ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis here and throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements, due to a number of factors, including but not limited to, risks described in the section entitled “Risk Factors.”
Except where indicated, all share and per share data in this section, as well as the consolidated financial statements, reflect the 1-for-45 reverse split of our common stock effective on January 7, 2020 (the “Reverse Split”). We have reflected the Reverse Split herein, unless otherwise indicated.
Overview of Our Business
We are an indoor intelligence company. Our business and government customers use our solutions to secure, digitize and optimize their indoor spaces with our positioning, mapping and analytics products. Our indoor intelligence platform uses sensor technology to detect accessible cellular, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, ultra-wide band ("UWB") and chirp signals emitted from devices within a venue providing positional information similar to what global positioning system (“GPS”) satellite systems provide for the outdoors. Combining this positional data with our dynamic and interactive mapping solution and a high-performance analytics engine, yields near real time insights to our customers providing them with increased visibility, security and business intelligence throughout their indoor spaces. Our highly configurable platform can also ingest data from our customers’ and other third party sensors, Wi-Fi access points, Bluetooth beacons, video cameras, and big data sources, among others to maximize indoor intelligence. We also offer digital tear-sheets with optional invoice integration, digital ad delivery, and an e-edition designed for reader engagement for the media, publishing and entertainment industry.
Our Indoor Intelligence products secure, digitize and optimize the interior of any premises with indoor positioning and data analytics that provide rich positional information, similar to a global positioning system, and browser-like intelligence for the indoors.
Revenues increased in the year ended December 31, 2020 over the same period in 2019 by approximately 48% due to revenue earned of approximately $1.2 million from the Systat licensing agreement, approximately $0.9 million from the Nanotron acquisition and approximately $0.9 million from existing product lines over the prior comparable period. We expect to continue to grow our Indoor Intelligence product line in 2021. The Indoor Intelligence product line does have long sales cycles, which result from customer-related issues such as budget and procurement processes but also because of the early stages of indoor-positioning technology and the learning curve required for customers to implement such solutions. Customers also often engage in a pilot program first which prolongs sales cycles and is typical of most emerging technology adoption curves. We anticipate sales cycles to improve in 2021 as our customer base moves from early adopters to mainstream customers. The sales cycle is also improving with the increased presence and awareness of beacon and Wi-Fi locationing technologies in the market. Indoor Intelligence sales can be licensed-based with government customers but commercial customers typically prefer a SaaS or subscription model. Our other digital solutions are also delivered on a SaaS model and allow us to generate industry analytics that complement our indoor-positioning solutions.
We experienced a net loss of approximately $29.2 million and $34.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We cannot assure that we will ever earn revenues sufficient to support our operations, or that we will ever be profitable. In order to continue our operations, we have supplemented the revenues we earned with proceeds from the sale of our equity and debt securities and proceeds from loans and bank credit lines.
Recent Events
Financings
On November 25, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with an institutional investor, pursuant to which we sold in a registered direct offering, 5,000,000 shares of our common stock, and warrants to purchase up to 8,000,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.25 per share (the “2020 Purchase Warrants”) for a combined purchase price of $1.25 per share and pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 3,000,000 shares of common stock ("2020 Pre-funded Warrants") at an exercise price of $0.001 per share at a purchase price of $1.249 per share for net proceeds of $9.2 million after deducting placement agent commissions and offering expenses. Each 2020 Purchase Warrant and 2020 Pre-funded warrant is exercisable for one share of common stock, is immediately exercisable and will expire five years from the issuance date. On December 23, 2020, the 2020 Pre-funded Warrants were exercised in full.
On January 24, 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with an institutional investor, pursuant to which we sold in a registered direct offering, 5,800,000 shares of our common stock, and warrants to purchase up to 19,354,838 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.55 per share (the “January 2021 Purchase Warrants”) for a combined purchase price of $1.55 per share and pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 13,554,838 shares of common stock ("January 2021 Pre-funded Warrants") at an exercise price of $0.001 per share, at a purchase price of $1.549 per share for net proceeds of $27.8 million after deducting placement agent commissions and offering expenses. Each January 2021 Purchase Warrant and January 2021 Pre-funded Warrant is exercisable for one share of common stock, is immediately exercisable and will expire five
years from the issuance date. The January 2021 Pre-funded Warrants were exercised in full as of February 8th, 2021. In addition, the investor exercised its purchase rights for 3 million shares of common stock pursuant to the the January 2021 Purchase Warrant on February 11, 2021.
On February 12, 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with an institutional investor, pursuant to which we sold in a registered direct offering, 7,000,000 shares of our common stock, and warrants to purchase up to 15,000,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $2.00 per share (the “First February 2021 Purchase Warrants”) for a combined purchase price of $2.00 per share and pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 8,000,000 shares of common stock ("First February 2021 Pre-funded Warrants") at an exercise price of $0.001 per share, at a purchase price of $1.999 per share for net proceeds of $27.8 million after deducting placement agent commissions and offering expenses. Each First February 2021 Purchase Warrant and First February 2021 Pre-funded Warrant is exercisable for one share of common stock, is immediately exercisable and will expire five years from the issuance date. The First February 2021 Pre-funded warrants were exercised in full as of February 18, 2021.
On February 16, 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with an institutional investor, pursuant to which we sold in a registered direct offering, 3,000,000 shares of our common stock, and warrants to purchase up to 9,950,250 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $2.01 per share (the “Second February 2021 Purchase Warrants”) for a combined purchase price of $2.01 per share and pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 6,950,250 shares of common stock ("Second February 2021 Pre-funded Warrants") at an exercise price of $0.001 per share, at a purchase price of $2.009 per share for net proceeds of $18.5 million after deducting placement agent commissions and offering expenses. Each Second February 2021 Purchase Warrant and Second February 2021 Pre-funded Warrant is exercisable for one share of common stock, is immediately exercisable and will expire five years from the issuance date. The Second February 2021 Pre-funded warrants were exercised in full as of March 1, 2021.
Game Your Game Acquisition of Controlling Interest
On March 25, 2021, we entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement (the “GYG Purchase Agreement”) with Game Your Game, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“GYG”), and certain selling shareholders (the "Selling Shareholders"), pursuant to which we will acquire an aggregate of 522,000 shares of common stock of GYG (the “GYG Shares”), representing 52.2% of the outstanding shares of common stock of GYG on a fully diluted basis, in exchange for $1,666,932 in cash (the “Cash Consideration”), and a number of shares of our common stock equal to $1,403,103 divided by the lesser of (A) the closing price per share of our common stock, as reported by the Nasdaq Stock Market, immediately prior to the closing of the transaction and (B) the average closing price of our common stock, as reported by the Nasdaq Stock Market, for the 5 trading days immediately preceding the closing date. The Cash Consideration will be used for working capital purposes and to satisfy certain outstanding payroll obligations of GYG. The closing of the transaction is subject to the terms and satisfaction of the conditions set forth in the GYG Purchase Agreement. GYG’s business consists of developing and providing solutions using sports data and analytics.
Nanotron Acquisition
On October 6, 2020, we acquired, through our wholly-owned subsidiary Inpixon GmbH, a limited liability company incorporated under the laws of Germany (the “Purchaser), all of the outstanding capital stock (the “Nanotron Shares”) of Nanotron Technologies GmbH, a limited liability company incorporated under the laws of Germany (“Nanotron”), pursuant to the terms and conditions of that certain Share Sale and Purchase Agreement, dated as of October 5, 2020 (the “Purchase Agreement”), among the Purchaser, Nanotron and Sensera Limited, a stock corporation incorporated under the laws of Australia and the sole shareholder of Nanotron (the “Seller”).
As a result of the acquisition, we now own 100% of Nanotron. Nanotron’s business consists of developing and manufacturing location-aware IoT systems and solutions.
At the closing, the Purchaser paid to the Seller an aggregate purchase price of $8,700,000 (less the Holdback Funds (as defined below) and certain other closing adjustments) for the Nanotron Shares (“Purchase Price”). The Purchase Price may be subject to certain post-Closing adjustments based on actual working capital as of the closing as described in the Purchase Agreement. The Purchaser retained $750,000 (the “Holdback Funds”) from the Purchase Price to secure the Seller’s obligations under the Purchase Agreement, with any unused portion of the Holdback Funds to be released to the Seller on the date that is 18 months after the closing date. The Purchaser paid the Purchase Price from funds received in connection with a capital contribution from us, and a portion of the Purchase Price was used by the Seller to satisfy outstanding loans payable by the Seller to obtain the release of certain existing security interests on Nanotron’s assets. On February 24, 2021, we agreed to the early release of the Holdback Funds, in exchange for a reduction in the total amount payable to the Seller by $225,000. In addition, the amount payable was further reduced by $59,156.74 in connection with a post closing working capital adjustment
and the satisfaction of a claim related to a customer dispute. A balance of $465,843.26 was paid to the Seller in full satisfaction of the Holdback Funds payable by the Purchaser to the Seller pursuant to the Purchase Agreement.
Subscription of Units of Cardinal Venture Holdings
On September 30, 2020, we entered into a Subscription Agreement (the “Subscription Agreement”) with Cardinal Venture Holdings LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“CVH”), pursuant to which we agreed to (i) contribute up to $1,800,000 (the “Contribution”) to CVH and (ii) purchase up to 599,999 Class A Units of CVH (the “Class A Units”) and up to 1,800,000 Class B Units of CVH (the “Class B Units,” and, together with the Class A Units, the “Units”). The $1,800,000 purchase price was paid on October 12, 2020 and therefore that is the date the purchase of the Units was closed. On December 16, 2020, the Company increased it capital contribution by $700,000 in exchange for an additional 700,000 Class B Units. The Company owns an aggregate of 599,999 Class A Units and 2,500,000 Class B Units.
CVH owns certain interests in the sponsor entity (the “Sponsor”) to a special purpose acquisition company formed for the purpose of pursuing an initial public offering of its securities followed by effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “SPAC”). It is anticipated that the Contribution will be used by CVH to fund the Sponsor’s purchase of securities in the SPAC.
Nadir Ali, our Chief Executive Officer, beneficially owns membership interests in CVH through 3AM LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and a founding member of CVH (“3AM”).
Concurrently with our entry into the Subscription Agreement, we entered into the Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of CVH (the “LLC Agreement”), dated as of September 30, 2020. Under the terms of the LLC Agreement, in the event the Managing Member (as defined in the LLC Agreement) can no longer manage CVH’s affairs due to his death, disability or incapacity, 3AM will serve as CVH’s replacement Managing Member. Except as may be required by law, the Company, as a non-managing member under the LLC Agreement, does not have any voting rights and generally cannot take part in the management or control of CVH’s business and affairs.
The LLC Agreement provides that each Class A Unit and each Class B Unit represents the right of the Company to receive any distributions made by the Sponsor on account of the Class A Interests and Class B Interests, respectively, of the Sponsor.
We are not required to make additional capital contributions to CVH, unless any such capital contribution is approved by all of CVH’s members. In addition, the LLC Agreement contains terms and conditions that provide for limitations on liability, restrictions on rights to distributions and certain indemnification rights for CVH’s members.
“Blue Dot” Technology Acquisition
On August 19, 2020, in accordance with the terms and conditions of that certain Asset Purchase Agreement, by and among us, Ten Degrees Inc., a Delaware corporation (“TDI”), Ten Degrees International Limited (“TDIL”), a Cayman Islands exempted company limited by shares and the sole shareholder of 100% of the outstanding capital stock of TDI, mCube International Limited (“MCI”), a Cayman Island company, and the holder of a majority of the outstanding capital of TDIL and mCube, Inc., a Delaware corporation, and the sole shareholder of 100% of the outstanding capital stock of MCI (“mCube”, together with TDI, TDIL, and MCI collectively, the “Transferors”, or "Ten Degrees"), dated August 19, 2020 (the “APA”), we acquired a suite of on-device “blue-dot” indoor location and motion technologies, including patents, trademarks, software and related intellectual property from the Transferors (collectively, the “Assets”).
The Assets were acquired for consideration consisting of (i) $1.5 million in cash and (ii) 480,000 shares of our common stock.
In accordance with the terms of the APA, commencing as of the date of the APA, the Transferors, and their affiliates, have agreed to not compete with our business associated with the Assets for a period of five years from the closing date. In addition, each party agreed to not solicit any employees from the other party for a period of one year from the closing date, subject to certain exceptions.
All of Transferors’ right, title and interest in and to the Assets were sold, conveyed, transferred, assigned, and delivered to us in accordance with a Bill of Sale and Assignment executed by the Transferors, dated as of the closing date.
Systat License Acquisition
On June 19, 2020, we entered into an exclusive license to market, distribute, and develop the SYSTAT and SigmaPlot software suite of products (the “License Grant”) pursuant to the terms and conditions of that certain Exclusive Software License and Distribution Agreement, as amended on June 30, 2020 (as amended, the “License Agreement”), with Cranes Software International Ltd. (“Cranes”) and Systat Software, Inc. (“Systat,” and together with Cranes, the “Systat Parties”). In accordance with the terms of the License Agreement, on June 30, 2020 (the “License Closing Date”), we acquired the License Grant, effective as of June 1, 2020, and we partitioned a portion of the outstanding balance under that certain secured promissory note (the “Sysorex Note”) issued to us by Sysorex, Inc. (“Sysorex”), into a new note in an amount equal to $3 million in principal plus accrued interest (the “Closing Note”) and assigned the Closing Note and all rights and obligations thereunder to Systat in accordance with the terms and conditions of that certain Promissory Note Assignment and Assumption Agreement. An aggregate of an additional $3.3 million of the principal balance underlying the Sysorex Note was partitioned and assigned to Systat as consideration payable for the rights granted under the license, including $1.3 million on the three month anniversary of the License Closing Date, $1.0 million on the six month anniversary of the License Closing Date and $1.0 million on March 19, 2021. Each assignment under the Sysorex Note was represented by a new secured promissory note and our right to any repayment under the Sysorex Note is subordinate and junior to Sysorex’s obligation to make any payment to Systat unless we have exercised our right to offset any losses against such assigned notes as permitted in the License Agreement. In addition, we paid the remaining cash consideration of $2.2 million for the License Grant on July 8, 2020.
In connection with the License Grant, the Systat Parties provided us with equipment for us to use at no additional cost for a minimum period of six months following the License Closing Date. In addition, we have the right, but not the obligation, to assume all of the Systat Parties’ rights, interests, and obligations under the Systat Customer Contracts and the Systat Distribution Agreements (as such terms are defined in the License Agreement). We are also entitled to any customer maintenance revenue, new license fees, or license renewal fees, received by any of the Systat Parties after June 1, 2020 in connection with the Systat Customer Contracts and/or Systat Distribution Agreements assigned to and assumed by us in connection with the License Agreement. The License Grant will remain in effect for a period of 15 years following the License Closing Date (the “Term”), unless terminated sooner upon mutual written consent of Systat and us or upon termination by either for the other party’s specified breach.
At any time during the first 5-year period of the Term (the "Purchase Option Exercise Period"), we may exercise our option to purchase the Software, Software Source, User Documentation, Systat Intellectual Property, Customer Information and Equipment (as such terms are defined in the License Agreement) from the Systat Parties in exchange for an assignment of our right to receive an additional $1.0 million in principal under the Sysorex Note. On February 22, 2021, we entered into a Second Amendment to the License Agreement to allow for the exercise of the purchase option in whole or in part any time during the Purchase Option Period and to provide for cash consideration in lieu of an assignment of the Sysorex Note at our option. In addition, we exercised our option to purchase a portion of the underlying assets, including certain software, trademarks, solutions, domain names and websites from Systat in exchange for consideration in an amount equal to $900,000.
In connection with the License Grant, the Company expanded its operations into the United Kingdom and Germany. As a result of such expansion, the Company formed Inpixon Limited, a new wholly owned subsidiary in the United Kingdom, and established Inpixon GmbH, a wholly owned subsidiary incorporated under the laws of Germany.
Promissory Note
On March 18, 2020, we entered into a note purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Iliad Research & Trading, L.P. (the “Holder”) (as amended in September 17, 2020 and March 2021), pursuant to which we issued and sold to the Holder an unsecured promissory note (the “March 2020 Note”) in an aggregate initial principal amount of $6,465,000.00 (the “Initial Principal Amount”), which is payable on or before March 18, 2022 (the “Maturity Date”). The Initial Principal Amount includes an original issue discount of $1,450,000.00 and $15,000.00 that we agreed to pay to the Holder to cover the Holder’s legal fees, accounting costs, due diligence, monitoring and other transaction costs. In exchange for the March 2020 Note, the Holder paid an aggregate purchase price of $5,000,000.00 (the “Transaction”). The March 2020 Note is payable on or before the date that is 12 months from the issuance date. Interest on the note accrues at a rate of 10% per annum and is payable on the maturity date or otherwise in accordance with the note. We may pay all or any portion of the amount owed earlier than it is due in an amount equal to 115% of the portion of the outstanding balance the Company elects to prepay.
Redemption. Beginning as of the date that was 6 months from the issuance date and at the intervals indicated below until the March 2020 Note is paid in full, the Holder has the right to redeem up to an aggregate of 1/3 of the initial principal balance of the Note each month (each monthly exercise, a “Monthly Redemption Amount”) by providing written notice (each, a “Monthly Redemption Notice”); provided, however, that if the Holder does not exercise any Monthly Redemption Amount in its corresponding month then such Monthly Redemption Amount shall be available for the Holder to redeem in any future
month in addition to such future month’s Monthly Redemption Amount. Upon receipt of Monthly Redemption Notice, we are required to the applicable Monthly Redemption Amount in cash to the Holder within five business days of receipt.
Monitoring Fee. The terms of the Note included a one-time monitoring fee equal to ten percent (10%) of the then-current outstanding balance if the Note was still outstanding six months following the original issue date, which amount was subsequently amended to five percent (5%) and was added to the Note.
In addition, at any time while the Note is outstanding, if we intend to enter into a financing pursuant to which we will issue securities that (A) have or may have conversion rights of any kind, contingent, conditional or otherwise, in which the number of shares that may be issued pursuant to such conversion right varies with the market price of the Company’s common stock, or (B) are or may become convertible into common stock (including without limitation convertible debt, warrants or convertible preferred stock), with a conversion price that varies with the market price of the common stock, even if such security only becomes convertible following an event of default, the passage of time, or another trigger event or condition (a “Future Offering”), then we must first offer such opportunity to the Holder on the same terms no later than five (5) trading days immediately prior to the trading day of the expected announcement of the Future Offering (the “Right of First Refusal”). If the Holder is unwilling or unable to provide such financing then we may obtain such financing upon the exact same terms and conditions offered to the Holder, which must be completed within 30 days after the date of the notice. If we do not receive the financing within 30 days after the date of the notice, then we must again offer the financing opportunity to the Holder as described above, and the process detailed above will be repeated. The Right of First Refusal does not apply to an Exempt Issuance (as defined in the Purchase Agreement) or to a registered offering made pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1 or Form S-3.
Note Exchanges
During the first quarter ended March 31, 2020, we entered into exchange agreements with a noteholder pursuant to which we issued an aggregate of 1,896,557 shares of common stock in exchange for the satisfaction of an aggregate amount of approximately $4,194,030 of the outstanding balance of promissory notes issued on May 3, 2019 and June 27, 2019 to the holders of such notes at exchange prices between $1.12 and $4.05 per share, in each case at a price per share equal to Nasdaq’s “minimum price” as defined by Nasdaq Listing Rule 5635(d).
During the quarter ended June 30, 2020, we entered into exchange agreements with noteholders pursuant to which we issued an aggregate of 3,889,990 shares of common stock in exchange for the satisfaction of an aggregate amount of approximately $4.6 million of the outstanding balance of promissory notes issued on December 21, 2018, August 8, 2019, September 17, 2019 and November 22, 2019 to the holders of such notes at exchange prices between $1.09 and $1.362 per share, in each case at a price per share equal to Nasdaq’s “minimum price” as defined by Nasdaq Listing Rule 5635(d).
On November 19, 2020, we entered into an exchange agreement pursuant to which we issued an aggregate of 389,863 shares of common stock in exchange for the satisfaction of an aggregate amount of approximately $400,000 of the outstanding balance of the March 2020 Note at a price per share equal to $1.026, which was equal to Nasdaq’s “minimum price” as defined by Nasdaq Listing Rule 5635(d).
On November 24, 2020, we entered into an exchange agreement pursuant to which we issued an aggregate of 686,813 shares of common stock in exchange for the satisfaction of an aggregate amount of approximately $750,000 of the outstanding balance of the March 2020 Note at a price per share equal to $1.092, which was equal to Nasdaq’s “minimum price” as defined by Nasdaq Listing Rule 5635(d).
On February 11, 2021, we entered into an exchange agreement pursuant to which we issued an aggregate of 893,921 shares of common stock in exchange for the satisfaction of an aggregate amount of approximately $1.5 million of the outstanding balance of the March 2021 Note at a price per share equal to $1.678, which was equal to Nasdaq’s “minimum price” as defined by Nasdaq Listing Rule 5635(d).
Equity Distribution Agreement
On March 3, 2020, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement ("EDA") with Maxim Group LLC (“Maxim”) under which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock in connection with the ATM in an aggregate offering amount of up to $50 million from time to time through Maxim, acting exclusively as our sales agent (the “Offering”). We intend to use the net proceeds of the Offering primarily for working capital and general corporate purposes. We may also use a portion of the net proceeds to invest in or acquire businesses or technologies that we believe are complementary to our own.
We issued and sold 33,416,830 shares of common stock during the year ended December 31, 2020, in connection with the ATM at per share prices between $1.07 and $2.11, resulting in net proceeds to the Company of approximately $46.1 million, after subtracting sales commissions and other offering expenses.
Such sales were made pursuant to the Company’s effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-223960), which was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on March 27, 2018, as amended on May 15, 2018, and declared effective on June 5, 2018 (the “Registration Statement”), and a base prospectus dated as of June 5, 2018 included in the Registration Statement and the prospectus supplements relating to the ATM filed with the SEC on March 3, 2020 and June 22, 2020. The EDA was terminated as of February 12, 2021.
Reverse Stock Split
On January 7, 2020, we effected a 1-for-45 reverse split of our outstanding common stock.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”). In connection with the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, we are required to make assumptions and estimates about future events, and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and the related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, we review the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our consolidated financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2 of the audited consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. There have been no changes to estimates during the periods presented in the filing. Historically changes in management estimates have not been material.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when we transfer control of the promised products or services to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those products or services. We derive our revenue from software as a service, design and implementation services for our Indoor Intelligence systems, and professional services for work performed in conjunction with our systems.
Hardware and Software Revenue Recognition
For sales of hardware and software products, our performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time when they are shipped to the customer. This is when the customer has title to the product and the risks and rewards of ownership. The delivery of products to our customers occurs in a variety of ways, including (i) as a physical product shipped from our warehouse, (ii) via drop-shipment by a third-party vendor, or (iii) via electronic delivery with respect to software licenses. We leverage drop-ship arrangements with many of our vendors and suppliers to deliver products to customers without having to physically hold the inventory at our warehouse. In such arrangements, we negotiate the sale price with the customer, pay the supplier directly for the product shipped, bear credit risk of collecting payment from our customers and are ultimately responsible for the acceptability of the product and ensuring that such product meets the standards and requirements of the customer. Accordingly, we are the principal in the transaction with the customer and record revenue on a gross basis. We receive fixed consideration for sales of hardware and software products. Our customers generally pay within 30 to 60 days from the receipt of a customer approved invoice. We have elected the practical expedient to expense the costs of obtaining a contract when they are incurred because the amortization period of the asset that otherwise would have been recognized is less than a year.
Software As A Service Revenue Recognition
With respect to sales of our maintenance, consulting and other service agreements including our digital advertising and electronic services, customers pay fixed monthly fees in exchange for the Company’s service. The Company’s performance
obligation is satisfied over time as the digital advertising and electronic services are provided continuously throughout the service period. The Company recognizes revenue evenly over the service period using a time-based measure because the Company is providing continuous access to its service.
Professional Services Revenue Recognition
Our professional services include milestone, fixed fee and time and materials contracts.
Professional services under milestone contracts are accounted for using the percentage of completion method. As soon as the outcome of a contract can be estimated reliably, contract revenue is recognized in the consolidated statement of operations in proportion to the stage of completion of the contract. Contract costs are expensed as incurred. Contract costs include all amounts that relate directly to the specific contract, are attributable to contract activity, and are specifically chargeable to the customer under the terms of the contract.
Professional services are also contracted on the fixed fee and time and materials basis. Fixed fees are paid monthly, in phases, or upon acceptance of deliverables. Our time and materials contracts are paid weekly or monthly based on hours worked. Revenue on time and material contracts is recognized based on a fixed hourly rate as direct labor hours are expended. Materials, or other specified direct costs, are reimbursed as actual costs and may include markup. We have elected the practical expedient to recognize revenue for the right to invoice because our right to consideration corresponds directly with the value to the customer of the performance completed to date. For fixed fee contracts including maintenance service provided by in house personnel, we recognize revenue evenly over the service period using a time-based measure because we are providing continuous service. Because our contracts have an expected duration of one year or less, we have elected the practical expedient in ASC 606-10-50-14(a) to not disclose information about the remaining performance obligations. Anticipated losses are recognized as soon as they become known. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not incur any such losses. These amounts are based on known and estimated factors.
SAVES by Inpixon Revenue Recognition
SAVES by Inpixon ("SAVES", formerly Systat) is a comprehensive set of data analytics and statistical visualization solutions for engineers and scientists.The Company enters into contracts with its customers whereby it grants a non-exclusive on-premise license for the use of its proprietary software. The contracts provide for either (i) a one-year stated term with a one-year renewal option (ii) a perpetual term or (iii) a two-year term for students with the option to upgrade to a perpetual license at the end of the term. The contracts may also provide for yearly on-going maintenance services for a specified price, which includes maintenance services, designated support, and enhancements, upgrades and improvements to the software (the “Maintenance Services”), depending on the contract. Licenses for on-premises software provide the customer with a right to use the software as it exists when made available to the customer. All software provides customers with the same functionality and differ mainly in the duration over which the customer benefits from the software.
The timing of our revenue recognition related to the SAVES revenue stream is dependent on whether the software licensing agreement entered into represents a good or service. Software that relies on an entity’s IP and is delivered only through a hosting arrangement, where the customer cannot take possession of the software, is a service. A software arrangement that is provided through an access code or key represents the transfer of a good. Licenses for on-premises software represents a good and provide the customer with a right to use the software as it exists when made available to the customer. Customers may purchase perpetual licenses or subscribe to licenses, which provide customers with the same functionality and differ mainly in the duration over which the customer benefits from the software. Revenue from distinct on-premises licenses is recognized upfront at the point in time when the software is made available to the customer.
Renewals or extensions of licenses are evaluated as distinct licenses (i.e., a distinct good or service), and revenue attributed to the distinct good or service cannot be recognized until (1) the entity provides the distinct license (or makes the license available) to the customer and (2) the customer is able to use and benefit from the distinct license. Renewal contracts are not combined with original contracts, and, as a result, the renewal right is evaluated in the same manner as all other additional rights granted after the initial contract. The revenue is not recognized until the customer can begin to use and benefit from the license, which is typically at the beginning of the license renewal period. Therefore, we recognize revenue resulting from renewal of licensed software at a point in time, specifically, at the beginning of the license renewal period.
We recognize revenue related to Maintenance Services evenly over the service period using a time-based measure because we are providing continuous service and the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits provided by our performance as the services are performed.
Design and Implementation Revenue Recognition
Design and implementation revenue is accounted for using the percentage of completion method. As soon as the outcome of a contract can be estimated reliably, contract revenue is recognized in the consolidated statement of operations in proportion to the stage of completion of the contract. Contract costs are expensed as incurred. Contract costs include all amounts that relate directly to the specific contract, are attributable to contract activity, and are specifically chargeable to the customer under the terms of the contract.
Contract Balances
The timing of our revenue recognition may differ from the timing of payment by our customers. We record a receivable when revenue is recognized prior to payment and we have an unconditional right to payment. Alternatively, when payment precedes the provision of the related services, we record deferred revenue until the performance obligations are satisfied. The Company had deferred revenue of approximately $1,922,000 and $912,000 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to cash received in advance for product maintenance services and professional services provided by the Company’s technical staff. The Company expects to satisfy its remaining performance obligations for these maintenance services and professional services, and recognize the deferred revenue and related contract costs over the next twelve months.
Long-lived Assets
We account for our long-lived assets in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 360, “Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets” (“ASC 360”), which requires that long-lived assets be evaluated whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable or the useful life has changed. Some of the events or changes in circumstances that would trigger an impairment test include, but are not limited to:
•significant under-performance relative to expected and/or historical results (negative comparable sales growth or operating cash flows for two consecutive years);
•significant negative industry or economic trends;
•knowledge of transactions involving the sale of similar property at amounts below our carrying value; or
•our expectation to dispose of long-lived assets before the end of their estimated useful lives, even though the assets do not meet the criteria to be classified as “held for sale.”
Long-lived assets are grouped for recognition and measurement of impairment at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets. The impairment test for long-lived assets requires us to assess the recoverability of our long-lived assets by comparing their net carrying value to the sum of undiscounted estimated future cash flows directly associated with and arising from our use and eventual disposition of the assets. If the net carrying value of a group of long-lived assets exceeds the sum of related undiscounted estimated future cash flows, we would be required to record an impairment charge equal to the excess, if any, of net carrying value over fair value.
When assessing the recoverability of our long-lived assets, which include property and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets, we make assumptions regarding estimated future cash flows and other factors. Some of these assumptions involve a high degree of judgment and also bear a significant impact on the assessment conclusions. Included among these assumptions are estimating undiscounted future cash flows, including the projection of comparable sales, operating expenses, capital requirements for maintaining property and equipment and residual value of asset groups. We formulate estimates from historical experience and assumptions of future performance, based on business plans and forecasts, recent economic and business trends, and competitive conditions. In the event that our estimates or related assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record an impairment charge. Based on our evaluation we did not record a charge for impairment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The benefits to be derived from our acquired intangibles, will take additional financial resources to continue the development of our technology. Management believes our technology has significant long-term profit potential, and to date, management continues to allocate existing resources to the develop products and services to seek returns on its investment. We continue to seek additional resources, through both capital raising efforts and meeting with industry experts, as part of our continued efforts. Although there can be no assurance that these efforts will be successful, we intend to allocate financial and personnel resources when deemed possible and/or necessary. If we choose to abandon these efforts, or if we determine that such funding is not available, the related development of our technology (resulting in our lack of ability to expand our business), may be subject to significant impairment.
As described previously, we continue to experience weakness in market conditions, a depressed stock price, and challenges in executing our business plans. The Company will continue to monitor these uncertainties in future periods, to determine the impact.
We evaluate the remaining useful lives of long-lived assets and identifiable intangible assets whenever events or circumstances indicate that a revision to the remaining period of amortization is warranted. Such events or circumstances may include (but are not limited to): the effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, and/or other economic factors including the stability of the industry in which we operate, known technological advances, legislative actions, or changes in the regulatory environment. If the estimated remaining useful lives change, the remaining carrying amount of the long-lived assets and identifiable intangible assets would be amortized prospectively over that revised remaining useful life. We have determined that there were no events or circumstances during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, which would indicate a revision to the remaining amortization period related to any of our long-lived assets. Accordingly, we believe that the current estimated useful lives of long-lived assets reflect the period over which they are expected to contribute to future cash flows and are therefore deemed appropriate.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development (“IPR&D”)
In accordance with authoritative guidance, we recognize IPR&D at fair value as of the acquisition date, and subsequently account for it as an indefinite-lived intangible asset until completion or abandonment of the associated research and development efforts. Once an IPR&D project has been completed, the useful life of the IPR&D asset is determined and amortized accordingly. If the IPR&D asset is abandoned, the remaining carrying value is written off. During fiscal year 2014, we acquired IPR&D through the acquisition of AirPatrol, in 2015 through the acquisition of the assets of LightMiner, in 2019 through the acquisitions of Locality, Jibestream and certain assets of GTX and in 2020 through the SYSTAT licensing agreement, the acquisition of certain assets of Ten Degrees, and the acquisition of Nanotron. Our IPR&D is comprised of AirPatrol, LightMiner, Locality, Jibestream, GTX, SYSTAT, Ten Degrees, and Nanotron, which was valued on the date of the acquisition. It will take additional financial resources to continue development of these technologies.
We continue to seek additional resources, through both capital raising efforts and meeting with industry experts, for further development of the AirPatrol, Locality, Jibestream, GTX, SYSTAT, Ten Degrees, and Nanotron technologies. Through December 31, 2020, we have made some progress with raising capital since these acquisitions, building our pipeline and getting industry acknowledgment. We have been recognized by leading industry analysts in a report on leading indoor positioning companies and were also awarded the IoT Security Excellence award by TMC and Crossfire Media. Management remains focused on growing revenue from these products and continues to pursue efforts to recognize the value of the AirPatrol, Locality, Jibestream, GTX, SYSTAT, Ten Degrees, and Nanotron technologies. Although there can be no assurance that these efforts will be successful, we intend to allocate financial and personnel resources when deemed possible and/or necessary. If we choose to abandon these efforts, or if we determine that such funding is not available, the related IPR&D will be subject to significant impairment.
Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Assets
We have recorded goodwill and other indefinite-lived assets in connection with our acquisitions of Shoom, Locality, Jibestream, GTX, the Systat Parties, and Nanotron. Goodwill, which represents the excess of acquisition cost over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets of the acquired company, is not amortized. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are stated at fair value as of the date acquired in a business combination. The recoverability of goodwill is evaluated at least annually and when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
We analyze goodwill first to assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform a detailed goodwill impairment test as required. The more-likely-than-not threshold is defined as having a likelihood of more than 50%. The Company has determined that the reporting unit is the entire company, due to the integration of the Company’s activities.
Events and circumstances for an entity to consider in conducting the qualitative assessment are:
•Macroeconomic conditions such as a deterioration in general economic conditions, limitations on accessing capital, fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, or other developments in equity and credit markets.
•Industry and market considerations such as a deterioration in the environment in which an entity operates, an increased competitive environment, a decline in market-dependent multiples or metrics (considered in both
absolute terms and relative to peers), a change in the market for an entity’s products or services, or a regulatory or political development.
•Cost factors such as increases in raw materials, labor, or other costs that have a negative effect on earnings and cash flows.
•Overall financial performance such as negative or declining cash flows or a decline in actual or planned revenue or earnings compared with actual and projected results of relevant prior periods.
•Other relevant entity-specific events such as changes in management, key personnel, strategy, or customers, contemplation of bankruptcy, or litigation.
•Events affecting a reporting unit such as a change in the composition or carrying amount of its net assets, a more-likely-than-not expectation of selling or disposing of all, or a portion, of a reporting unit, the testing for recoverability of a significant asset group within a reporting unit, or recognition of a goodwill impairment loss in the financial statements of a subsidiary that is a component of a reporting unit.
•If applicable, a sustained decrease in share price (considered in both absolute terms and relative to peers).
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets Subject to Amortization
We amortize intangible assets with finite lives over their estimated useful lives and review them for impairment whenever an impairment indicator exists. We continually monitor events and changes in circumstances that could indicate carrying amounts of our long-lived assets, including our intangible assets, may not be recoverable. When such events or changes in circumstances occur, we assess recoverability by determining whether the carrying value of such assets will be recovered through the undiscounted expected future cash flows. If the future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying amount of these assets, we recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the assets. We did not recognize any intangible asset impairment charges for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. See “Acquired In-Process Research and Development (“IPR&D”)” for further information.
Deferred Income Taxes
In accordance with ASC 740 “Income Taxes” (“ASC 740”), management routinely evaluates the likelihood of the realization of its income tax benefits and the recognition of its deferred tax assets. In evaluating the need for any valuation allowance, management will assess whether it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax asset may not be realized on a jurisdictional basis. Ultimately, the realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during those periods in which temporary differences become deductible and/or tax credits and tax loss carry-forwards can be utilized. In performing its analyses, management considers both positive and negative evidence including historical financial performance, previous earnings patterns, future earnings forecasts, tax planning strategies, economic and business trends and the potential realization of net operating loss carry-forwards within a reasonable timeframe. To this end, management considered (i) that we have had historical losses in the prior years and cannot anticipate generating a sufficient level of future profits in order to realize the benefits of our deferred tax asset; (ii) tax planning strategies; and (iii) the adequacy of future income as of and for the year ended December 31, 2019, based upon certain economic conditions and historical losses through December 31, 2020. After consideration of these factors, management deemed it appropriate to establish a full valuation allowance with respect to the deferred tax assets for Inpixon and Inpixon Canada.
A liability for “unrecognized tax benefits” is recorded for any tax benefits claimed in the Company’s tax filings that do not meet these recognition and measurement standards. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, no liability for unrecognized tax benefits was required to be reported. The guidance also discusses the classification of related interest and penalties on income taxes. The Company’s policy is to record interest and penalties on uncertain tax positions as a component of income tax expense. No interest or penalties were recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain our reserves for credit losses at a level believed by management to be adequate to absorb potential losses inherent in the respective balances. We assign an internal credit quality rating to all new customers and update these ratings regularly, but no less than annually. Management’s determination of the adequacy of the reserve for credit losses for our accounts and notes receivable is based on the age of the receivable balance, the customer’s credit quality rating, an evaluation of historical credit losses, current economic conditions, and other relevant factors.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, reserves for credit losses included a reserve for doubtful accounts of approximately $235,000 and $646,000, respectively, due to the aging of the items greater than 90 days outstanding and other potential non-collections.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, and accordingly, the assets and liabilities of the acquired business are recorded at their fair values at the date of acquisition. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value is recorded as goodwill. Any changes in the estimated fair values of the net assets recorded for acquisitions prior to the finalization of more detailed analysis, but not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, will change the amount of the purchase price allocable to goodwill. Any subsequent changes to any purchase price allocations that are material to our consolidated financial results will be adjusted. All acquisition costs are expensed as incurred and in-process research and development costs are recorded at fair value as an indefinite-lived intangible asset and assessed for impairment thereafter until completion, at which point the asset is amortized over its expected useful life. Separately recognized transactions associated with business combinations are generally expensed subsequent to the acquisition date. The application of business combination and impairment accounting requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions.
Upon acquisition, the accounts and results of operations are consolidated as of and subsequent to the acquisition date and are included in our Consolidated Financial Statements from the acquisition date.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for equity instruments issued to non-employees in accordance with accounting guidance, which requires that such equity instruments are recorded at their fair value on the measurement date, which is typically the date the services are performed.
We account for equity instruments issued to employees in accordance with accounting guidance that requires that awards are recorded at their fair value on the date of grant and are amortized over the vesting period of the award. We recognize compensation costs over the requisite service period of the award, which is generally the vesting term of the equity instrument issued.
The Black-Scholes option valuation model is used to estimate the fair value of the options or the equivalent security granted. The model includes subjective input assumptions that can materially affect the fair value estimates. The model was developed for use in estimating the fair value of traded options or warrants. The expected volatility is estimated based on the average of historical volatilities for industry peers.
The principal assumptions used in applying the Black-Scholes model along with the results from the model were as follows:
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded a charge of $1.2 million and $3.2 million, respectively, for the amortization of employee stock options.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth selected consolidated financial data as a percentage of our revenue and the percentage of period-over-period change:
* Amounts used to calculate dollar and percentage changes are based on numbers in the thousands. Accordingly, calculations in this item, which may be rounded to the nearest hundred thousand, may not produce the same results.
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $9.3 million compared to $6.3 million for the comparable period in the prior year for an increase of approximately $3.0 million, or approximately 48%. Revenues increased approximately $1.2 million from the Systat License Agreement, approximately $0.9 million from the Nanotron acquisition and approximately $0.9 million from existing product lines over the prior comparable period.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2.6 million compared to $1.6 million for the comparable period in the prior year. This increase in cost of revenues of approximately $1.0 million, or approximately 62%, was primarily attributable to the increase in revenues from the Systat License Agreement, Nantoron acquisition and the existing product lines.
The gross profit margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 72% compared to 74% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in margin is primarily due to to lower gross profit margins from the Nanotron acquisition.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $30.5 million and $25.5 million for the comparable period ended December 31, 2019. This increase of $5.0 million is primarily attributable to increased operating expenses of the Systat licensing product line, Nanotron acquisition, increased operating expense of the Jibestream division as it was included for a full twelve months during 2020, increased professional fees and marketing expenses offset by a decrease in travel expenses, stock based compensation and amortization of intangibles.
Loss From Operations
Loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $23.8 million as compared to $20.8 million for the comparable period in the prior year. This increase in loss of approximately $3.0 million was primarily attributable to higher operating expenses offset by the increase in gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income/Expense
Other income/expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a loss of $5.5 million compared to a loss of $13.8 million for the comparable period in the prior year. This decrease in loss of approximately $8.3 million is primarily attributable to a decrease in the valuation allowance adjustment in connection with a Note Receivable from Sysorex.
Provision for Income Taxes
There was an income tax benefit of $56,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the acquisition of intangibles and net operating losses of Locality and Jibestream. There was no provision for income taxes for the year ended
December 31, 2019 as the Company was in a net taxable loss position. Deferred tax assets resulting from such losses are fully reserved as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 for Inpixon and Inpixon Canada since, at present, the Company has no history of taxable income and it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized.
Net Gain Attributable To Non-Controlling Interest
Net gain attributable to non-controlling interest for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $15,000 and $9,000, respectively. This increase of $6,000 was attributable to the gain from Inpixon India and is immaterial.
Net Loss Attributable To Stockholders of Inpixon
Net loss attributable to stockholders for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $29.2 million compared to $34.0 million for the comparable period in the prior year. This decrease in loss of approximately $4.8 million was primarily attributable to the increase in operating expenses offset by the increase in gross margin and the decrease in the valuation allowance adjustment.
Non-GAAP Financial information
EBITDA
EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) before interest, provision for (benefit from) income taxes, and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is used by our management as the matrix in which it manages the business. It is defined as EBITDA plus adjustments for other income or expense items, non-recurring items and non-cash stock-based compensation.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a loss of $17.1 million compared to a loss of $11.1 million for the prior year period.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income/loss attributable to stockholders of Inpixon, which is our GAAP operating performance measure, to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
We rely on Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure for the following:
•To review and assess the operating performance of our Company as permitted by Accounting Standards Codification Topic 280, Segment Reporting;
•To compare our current operating results with corresponding periods and with the operating results of other companies in our industry;
•As a basis for allocating resources to various projects;
•As a measure to evaluate potential economic outcomes of acquisitions, operational alternatives and strategic decisions; and
•To evaluate internally the performance of our personnel.
We have presented Adjusted EBITDA above because we believe it conveys useful information to investors regarding our operating results. We believe it provides an additional way for investors to view our operations, when considered with both our GAAP results and the reconciliation to net income (loss). By including this information, we can provide investors with a more complete understanding of our business. Specifically, we present Adjusted EBITDA as supplemental disclosure because of the following:
•We believe Adjusted EBITDA is a useful tool for investors to assess the operating performance of our business without the effect of interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization and other non-cash items including stock based compensation, amortization of intangibles, change in the fair value of shares to be issued, change in the fair value of derivative liability, impairment of goodwill and one time charges including gain/loss on the settlement of obligations, severance costs, provision for doubtful accounts, acquisition costs and the costs associated with the public offering.
•We believe that it is useful to provide to investors with a standard operating metric used by management to evaluate our operating performance; and
•We believe that the use of Adjusted EBITDA is helpful to compare our results to other companies.
Even though we believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful for investors, it does have limitations as an analytical tool. Thus, we strongly urge investors not to consider this metric in isolation or as a substitute for net income (loss) and the other consolidated statement of operations data prepared in accordance with GAAP. Some of these limitations include the fact that:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the significant interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect income or other taxes or the cash requirements to make any tax payments; and
•Other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, thereby potentially limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered a measure of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business or as a measure of performance in compliance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and providing Adjusted EBITDA only as supplemental information.
Proforma Non-GAAP Net Loss per Share
Basic and diluted net loss per share for the year ended December 31, 2020 was ($1.01) compared to ($47.52) for the prior year period. The decreased loss per share in 2020 was attributable to the changes discussed in our results of operations.
Proforma non-GAAP net income (loss) per share is used by our Company’s management as an evaluation tool as it manages the business and is defined as net income (loss) per basic and diluted share adjusted for non-cash items including stock based compensation, amortization of intangibles and one time charges including gain on the settlement of obligations, severance costs, provision for doubtful accounts, change in the fair value of shares to be issued, acquisition costs and the costs associated with the public offering.
Proforma non-GAAP net loss per basic and diluted common share for the year ended December 31, 2020 was ($0.71) compared to a loss of ($18.75) per share for the prior year period.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss per basic and diluted share, which is our GAAP operating performance measure, to proforma non-GAAP net loss per share for the periods reflected (in thousands, except per share data):
We rely on proforma non-GAAP net loss per share, which is a non-GAAP financial measure:
•To review and assess the operating performance of our Company as permitted by Accounting Standards Codification Topic 280, Segment Reporting;
•To compare our current operating results with corresponding periods and with the operating results of other companies in our industry;
•As a measure to evaluate potential economic outcomes of acquisitions, operational alternatives and strategic decisions; and
•To evaluate internally the performance of our personnel.
We have presented proforma non-GAAP net loss per share above because we believe it conveys useful information to investors regarding our operating results. We believe it provides an additional way for investors to view our operations, when considered with both our GAAP results and the reconciliation to net income (loss), and that by including this information we can provide investors with a more complete understanding of our business. Specifically, we present proforma non-GAAP net loss per share as supplemental disclosure because:
•We believe proforma non-GAAP net loss per share is a useful tool for investors to assess the operating performance of our business without the effect of non-cash items including stock based compensation,
amortization of intangibles and one time charges including gain on the settlement of obligations, severance costs, provision for doubtful accounts, change in the fair value of shares to be issued, acquisition costs and the costs associated with the public offering.
•We believe that it is useful to provide to investors a standard operating metric used by management to evaluate our operating performance; and
•We believe that the use of proforma non-GAAP net loss per share is helpful to compare our results to other companies.
Liquidity and Capital Resources as of December 31, 2020
Our current capital resources and operating results as of and through December 31, 2020, consist of:
1)an overall working capital surplus of approximately $18.2 million;
2)cash of approximately $18.0 million;
3)ATM equity facility in an aggregate offering amount of up to $150 million of which we have raised approximately $46.1 million of net proceeds after subtracting sales commissions and other offering costs as of December 31, 2020; and
4)net cash used by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $20.6 million.
The breakdown of our overall working capital deficit is as follows (in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $20.6 million consists of net loss of $29.2 million offset by non-cash adjustments of approximately $11.8 million less net cash changes in operating assets and liabilities of approximately $3.2 million.
During the first quarter of 2020, we raised $5 million in gross proceeds in connection with a debt financing, during the year ended December 31, 2020 we raised net proceeds of approximately $46.1 million in connection with sales under the ATM and net proceeds of approximately $9.2 million from a registered direct offering, and subsequent to December 31, 2020 we raised net proceeds of approximately $77.2 million from the sale of our securities in connection with registered direct offerings and the exercise of warrants. Given our current cash balances and budgeted cash flow requirements, the Company believes such funds are sufficient to support ongoing operations for the next 12 months from the issuance date of the financial statements. However, general economic or other conditions resulting from COVID 19 or other events materially may impact the liquidity of our common stock or our ability to continue to access capital from the sale of our securities to support our growth plans. Our business has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and may continue to be impacted. While we have been able to continue operations remotely, we have and continue to experience supply chain constraints and delays in the receipt of certain components of our products impacting delivery times for our products. We have also seen some impact in the demand of certain products and delays in certain projects and customer orders either because they require onsite services which could not be performed while shelter in place orders were in effect, compliance with new rules and regulations resulting from the pandemic or because of the uncertainty of the customer’s financial position and ability to invest in our technology. Despite these challenges, including a decline in revenue for certain existing product lines, we were able to realize growth in total revenue for
the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the year ended 2019, as a result of the addition of new product lines including a full year of sales associated with our mapping product, the addition of the SAVES product lines following the second quarter of 2020 and the addition of the RTLS product line in the fourth quarter of 2020. The total impact that COVID-19 will have on general economic conditions is continuously evolving and the impact it may continue to have on our results of operations continues to remain uncertain and there are no assurances that we will be able to continue to experience the same growth or not be materially adversely effected. A further discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is set forth below in Part II, Item 1A. Risk Factors.The Company is also pursuing possible strategic transactions and may raise such additional capital as needed, using our equity securities, an assignment of the remaining note receivable from Sysorex and/or cash and debt financings in combinations appropriate for each acquisition.
Liquidity and Capital Resources as of December 31, 2020 Compared With December 31, 2019
The Company’s net cash flows used in operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and certain balances as of the end of those periods are as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities for the year ended December 31, 2020
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $21.0 million. The cash flows related to the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of the following (in thousands):
The non-cash income and expense of approximately $12.0 million consisted primarily of the following (in thousands):
The net cash used in the change in operating assets and liabilities aggregated approximately $3.2 million and consisted primarily of the following (in thousands):
Operating Activities for the year ended December 31, 2019
Net cash used in operating activities during the years ended December 31, 2019 was approximately $10.7 million. The cash flows related to the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of the following (in thousands):
The non-cash income and expense of approximately $21.6 million consisted primarily of the following (in thousands):
The net use of cash in the change in operating assets and liabilities aggregated approximately $1.7 million and consisted primarily of the following (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Investing Activities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net cash flows used in investing activities during 2020 was approximately $23.5 million compared to net cash flows used in investing activities during 2019 of approximately $5.1 million. Cash flows related to investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 include $972,000 for the purchase of property and equipment, $862,000 for investment in capitalized software, $8.0 million for a short term investment, $2.2 million for cash paid the in Systat License Agreement, $1.5 million for cash paid for the Ten Degrees acquisition, $7.8 million for cash paid in the Nanotron acquisition, $311,000 of cash acquired in the Nanotron acquisition, and $2.5 million for a long term investment. Cash flows related to investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 include $89,000 for the purchase of property and equipment, $927,000 investment in capitalized software, $250,000 for cash paid for the GTX asset acquisition, $204,000 for cash paid for the Locality acquisition, $70,000 of cash acquired in the Locality acquisition, $3.7 million for cash paid for the Jibestream acquisition, and $6,000 of cash acquired in the Jibestream acquisition..
Cash Flows from Financing Activities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net cash flows provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $57.3 million. Net cash flows provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $19.4 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company received incoming cash flows of $55.4 million for the issuance of common stock, preferred stock and warrants, repaid $74,000 of notes payable, loaned $2.6 million to related parties, received $200,000 of repayments from related parties, received $5.0 million of net proceeds from promissory notes, paid a $500,000 acquisition liability to the pre-acquisition shareholders of Locality, and made $150,000 of repayments to a bank facility. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company received incoming cash flows of $20.7 million from the issuance of common stock, preferred stock and warrants, $1.8 million of repayments from a related party note, $7.5 million from promissory notes and $127,000 of net proceeds from a bank facility, offset by $10.3 million of loans to related party, $210,000 repayments of an acquisition liability, $141,000 loan to Jibestream, $50,000 loan to GTX, $31,000 of advances to a related party and $70,000 repayments of notes payable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet guarantees, interest rate swap transactions or foreign currency contracts. We do not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements, please see Note 2 to our financial statements, which are included in this report beginning on page.