ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion also should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under the section entitled Risk Factors, Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and elsewhere herein, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
We are a global biopharmaceutical company on a mission to transform the lives of patients with serious and rare diseases. Our first commercial product, ARIKAYCE, was approved in the US in September 2018 and in the EU in October 2020. Our clinical-stage pipeline includes brensocatib and TPIP. Brensocatib is a small molecule, oral, reversible inhibitor of dipeptidyl peptidase 1, which we are developing for the treatment of patients with bronchiectasis and other neutrophil-mediated diseases. TPIP is an inhaled formulation of the treprostinil prodrug treprostinil palmitil which may offer a differentiated product profile for pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) and other rare pulmonary disorders. We have legal entities in the US, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland, the United Kingdom (UK) and Japan.
Refer to Part I, Item 1. "Business" for a summary of our ongoing commercial and clinical programs for ARIKAYCE and our ongoing clinical programs for brensocatib and TPIP.
Prior to 2019, we had not generated significant revenue and through December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $1.8 billion. We have financed our operations primarily through the public offerings of our equity securities and debt financings. Although it is difficult to predict our future funding requirements, based upon our current operating plan, we anticipate that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 will enable us to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months.
Our ability to reduce our operating loss and begin to generate positive cash flow from operations depends on the continued success in commercializing ARIKAYCE, including expanding the commercial sale of ARIKAYCE to additional territories, as well as achieving positive results from the ARIKAYCE frontline clinical trial program in order to potentially reach more patients. Additionally, our continued success also depends on bringing additional clinical stage products to market, such as brensocatib and TPIP. We expect to continue to incur substantial expenses related to our research and development activities as we continue the ARIKAYCE frontline clinical program, conduct the Phase 3 ASPEN trial for brensocatib, and continue the required trials for TPIP. We also expect to continue to incur significant costs related to the commercialization of ARIKAYCE, especially as we anticipate launching in new markets. Our financial results may fluctuate from quarter to quarter and will depend on, among other factors, the net sales of ARIKAYCE; the scope and progress of our research and development efforts; and the timing of certain expenses. We cannot predict whether or when new products or new indications for marketed products will receive regulatory approval or, if any such approval is received, whether we will be able to successfully commercialize such products and whether or when they may become profitable.
KEY COMPONENTS OF OUR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Product Revenues, Net
Product revenues, net, consist primarily of net sales of ARIKAYCE in the US and Europe. In October 2018, we began shipping ARIKAYCE to our customers in the US, which include specialty pharmacies and specialty distributors. In December 2020, we began commercial sales of ARIKAYCE in Germany. We recognize revenue for product received by our customers net of allowances for customer credits, including prompt pay discounts, service fees, estimated rebates, including government rebates, such as Medicaid rebates and Medicare Part D coverage gap reimbursements in the US, chargebacks and returns.
Cost of Product Revenues (Excluding Amortization of Intangible Assets)
Cost of product revenues (excluding amortization of intangible assets) consist primarily of direct and indirect costs related to the manufacturing of ARIKAYCE sold, including third-party manufacturing costs, packaging services, freight, and allocation of overhead costs, in addition to royalty expenses and revenue-based milestones. We began capitalizing inventory upon FDA approval of ARIKAYCE. All costs related to inventory for ARIKAYCE prior to FDA approval were expensed as incurred and therefore not included in cost of product revenues.
Research and Development (R&D) Expenses
R&D expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel serving in our research and development functions, including medical affairs and program management. R&D
expense also includes other internal operating expenses, the cost of manufacturing product candidates, including the medical devices for drug delivery, for clinical study, the cost of conducting clinical studies, and the cost of conducting preclinical and research activities. In addition, R&D expenses include payments to third parties for the license rights to products in development (prior to marketing approval), such as brensocatib. Our R&D expenses related to manufacturing our product candidates and medical devices for clinical study are primarily related to activities at contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs) that manufacture brensocatib and TPIP. Our R&D expenses related to clinical trials are primarily related to activities at contract research organizations (CROs) that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. These contracts with CROs set forth the scope of work to be completed at a fixed fee or amount per patient enrolled. Payments under these contracts with CROs primarily depend on performance criteria such as the successful enrollment of patients or the completion of clinical trial milestones as well as time-based fees. Expenses are accrued based on contracted amounts applied to the level of patient enrollment and to activity according to the clinical trial protocol. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. Such amounts are then recognized as an expense as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed, or when the goods or services are no longer expected to be provided.
Selling, General and Administrative (SG&A) Expenses
SG&A expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for our non-employee directors and personnel serving in our executive, finance and accounting, legal and compliance, commercial and pre-commercial, corporate development, field sales, information technology and human resource functions. SG&A expenses also include professional fees for legal services, consulting services, including commercial activities, insurance, board of director fees, tax and accounting services and certain milestones related to ARIKAYCE.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Upon commercialization of ARIKAYCE, our intangible assets began to be amortized over their estimated useful lives. The fair values assigned to our intangible assets are based on estimates and assumptions we believe are reasonable based on available facts and circumstances. Unanticipated events or circumstances may occur that require us to review the assets for impairment.
Investment Income and Interest Expense
Investment income consists of interest and dividend income earned on our cash and cash equivalents. Interest expense consists primarily of the accretion of debt discount, contractual interest costs and the amortization of debt issuance costs related to our accretion of debt. Debt discount is accreted, and debt issuance costs are amortized, to interest expense using the effective interest rate method over the term of the debt. Our balance sheet reflects debt, net of the debt discount, debt issuance costs paid to the lender, and other third-party costs. Unamortized debt issuance costs associated with extinguished debt are expensed in the period of the extinguishment.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
COVID-19 Update
We are committed to the safety and well-being of our workforce. In March 2020, we implemented a number of corporate initiatives in response to the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) global pandemic which manifests as COVID-19. These initiatives included a remote working policy for all employees in order to aid the global containment effort and allow infectious disease specialists and pulmonologists to focus exclusively on treating patients and containing the virus. The policy included all of the field-based therapeutic specialists and employees who support ARIKAYCE prescribers. Beginning on June 1, 2020, certain of our field-based employees who support ARIKAYCE prescribers were permitted to return to the field. To date, access to prescribers has been limited with significant regional variability. Our Arikares® trainers are continuing to offer remote training for patients who initiate treatment with ARIKAYCE. While we continue to see use of ARIKAYCE, including new patient adds and continued prescription renewals, there remains a general uncertainty regarding the impact of COVID-19 on the ARIKAYCE patient population and physicians. Patients suffering from refractory NTM lung disease are typically older individuals with underlying lung conditions, and are often treated by infectious disease specialists and pulmonologists. These treating physicians are on the front lines in addressing this global pandemic and must now, understandably, focus their attention on COVID-19.
There are many uncertainties regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, and we are closely monitoring the impact of the pandemic on all aspects of our business, including how it will impact our patients, employees, suppliers, vendors, business partners and distribution channels. While the pandemic did not materially affect our financial results and business operations through the year ended December 31, 2020, we are unable to predict the impact that COVID-19 will have on our financial position and operating results in future periods due to numerous uncertainties. We will continue to assess the evolving impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and will make adjustments to our operations as necessary.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Overview - Operating Results
Our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020, included the following:
•Product revenues, net, increased $27.9 million, or 20.5%, as compared to the prior year as a result of the growth in ARIKAYCE net sales;
•Cost of product revenues (excluding amortization of intangibles) increased $15.7 million, or 64.7%, as compared to the prior year as a result of the increase in net sales of ARIKAYCE and the decrease in the benefit from the sale of inventory for which the cost was incurred prior to FDA approval of ARIKAYCE;
•R&D expenses increased $49.4 million, or 37.5%, as compared to the prior year primarily resulting from increases in clinical development and research expenses related to our new clinical trials, achievement of a patient dosing milestone (resulting in a milestone payment obligation) in our agreement with AstraZeneca in December 2020, and an increase in compensation and benefit related expenses;
•SG&A expenses decreased $7.2 million, or 3.4%, as compared to the prior year resulting from decreases in professional fees and other external expenses related to ARIKAYCE;
•Amortization of intangible assets was consistent with the prior year; and
•Interest expense increased $1.9 million as compared to the prior year related primarily to finance lease interest expense for our corporate headquarters.
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $294.1 million, or $3.01 per share-basic and diluted, compared with a net loss of $254.3 million, or $3.01 per share-basic and diluted, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Product Revenues, Net
Product revenues, net, consists of net sales of ARIKAYCE. The following table summarizes the sources of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Product revenues, net, for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $164.4 million as compared to $136.5 million in 2019 as a result of the growth in net sales of ARIKAYCE.
Cost of Product Revenues (Excluding Amortization of Intangibles)
Cost of product revenues (excluding amortization of intangibles) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were comprised of the following (in thousands):
Cost of product revenues (excluding amortization of intangibles) increased by $15.7 million, or 64.7%, to $39.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $24.2 million in 2019. The increase in cost of product revenues (excluding amortization of intangibles) in the year ended December 31, 2020 was directly attributable to the increase in total revenues discussed above and a decrease in the benefit from the sale of inventory for which the cost was incurred prior to FDA approval of ARIKAYCE. All product costs incurred prior to FDA approval of ARIKAYCE in September 2018 were expensed as R&D expenses.
R&D Expenses
R&D expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were comprised of the following (in thousands):
R&D expenses increased to $181.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $131.7 million in 2019. The $49.4 million increase was primarily due to a $13.6 million increase in compensation and benefit related expenses and stock-based compensation due to an increase in headcount, a $13.3 million increase in clinical development and research costs related to the initiation of the ARIKAYCE frontline clinical trial program and the Phase 3 ASPEN trial of brensocatib, and the $12.5 million milestone payment obligation due to AstraZeneca upon the first dosing in our Phase 3 ASPEN trial.
External R&D expenses by product for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were comprised of the following (in thousands):
We expect R&D expenses to increase in 2021 relative to 2020 primarily due to our clinical trial activities and related spend including our Phase 3 ASPEN trial of brensocatib, our confirmatory clinical trial of ARIKAYCE in a front-line treatment setting for patients with MAC lung disease, and our TPIP clinical trials.
SG&A Expenses
SG&A expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were comprised of the following (in thousands):
SG&A expenses decreased to $203.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $210.8 million in 2019. The $7.2 million decrease was primarily due to a $14.0 million decrease in professional fees and other external expenses resulting from a $10.2 million milestone related to agreements with CFFT in the prior year and the reduction of certain commercial activities in the current year due to COVID-19 restrictions. In addition, there was a $2.7 million decrease in facility related and other internal expenses due to decreases in travel and other office related expenses. These decreases were partially
offset by a $5.6 million increase in stock-based compensation and a $3.9 million increase in compensation and benefit related expenses.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $5.0 million and $5.0 million, respectively. Amortization of intangible assets is comprised of amortization of acquired ARIKAYCE R&D and amortization of the milestones paid to PARI for the FDA and EMA approvals of ARIKAYCE.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $29.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $27.7 million for 2019. The $1.9 million increase in interest expense in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year period relates to finance lease interest expense for our corporate headquarters.
Provision for Income Taxes
The income tax provision was $1.4 million and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 reflects the current income tax expense recorded as a result of taxable income in certain of our subsidiaries in Europe and Japan as well as a liability for certain state income taxes.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Please refer to the section titled "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 for a comparative discussion of our fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
There is considerable time and cost associated with developing potential pharmaceutical products to the point of regulatory approval and commercialization. We commenced commercial shipments of ARIKAYCE in October 2018. We expect to continue to incur operating losses at our US and certain international entities, as we plan to fund R&D for ARIKAYCE, brensocatib, TPIP and our other pipeline programs, continue commercialization activities for ARIKAYCE in the US and Europe, continue to invest in pre-commercial and regulatory activities for ARIKAYCE in Japan, and other general and administrative activities.
In the second quarter of 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 11,155,000 shares of our common stock, including 1,455,000 shares issued pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriters' option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $23.25 per share. Our net proceeds from the sale of the shares, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses of $13.5 million, were $245.9 million.
In the second quarter of 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering of 10,657,692 shares of common stock, including 1,042,307 shares issued pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriters' option to purchase additional shares at a public offering price of $26.00. Our net proceeds from the sale of the shares, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses of $16.0 million, were $261.1 million. The offering also included the sale of 400,000 shares from our Chair and Chief Executive Officer, from which we received no proceeds.
In January 2018, we completed an underwritten public offering of $450.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes, including the exercise in full of the underwriter's option to purchase additional Convertible Notes. Our net proceeds from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses of $14.2 million, were $435.8 million.
We may need to raise additional capital to fund our operations, including continued commercialization of ARIKAYCE and future clinical trials related to ARIKAYCE, to design and conduct ongoing and future clinical trials for brensocatib and TPIP, and to develop, acquire, in-license or co-promote other products or product candidates, including those that address orphan or rare diseases. We believe we currently have sufficient funds to meet our financial needs for at least the next 12 months. We expect to opportunistically raise additional capital and may do so through equity or debt financing(s), strategic transactions or otherwise. We expect such additional funding, if any, would be used to continue to commercialize ARIKAYCE, to conduct further trials of ARIKAYCE, to develop brensocatib, TPIP and our other product candidates, or to pursue the license
or purchase of other technologies or products and product candidates. During 2021, we plan to continue to support the commercialization of ARIKAYCE in the US and Europe, to continue to fund further clinical development of ARIKAYCE, brensocatib and TPIP, and to fund our global expansion efforts to support commercial launch activities in additional countries in Europe and pre-commercial activities in Japan including obtaining regulatory approvals for ARIKAYCE in Japan. Our cash requirements for the next 12 months will be impacted by a number of factors, the most significant of which we expect to be expenses related to our commercialization efforts and our ARISE and ENCORE clinical trials for ARIKAYCE, expenses related to the ASPEN trial and other development activities for brensocatib, and to a lesser extent, expenses related to the clinical development of TPIP.
Cash Flows
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $532.8 million, as compared with $487.4 million as of December 31, 2019. The $45.3 million increase was due to cash received from the underwritten public offering of our common stock in the second quarter of 2020, partially offset by cash used in operating activities and, to a lesser extent, cash used in investing activities. Our working capital was $504.1 million as of December 31, 2020 as compared with $470.0 million as of December 31, 2019.
Net cash used in operating activities was $219.3 million and $250.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The net cash used in operating activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was primarily for the commercial, clinical and manufacturing activities related to ARIKAYCE, as well as other SG&A expenses and clinical trial expenses related to brensocatib. The decrease in cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to increased cash collections from the sale of ARIKAYCE and the net change in working capital, driven by an in increase in accounts payable and accrued compensation and, to a lesser extent, a decrease in accounts receivable.
Net cash used in investing activities was $6.8 million and $42.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The net cash used in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was primarily related to the investment in our long-term production capacity at Patheon.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $271.0 million and $285.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 included net cash proceeds of $245.9 million from our underwritten public offering of 11,155,000 shares of common stock in the second quarter of 2020 and cash proceeds from stock option exercises. Net cash provided by financing activities during 2019 primarily included net cash proceeds of $261.1 million from our underwritten public offering of 10,657,692 shares of common stock in the second quarter of 2019 and cash proceeds from stock option exercises.
Contractual Obligations
In January 2018, we completed an underwritten public offering of $450.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes pursuant to an indenture between the Company and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee. Our net proceeds from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses of $14.2 million, were approximately $435.8 million. The Convertible Notes bear interest payable semiannually in arrears on January 15 and July 15 of each year, beginning on July 15, 2018. The Convertible Notes mature on January 15, 2025, unless earlier converted, redeemed, or repurchased. The Convertible Notes are convertible into common stock of the Company under certain circumstances described in the indenture. For more information, see Note 8 - Debt in our notes to the consolidated financial statements.
In September 2018, we entered into an agreement (the Lease) with Exeter 700 Route 202/206, LLC to lease 117,022 square feet of office space located in Bridgewater, New Jersey for our corporate headquarters. Subject to certain conditions, we have the one-time option to expand the leased premises by up to 50,000 rentable square feet, exercisable prior to the fifth anniversary of the Commencement Date, which was October 1, 2019. The initial Lease term runs 130 months from the Commencement Date and we have the option to extend that term for up to three additional five-year periods. In addition, we are responsible for operating expenses and taxes pursuant to the Lease. Future minimum payments under the Lease during the initial Lease Term are approximately $23.8 million. The Lease contains customary default provisions, including those relating to payment defaults, performance defaults and events of bankruptcy.
In February 2014, we entered into a contract manufacturing agreement with Therapure Biopharma Inc., which has been assumed by Resilience, for the manufacture of ARIKAYCE, on a non-exclusive basis, at a 200 kg scale. Pursuant to the agreement, we collaborated with Resilience to construct a production area for the manufacture of ARIKAYCE in Resilience's existing manufacturing facility in Canada. The agreement has an initial term of five years, which began in October 2018, and will renew automatically for successive periods of two years each, unless terminated by either party by providing the required
two years' prior written notice to the other party. Under the agreement, we are obligated to pay certain minimum amounts for the batches of ARIKAYCE produced each calendar year.
In September 2015, we entered into a Commercial Fill/Finish Services Agreement (the Fill/Finish Agreement) with Althea, for Althea to produce, on a non-exclusive basis, ARIKAYCE in finished dosage form at a 50 kg scale. Under the Fill/Finish Agreement, we are obligated to pay a minimum of $2.7 million for the batches of ARIKAYCE produced each calendar year during the term of the Fill/Finish Agreement. The Fill/Finish Agreement became effective as of January 1, 2015, and following an extension in 2018, the agreement remains in effect through December 31, 2021. The Fill/Finish Agreement may be extended for additional two-year periods upon mutual written agreement of the Company and Althea at least one year prior to the expiration of its then-current term.
We have a licensing agreement with PARI for the use of the optimized Lamira Nebulizer System for delivery of ARIKAYCE in treating patients with NTM lung infections, CF and bronchiectasis. Under the licensing agreement, we have rights under several US and foreign issued patents, and patent applications involving improvements to the optimized Lamira Nebulizer System, to exploit the system with ARIKAYCE for the treatment of such indications, but we cannot manufacture the nebulizers except as permitted under our Commercialization Agreement with PARI, as described below. The Lamira Nebulizer System has been approved for use in the US (in combination with ARIKAYCE) and the EU. Under the licensing agreement, we made an upfront license fee and milestone payments to PARI. Upon FDA acceptance of our NDA and the subsequent FDA and EMA approvals of ARIKAYCE, we made additional milestone payments of €1.0 million, €1.5 million, and €0.5 million, respectively, to PARI. In October 2017, we exercised an option to buy-down the royalties payable to PARI, which was included within selling, general and administrative expenses in the fourth quarter of 2017. PARI is entitled to receive royalty payments in the mid-single digits on the annual global net sales of ARIKAYCE, pursuant to the licensing agreement, subject to certain specified annual minimum royalties.
In July 2014, we entered into a Commercialization Agreement with PARI for the manufacture and supply of the Lamira Nebulizer Systems and related accessories (the Device) as optimized for use with ARIKAYCE. Under the Commercialization Agreement, PARI manufactures the Device except in the case of certain defined supply failures, when the Company will have the right to make the Device and have it made by third parties (but not certain third parties deemed under the Commercialization Agreement to compete with PARI). The Commercialization Agreement has an initial term of 15 years that began in October 2018 (the Initial Term). The term of the Commercialization Agreement may be extended by us for an additional five years by providing written notice to PARI at least one year prior to the expiration of the Initial Term.
In October 2017, we entered into certain agreements with Patheon related to the increase of our long-term production capacity for ARIKAYCE. The agreements provide for Patheon to manufacture and supply ARIKAYCE for our anticipated commercial needs. Under these agreements, we are required to deliver to Patheon the required raw materials, including active pharmaceutical ingredients, and certain fixed assets needed to manufacture ARIKAYCE. Patheon's supply obligations will commence once certain technology transfer and construction services are completed. Our manufacturing and supply agreement with Patheon will remain in effect for a fixed initial term, after which it will continue for successive renewal terms unless either we or Patheon have given written notice of termination. The technology transfer agreement will expire when the parties agree that the technology transfer services have been completed. The agreements may also be terminated under certain other circumstances, including by either party due to a material uncured breach of the other party or the other party’s insolvency. These early termination clauses may reduce the amounts due to the relevant parties. The aggregate investment to increase our long-term production capacity, including under the Patheon agreements and related agreements or purchase orders with third parties for raw materials and fixed assets, is estimated to be approximately $60 million.
In 2004 and 2009, we entered into research funding agreements with CFFT whereby we received $1.7 million and $2.2 million in research funding for the development of ARIKAYCE. As a result of the US approval of ARIKAYCE and in accordance with the agreements, as amended, we owe milestone payments to CFFT of $13.4 million in the aggregate, of which $1.0 million has been paid through December 31, 2020, which are payable through 2025. Furthermore, if certain global sales milestones are met within five years of the commercialization of ARIKAYCE, we would owe up to an additional $3.9 million. We have determined the likelihood of meeting such global sales milestones and have accrued for these contingent obligations proportionally based on net sales of ARIKAYCE.
In April 2020, we entered into a master services agreement with PPD Development, L.P. (PPD) pursuant to which we retained PPD to perform clinical development services in connection with certain of our clinical research programs. The master services agreement has an initial term of five years. Either party may terminate (i) any project addendum under the master services agreement for any reason and without cause upon 30 days’ written notice, (ii) any project addendum in the event of the other party’s breach of the master services agreement or such project addendum upon 30 days’ written notice, provided that such breach is not cured within such 30-day period, (iii) the master services agreement or any project addendum immediately upon the occurrence of an insolvency event with respect to the other party or (iv) any project addendum upon 30 days’ written notice if (a) the continuation of the services under such project addendum would post material ethical or safety risks to study participants, (b) any approval from a regulatory authority necessary to perform the applicable study is revoked, suspended or expires without renewal or (c) in the reasonable opinion of such party, continuation of the services provided under such project addendum would be in violation of applicable law. We have entered into project addenda with PPD to perform clinical development services over several years for, but not limited to, our ARISE, ENCORE and ASPEN studies. We currently expect to incur approximately $200 million of costs related to these project addenda.
In October 2016, we entered into the AZ License Agreement, pursuant to which AstraZeneca granted us exclusive global rights for the purpose of developing and commercializing AZD7986 (which we renamed brensocatib). In consideration of the licenses and other rights granted by AstraZeneca, we made an upfront payment of $30.0 million, which was included as research and development expense in the fourth quarter of 2016. In December 2020, we incurred a $12.5 million milestone payment obligation upon first dosing in a Phase 3 clinical trial of brensocatib. We are obligated to make a series of additional contingent milestone payments to AstraZeneca totaling up to an additional $72.5 million upon the achievement of clinical development and regulatory filing milestones. If we elect to develop brensocatib for a second indication, we will be obligated to make an additional series of contingent milestone payments totaling up to $42.5 million, the first of which occurs at the initiation of a Phase 3 trial in the additional indication. We are not obligated to make any additional milestone payments for any additional indications. In addition, we have agreed to pay AstraZeneca tiered royalties ranging from a high single-digit to mid-teens on net sales of any approved product based on brensocatib and one additional payment of $35.0 million upon the first achievement of $1 billion in annual net sales. The AZ License Agreement provides AstraZeneca with the option to negotiate a future agreement with us for commercialization of brensocatib in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma.
Future Funding Requirements
We may need to raise additional capital to fund our operations, including the continued commercialization of ARIKAYCE, current and future clinical trials related to ARIKAYCE, development of brensocatib and TPIP, and the potential development, acquisition, in-license or co-promotion of other products or product candidates, including those that address orphan or rare diseases. We expect that our future capital requirements may be substantial and will depend on many factors, including:
•The timing and cost of our current and future clinical trials of ARIKAYCE for the treatment of patients with NTM lung infections, including the ARISE and ENCORE trials;
•The decisions of the MHLW and PMDA with respect to our applications for marketing approval of ARIKAYCE in Japan;
•The costs of activities related to the regulatory approval process and the timing of approvals, if received;
•The cost of supporting the sales and marketing efforts necessary to support the continued commercial efforts of ARIKAYCE;
•The cost of filing, prosecuting, defending, and enforcing patent claims;
•The timing and cost of our ongoing and anticipated clinical trials for our product candidates, including our brensocatib Phase 3 ASPEN trial;
•The costs of our manufacturing-related activities;
•The costs associated with commercializing ARIKAYCE in Japan, if approved; and
•The levels, timing and collection of revenue earned from sales of ARIKAYCE and other products approved in the future, if any.
We have raised $943 million in net proceeds from securities offerings since 2018. We believe we currently have sufficient funds to meet our financial needs for at least the next 12 months. However, our business strategy may require us to raise additional capital at any time through equity or debt financing(s), strategic transactions or otherwise.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. We do not have any interest in special purpose entities, structured finance entities or other variable interest entities.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the US requires us to make estimates and assumptions affecting the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We use our historical experience and other relevant factors when developing our estimates and assumptions and we regularly evaluate these estimates and assumptions. The amounts of assets and liabilities reported in our consolidated balance sheets and the amounts reported in our consolidated statements of comprehensive loss are affected by estimates and assumptions, which are used for, but not limited to, the accounting for revenue recognition, research and development, stock-based compensation, inventory, finite-lived intangible assets, and accrued expenses. The accounting estimates discussed below involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. Actual results could differ materially from our estimates. For additional accounting policies, see Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
Revenue Recognition
Product revenues, net, consist primarily of net sales of ARIKAYCE in the US and Europe. In October 2018, we began shipping ARIKAYCE to our customers in the US, which include specialty pharmacies and specialty distributors. In December 2020, we began commercial sales of ARIKAYCE in Germany, and plan to launch in other EU countries and the UK, subject to local reimbursement processes. Product revenues, net, are recognized for arrangements within the scope of ASC 606, once we perform the following five steps: (1) identify the contracts with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when or as the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Revenue is recorded at net selling price (transaction price), which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established for (a) customer payments, such as invoice discounts for prompt pay and specialty pharmacies fees, (b) estimated government rebates, such as Medicaid and Medicare Part D reimbursements, and estimated managed care rebates, (c) estimated chargebacks, and (d) estimated costs of co-payment assistance. These reserves are based on the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales and are classified as reductions of accounts receivable (prompt pay discounts and chargebacks), prepaid expenses (co-payment assistance), or as a current liability (customer fees and rebates). Where appropriate, these estimates take into consideration a range of possible outcomes which are probability-weighted for relevant factors such as our historical experience, current contractual and statutory requirements, and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which the relevant third party is entitled based on the terms of the applicable contract. The amount of variable consideration included in the transaction price may be constrained and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
Customer payments: Our customers are offered various forms of consideration, including fees for enhanced services and prompt payment discounts. The payment terms for sales to specialty pharmacies for prompt payment discounts and fees for services are based on contractual rates agreed with the respective specialty pharmacies. We anticipate that our customers will earn these discounts and fees and, therefore, we deduct the full amount of these discounts and fees from total gross product revenues at the time such revenues are recognized.
Rebates: We contract with government agencies and managed care organizations, or collectively, third-party payors, so that ARIKAYCE will be eligible for purchase by, or partial or full reimbursement from, such third-party payors. We estimate the rebates we will provide to third-party payors and deduct these estimated amounts from total gross product revenues at the time the revenues are recognized. These reserves are recorded in the same period in which the revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and the establishment of a current liability, which is included in accrued expenses on the consolidated balance sheets. We estimate the rebates that will be provided to third-party payors based upon (i) our contracts with these third-party payors, (ii) the government mandated discounts applicable to government-funded programs, (iii) a range of possible outcomes that are probability-weighted for the estimated payor mix, and (iv) information obtained from our specialty pharmacies.
Chargebacks: Chargebacks are discounts that occur when certain contracted customers, currently public health service institutions and federal government entities purchasing via the Federal Supply Schedule, purchase directly from our specialty distributor. Contracted customers generally purchase the product at a discounted price and the specialty distributor, in turn, charges back to us the difference between the price they initially paid and the discounted price paid by the contracted customers. We estimate the chargebacks provided to the specialty distributor and deduct these estimated amounts from gross product revenues at the time revenues are recognized.
Co-payment assistance: Patients who have commercial insurance and meet certain eligibility requirements may receive co-payment assistance. Based upon the terms of the program and our historical experience with copay redemptions, we estimate the average co-pay mitigation amounts and the percentage of patients that we expect to participate in the program in order to establish our accruals for co-payment assistance. These reserves are recorded in the same period in which the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue. We adjust our accruals for co-pay assistance based on actual redemption activity and estimates of future redemptions related to sales in the current period.
If any, or all, of our actual experience vary from the estimates above, we may need to adjust prior period accruals, affecting revenue in the period of adjustment. For additional information regarding our estimates of variable consideration, including quantitative impacts on our financial results, see Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
We also have recognized revenue related to early access programs (EAPs) in Europe, primarily consisting of sales to the French National Agency for Medicines and Health Products Safety, which granted ARIKAYCE a Temporary Authorization for Use (Autorisation Temporaire d'Utilisation or ATU) and from the named patient program in Germany, both compassionate use programs. EAPs are intended to make products available on a named patient basis before they are commercially available in accordance with local regulations.