ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
INTRODUCTION
This MD&A, which should be read in conjunction with our accompanying consolidated financial statements as set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, provides a discussion and analysis of our business, current developments, financial condition, cash flows and results of operations. It is organized as follows:
● General. This section provides a general description of our business, which we believe is important in understanding the results of our operations, financial condition and potential future trends.
● Operations & Oil Tanker Markets. This section provides an overview of industry operations and dynamics that have an impact on the Company’s financial position and results of operations.
● Results from Vessel Operations. This section provides an analysis of our results of operations presented on a business segment basis. In addition, a brief description of significant transactions and other items that affect the comparability of the results is provided, if applicable.
● Liquidity and Sources of Capital. This section provides an analysis of our cash flows, outstanding debt and commitments. Included in the analysis of our outstanding debt is a discussion of the amount of financial capacity available to fund our ongoing operations and future commitments as well as a discussion of the Company’s planned and/or already executed capital allocation activities.
● Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies. This section identifies those accounting policies that are considered important to our results of operations and financial condition, require significant judgment and invoice significant management estimates.
We have elected to omit discussion on the earliest of the three years covered by the consolidated financial statements presented. Refer to Item 7 of our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed on March 3, 2020, for reference to discussion of the year ended December 31, 2018, the earliest of the three years presented.
GENERAL
We are a provider of ocean transportation services for crude oil and refined petroleum products. We operate our vessels in the International Flag market. Our business includes two reportable segments: Crude Tankers and Product Carriers. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we derived 79% and 76% of our TCE revenues from our Crude Tankers segment. Revenues from our Product Carriers segment constituted the balance of our TCE revenues during these periods.
As of December 31, 2020, we owned or operated an International Flag fleet of 36 vessels aggregating 6.1 million dwt, including three vessels that have been chartered-in under operating leases for durations exceeding one year at inception and two FSO service vessels in which we have ownership interests through joint venture partnerships (the “JV Vessels”). Our fleet includes VLCC, Suezmax, Aframax and Panamax crude tankers and LR1, LR2 and MR product carriers.
The Company’s revenues are highly sensitive to patterns of supply and demand for vessels of the size and design configurations owned and operated by the Company and the trades in which those vessels operate. Rates for the transportation of crude oil and refined petroleum products from which the Company earns a substantial majority of its revenues are determined by market forces such as the supply and demand for oil, the distance that cargoes must be transported, and the number of vessels expected to be available at the time such cargoes need to be transported. The demand for oil shipments is significantly affected by the state of the global economy, levels of U.S. domestic and international production and OPEC exports. The number of vessels is affected by newbuilding deliveries and by the removal of existing vessels from service, principally through storage, recycling or conversions. The Company’s revenues are also affected by its vessel employment strategy, which seeks to achieve the optimal mix of spot (voyage charter) and long-term (time or bareboat charter) charters. Because shipping revenues and voyage expenses are significantly affected by the mix between voyage charters and time charters, the Company measures the performance of its fleet of vessels based on TCE revenues. Management makes economic decisions based on anticipated TCE rates and evaluates financial performance based on TCE rates achieved. In order to take advantage of market conditions and optimize economic performance, management employs the majority of
International Seaways, Inc.
the Company’s LR1 Product carriers, which currently participate in the Panamax International pool, in the transportation of crude oil cargoes. Other than the JV Vessels, our revenues are derived predominantly from spot market voyage charters and our vessels are predominantly employed in the spot market via market-leading commercial pools. We derived approximately 79% and 92% of our total TCE revenues in the spot market for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in spot market exposure during 2020 reflects our decision to opportunistically lock in four of our VLCCs on time charters for periods ranging from seven months to 36 months at high rates with major oil producing and trading companies during the second quarter of 2020.
OPERATIONS AND OIL TANKER MARKETS
The International Energy Agency (“IEA”) estimates global oil consumption for the fourth quarter of 2020 at 94.5 million barrels per day (“b/d”), a decrease of 6.4 million b/d, or 6.3%, over the same quarter in 2019. The estimate for global oil consumption for 2021 is 96.6 million b/d, an increase of 5.9% over 2020. OECD demand in 2021 is estimated to increase by 6.7% to 44.8 million b/d, while non-OECD demand is estimated to increase by 5.7% to 51.9 million b/d.
Global oil production in the fourth quarter of 2020 was 92.3 million b/d, a decrease of 8.9% from the fourth quarter of 2019. OPEC crude oil production averaged 24.9 million b/d in the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of 1.1 million b/d from the third quarter of 2020, and a decrease of 4.2 million b/d from the fourth quarter of 2019. Non-OPEC production decreased by 4.7 million b/d to 62.2 million b/d in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared with the fourth quarter of 2019. Oil production in the U.S. in the fourth quarter of 2020 increased by 5.1% to 11.1 million b/d compared to the third quarter of 2020 but decreased 13.5% from the fourth quarter of 2019.
U.S. refinery throughput decreased by 0.1 million b/d to 14.6 million b/d in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared with the third quarter of 2020. U.S. crude oil imports in the fourth quarter of 2020 decreased by 0.2 million b/d to 5.6 million b/d compared with the fourth quarter of 2019, with imports from OPEC countries declining by 0.6 million b/d and imports from non-OPEC countries increasing by 0.4 million b/d.
China’s crude oil imports reached a record 10.85 million b/d for 2020, an increase of 7.3% from 2019 levels, although December’s levels decreased to 9.1 million b/d due to teapot refineries not receiving import quotas for the month. November’s import levels were at 11.0 million b/d.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the tanker fleet of vessels over 10,000 dwt increased, net of vessels recycled, by 2.6 million dwt as the crude fleet increased by 2.0 million dwt, with VLCCs and Suezmaxes growing by 1.5 and 0.6 million dwt, respectively, and the Aframax sector remained flat. The product carrier fleet expanded by 0.6 million dwt with MRs increasing by 0.6 million dwt while the LR1 sector remained flat. Year-over-year, the size of the tanker fleet increased by 19.2 million dwt with the largest increases in the VLCC, Suezmax and MR sectors, while Aframaxes and LR1s saw only modest growth in fleet size.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the tanker orderbook increased by 4.8 million dwt overall, reflecting increased new ordering activity. The crude tanker orderbook increased by 5.4 million dwt, with increases of 4.4, 0.5 and 0.4 million dwt in the VLCC, Suezmax and Aframax sectors, respectively. The product carrier orderbook declined by 0.6 million dwt with LR1s declining by 0.1 million dwt and MRs declining by 0.4 million dwt.
Year-over-year, the total tanker orderbook was flat, with VLCCs and Aframaxes increasing by 1.1 and 1.6 million dwt, respectively, while the Panamax and MR orderbooks declined by 0.9 and 1.7 million dwt, respectively. The Suezmax orderbook remained flat.
Crude tanker rates fared poorly in the fourth quarter of 2020 with, the large inventory build-up seen in the second quarter as a result of overproduction and oil contango, continuing to put pressure on tanker rates during the fourth quarter. During the fourth quarter of 2020, all tanker types on benchmark routes were operating at or below industry average cash breakeven levels.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
In March 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) recognized the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) as a pandemic. COVID-19 severely restricted the level of economic activity around the world during 2020. In response to COVID-19, the governments of many countries, states, cities, and other geographic regions took preventative or protective actions, such as imposing restrictions on travel and business operations. Temporary closures of businesses were ordered and numerous other businesses temporarily closed voluntarily. Further, individuals' ability to travel was curtailed through mandated travel restrictions and were further limited through
International Seaways, Inc.
additional voluntary or mandated closures of travel-related businesses. These pandemic-related travel restrictions impacted the Company’s business operations and will likely continue to do so until vaccines have been widely administered and governments of countries begin to ease travel restrictions. The pandemic-related travel restrictions during 2020 led to a drop in consumer demand for oil. This coupled with OPEC’s decision to cut oil production, created a contango in the price of oil, which initially created a strong demand for the transportation and storage of crude oil on tankers, and resulted in very favorable earnings for tanker owners like INSW during the first half of 2020. However, beginning in the third quarter of 2020, tanker rates began to experience a downward pressure as the demand for the transportation and storage of crude oil experienced during the first half of the year reversed as the drawdown of the large inventory buildup commenced. Also, our ability to rotate seafarers on and off our fleet of vessels was extremely challenging during 2020. Changing immigration rules, mandatory quarantine requirements and limited air travel made crew rotations very complicated and expensive and has caused many of our seafarers to remain onboard our vessels for longer that their contract periods. We and many of our industry peers and industry trade groups lobbied governments and port authorities during 2020 to award seafarers “essential worker” status, with the same travel and immigration privileges often conferred on aircraft staff and medical workers. In July 2020, more than a dozen countries including critical global shipping hubs like the U.S., Singapore, Greece and the United Arab Emirates pledged to ease port and border restrictions and to help stranded crews return home.
We implemented various measures to protect our seafarers and shore-based personnel and reduce the spread of the virus. Strict quarantine and testing protocols were implemented for personnel and visitors to our vessels. Since our shore-based personnel and those of our third-party technical and commercial operators were able to work remotely from home using various technology tools, we were able to maintain our operations and internal controls over financial reporting and disclosures.
RESULTS FROM VESSEL OPERATIONS
During 2020, income from vessel operations decreased by $15.3 million to $39.9 million from $55.2 million in 2019. An increase of $99.8 million in losses on disposals of vessels and other property, including impairments, in the current year drove such decrease. Offsetting these non-cash charges to a large extent were significantly higher TCE revenues, and lower charter hire expenses, which were due to fewer chartered-in vessels in the Crude Tankers Lightering business and the Company’s redelivery of four time-chartered in MRs between August 2019 and July 2020.
The increase in TCE revenues in 2020 of $62.1 million, or 18%, to $402.0 million from $339.9 million in 2019 primarily reflects higher average daily rates across all of INSW’s fleet sectors, which accounted for an increase of approximately $104.9 million. Such rates-based increases were partially offset by (i) fewer revenue days in the VLCC fleet during 2020 due in large part to vessels being off-hire while undergoing scrubber installations and the sales of a 2002-built and 2003-built VLCC during the fourth quarter of 2020, (ii) a days-based decrease in the MR fleet primarily resulting from the sales and redeliveries of six MRs between June 2019 and July 2020, (iii) a decline in revenue days in the Panamax fleet primarily due to 325 more drydock days in the current year, and (iv) a lower volume of activity in the Crude Tankers Lightering business, all of which accounted for offsetting decreases in TCE revenue of $5.6 million, $14.8 million, $4.4 million and $19.8 million, respectively.
International Seaways, Inc.
The following tables provide a quarterly trend analysis of spot TCE rates earned between the fourth quarter of 2019 and 2020 by our Crude Tankers and Product Carriers fleet. See segment discussion below for a description of the market factors that impacted the quarterly trend of spot rates during 2020.
See Note 4, “Business and Segment Reporting,” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements as set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for additional information on the Company’s segments, including equity in income of affiliated companies and reconciliations of (i) time charter equivalent revenues to shipping revenues and (ii) adjusted income/(loss) from vessel operations for the segments to loss before income taxes, as reported in the consolidated statements of operations.
International Seaways, Inc.
Crude Tankers
(a) Adjusted income/(loss) from vessel operations by segment is before general and administrative expenses, provision for credit losses, third-party debt modification fees, and loss on disposal of vessels and other property, including impairments.
(b) The average is calculated to reflect the addition and disposal of vessels during the year.
(c) Revenue days represent ship-operating days less days that vessels were not available for employment due to repairs, drydock or lay-up. Revenue days are weighted to reflect the Company’s interest in chartered-in vessels.
(d) Ship-operating days represent calendar days.
(e) The Company’s Crude Tankers Lightering business time chartered-in one vessel and spot chartered-in 29 vessels under operating leases at various points during 2019 for full service lightering jobs. Only one vessel was time chartered-in for a portion of the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table provides a breakdown of TCE rates achieved for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 between spot and fixed earnings and the related revenue days. The information in these tables is based, in part, on information provided by the commercial pools in which the segment’s vessels participate and excludes commercial pool fees/commissions averaging approximately $674 and $778 per day in 2020 and 2019, respectively, as well as revenue and revenue days for which recoveries were recorded by the Company under its loss of hire insurance policies.
During 2020, TCE revenues for the Crude Tankers segment increased by $59.1 million, or 23%, to $318.6 million from $259.5 million in 2019, principally as a result of significantly higher average blended rates in the VLCC, Suezmax, and Panamax sectors aggregating approximately $88.3 million. The increased rates in the VLCC fleet accounted for $78.6 million of this total rates-based increase. The very strong rate environment for Crude Tanker fixtures concluded during the latter portion of the first quarter of 2020 and the majority of the second quarter of 2020 was due in large part to increased oil production and a growth in demand for floating storage. During the second quarter of 2020, four of the Company’s VLCCs commenced time charters with periods ranging from seven to 36 months at
International Seaways, Inc.
attractive rates. Commencing from the latter part of the second quarter of 2020, principally as the result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, oil production has declined and consequently so did the need for floating storage. This development negatively impacted the demand for oil tankers during the second half of 2020. The extent to which the current COVID-19 related market conditions will continue to negatively impact the tanker rate environment will depend on (i) the extent to which oil demand is met from excess crude inventories that were built up during the period of oil demand destruction, (ii) the timing and magnitude of oil demand recoveries in the various parts of the world and (iii) the levels of oil production during such periods.
Partially offsetting the rates-based increases in TCE revenues described above was the impact of a 505-day decrease in VLCC and Panamax revenue days aggregating $10.0 million and a $19.8 million decrease in revenue in the Crude Tankers Lightering business in 2020. The decrease in VLCC and Panamax revenue days resulted primarily from (i) a 93-day and 325-day increase in drydock days for the VLCC and Panamax fleets, respectively, during 2020 for scrubber installations on the VLCCs and for regularly scheduled drydocks on the Panamaxes, and (ii) the sales of a 2003-built VLCC and a 2002-built VLCC during November and December 2020, respectively.
Through January 2021, the Company has completed the scrubber installations on eight of its modern VLCCs. The scrubber installations on its final two modern VLCC were rescheduled from 2020 to 2021 because of challenges to the original schedule posed by COVID-19. The later dates now align with the natural drydocking dates for the vessels.
The expected offhire days across the fleets could be subject to increase due to the impacts that COVID-19 has had and may continue to have on international travel and movement of personnel and other scheduling changes.
Vessel expenses increased by $3.7 million to $97.4 million in 2020 from $93.7 million in 2019. Such increase reflects (i) approximately $1.2 million in technical management transition costs incurred on six of our VLCCs during 2020, (ii) approximately $1.4 million in COVID-19 related crew bonuses, travel and accommodation costs and voyage deviation costs incurred to facilitate crew changes during 2020, (iii) approximately $2.1 million increase in drydock deviation costs, (iv) increased insurance costs, and (v) approximately $0.8 million in off-hire fuel costs for the Seaways Mulan during the time it was held in Indonesia, partially offset by a decrease in vessel expenses resulted from the VLCC sales noted above and the sale of a 2002-built Aframax in January 2020 and a 2001-built Aframax in November 2020. Charter hire expenses decreased by $16.3 million to $18.8 million in 2020 from $35.1 million in 2019. The decrease reflects a significant decrease in spot and short-term time chartered-in vessels in the Crude Tankers Lightering business as a result of the absence of full-service lightering activity in 2020.
Excluding depreciation and amortization, the provision for credit losses and general and administrative expenses, operating income for the Crude Tankers Lightering business was $6.6 million for 2020 compared to $5.8 million for 2019. The increase in the current period’s operating income as compared to prior year’s period primarily reflects reductions in charter hire expense offset by lower levels of full-service lightering activity in 2020. During 2020, zero full service and 369 service support only lighterings were performed, as compared to 57 full service and 378 service support only lighterings in the prior year. Additionally, during the prior year’s period the Crude Tankers Lightering business utilized its chartered-in Aframaxes on 18 spot voyages. Weakness in the U.S. Gulf Aframax market in 2019 resulted in those voyages achieving TCE results that were on average lower than the charter-in rates for these vessels. The two chartered-in Aframaxes employed in Crude Tankers Lightering business in the first quarter of 2020 performed four spot voyages at high rates prior to their redelivery, which contributed approximately $2.4 million of income during the period.
International Seaways, Inc.
Product Carriers
The following table provides a breakdown of TCE rates achieved for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 between spot and fixed earnings and the related revenue days. The information is based, in part, on information provided by the commercial pools in which the segment’s vessels participate and excludes commercial pool fees/commissions averaging approximately $659, and $486 per day in 2020 and 2019, respectively, as well as revenue and revenue days for which recoveries were recorded by the Company under its loss of hire insurance policies.
(1) During the 2020 and 2019 periods, with the exception of a 2009-built LR1 purchased by the Company in February 2020 that at times transported refined oil product cargoes, each of the Company’s LR1s participated in the Panamax International Pool and transported crude oil cargoes exclusively.
During 2020, TCE revenues for the Product Carriers segment increased by $3.0 million, or 4%, to $83.4 million from $80.4 million in 2019. Year-over-year increases in average daily blended rates earned across all Product Carrier fleets accounted for an increase in revenue of approximately $15.6 million. Also contributing to the increase was a $1.9 million days-based increase in the LR1 fleet which resulted principally from (i) the entry into a two-year time charter-in of a 2006-built LR1 in August 2019, and (ii) the purchase of a 2009-built LR1 that was delivered to the Company in February 2020, partially offset by (i) 226 more drydock days in the current year and (ii) one six-month time charter-in of a LR1 that was redelivered to its owner in November 2019. These increases were offset to a large extent by a $14.8 million days-based decline in TCE revenues arising from a 1,226-day decrease in MR revenue days arising from the redelivery of four time chartered-in MRs to their owners between the third quarter of 2019 and July 2020 and the sales of two 2004-built MRs between June and July 2019.
Vessel expenses during 2020 increased by $1.5 million to $31.0 million from $29.5 million in 2019 primarily due to an increase in insurance costs and drydock deviation costs in the current year, partially offset by the net impact of the vessel transactions described above. Charter hire expenses decreased by $11.1 million to $11.3 million in 2020 from $22.4 million in 2019 due to the vessel transactions described above.
International Seaways, Inc.
General and Administrative Expenses
During 2020, general and administrative expenses increased by $2.2 million to $29.0 million from $26.8 million in 2019. The primary drivers for such increase are (i) a $2.4 million increase in compensation and benefits costs, of which $1.4 million relates to non-cash stock compensation, and (ii) a $0.2 million increase in directors and officers liability insurance costs. These increases were partially offset by an approximately $0.7 million decrease in travel and entertainment costs, due to COVID-19 related travel restrictions.
Provision for Credit Losses
Provision for credit losses totaled a net benefit of $0.1 million during 2020, as compared to an expense of $1.2 million during 2019. The 2019 provision for credit losses were primarily related to one customer from the Company’s Crude Tankers Lightering business, for whom two full service lighterings were performed during the fourth quarter of 2018, who filed for bankruptcy in 2019. During 2020 we recovered $0.1 million from this customer and wrote off the remaining $1.1 million provision.
Equity in Income of Affiliated Companies
In October 2020, the FSO Joint Venture signed a 10-year extension on each of the existing service contracts with North Oil Company (“NOC”), relating to the two FSO service vessels. Such extensions shall commence in direct continuation of the existing contracts, which were originally scheduled to expire during the third quarter of 2022. The fixed charter rates during the extension period although lower than the charter rates that are currently in effect, provide certainty with respect to cash flows over the remaining economic lives of FSO service vessels. Based on the Company’s 50% ownership interest in the FSO Joint Venture, the 10-year contract extensions are expected to generate in excess of $322 million in contract revenues for the Company.
During 2020, equity in income of affiliated companies decreased by $7.1 million to $4.1 million from $11.2 million in 2019. This decrease was principally attributable to decreases in earnings from the FSO Joint Venture of $15.3 million, partially offset by the non-recurrence of the 2019 recognition of an $8.2 million loss from the LNG joint venture, which was sold in October 2019, as discussed below. The decrease in earnings from the FSO Joint Venture reflects INSW’s $16.4 million share of the non-cash deferred tax provision recorded by the FSO Joint Venture in the fourth quarter of 2020, which was driven by the execution of 10-year extensions on each of the joint venture’s existing service contracts in October 2020. The deferred tax provision relates to temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of the FSO Vessels, which are scheduled to reverse over the period from the expiry of the current service contracts in 2022 through the expiry of the extended contracts in 2032. Earnings generated from the FSO Joint Venture also reflect decreases in interest expense due to lower average outstanding debt balances in 2020.
The $8.2 million loss recognized from the LNG joint venture in 2019 was attributable to the release of the Company’s share of the unrealized losses associated with the interest rate swaps held by the LNG joint venture of $21.6 million into earnings from accumulated other comprehensive loss upon the Company’s sale of its ownership interest in the joint venture, offset in part by a $3.0 million cash gain on such sale and $10.4 million of earnings from the joint venture during 2019 prior to its sale.
Other Expense
Other expense was $12.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The current period expense includes (i) prepayment fees of $1.0 million related to the 10.75% Subordinated Notes and a write-off of $12.5 million of unamortized original issue discount and deferred financing costs associated with the payoff of the 2017 Term Loan, ABN Term Loan Facility, and the 10.75% Subordinated Notes, which were treated as extinguishments during the first quarter of 2020, and (ii) prepayment fees of $0.2 million and a write-off of $0.6 million of unamortized deferred financing costs associated with the payoff of the Transition Term Loan Facility in August 2020, which was treated as an extinguishment. Similarly, the 2019 expense includes a 1% prepayment fee of $1.1 million and the write-off of $3.6 million of unamortized original issue discount and deferred financing costs associated with the $110 million principal prepayments on the 2017 Debt Facilities. Such charges in 2020 and 2019 were both partially offset by interest income on cash deposits, net actuarial gains and currency gains or losses associated with the retirement benefit obligation in the United Kingdom. Interest income earned on the Company’s cash deposits decreased in 2020 due to a decline in interest rates.
International Seaways, Inc.
Interest Expense
The components of interest expense are as follows:
Interest expense was $36.7 million in 2020, compared with $66.3 million in 2019. Interest expense decreased as a result of lower average outstanding debt balances in 2020 compared with 2019, principally attributable to $110 million in principal prepayments on the 2017 Term Loan Facility during the second half of 2019, the $40 million payoff of the Transition Term Loan Facility in August 2020 and the use of cash in the January 2020 refinancing to further reduce outstanding debt balances, and lower average margins and interest rates on the refinanced portion of debt entered into by the Company during the first quarter of 2020, and lower average LIBOR rates during 2020 compared with 2019. See Note 8, “Debt,” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements as set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for further information on the Company’s debt facilities.
Income Tax Expense
If we do not qualify for an exemption pursuant to Section 883, or the “Section 883 exemption,” of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the “Code,” then we will be subject to U.S. federal income tax on our shipping income that is derived from U.S. sources. If we are subject to such tax, our results of operations and cash flows would be reduced by the amount of such tax. We qualified for the Section 883 exemption for the tax year ended December 31, 2020. We will qualify for the Section 883 exemption for 2021 and forward if, among other things, (i) our common shares are treated as primarily and regularly traded on an established securities market in the United States or another qualified country (“publicly traded test”), or (ii) we satisfy one of two other ownership tests. Under applicable U.S. Treasury Regulations, the publicly traded test will not be satisfied in any taxable year in which persons who directly, indirectly or constructively own five percent or more of our common shares (sometimes referred to as “5% shareholders”) own 50% or more of the vote and value of our common shares for more than half the days in such year, unless an exception applies. We can provide no assurance that ownership of our common shares by 5% shareholders will allow us to qualify for the Section 883 exemption in future taxable years. If we do not qualify for the Section 883 exemption, our gross shipping income derived from U.S. sources, i.e., 50% of our gross shipping income attributable to transportation beginning or ending in the United States (but not both beginning and ending in the United States), generally would be subject to a four percent tax without allowance for deductions.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA represents net income/(loss) before interest expense, income taxes and depreciation and amortization expense. Adjusted EBITDA consists of EBITDA adjusted for the impact of certain items that we do not consider indicative of our ongoing operating performance. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are presented to provide investors with meaningful additional information that management uses to monitor ongoing operating results and evaluate trends over comparative periods. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not represent, and should not be considered a substitute for, net income or cash flows from operations determined in accordance with GAAP. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as analytical tools, and should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results reported under GAAP. Some of the limitations are:
● EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; and
● EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect the significant interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debt.
While EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are frequently used by companies as a measure of operating results and performance, neither of those items as prepared by the Company is necessarily comparable to other similarly titled captions of other companies due to differences in methods of calculation.
International Seaways, Inc.
The following table reconciles net income/(loss), as reflected in the consolidated statements of operations set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA:
Effects of Inflation
The Company does not believe that inflation has had or is likely, in the foreseeable future, to have a significant impact on vessel operating expenses, drydocking expenses and general and administrative expenses.
LIQUIDITY AND SOURCES OF CAPITAL
Our business is capital intensive. Our ability to successfully implement our strategy is dependent on the continued availability of capital on attractive terms. In addition, our ability to successfully operate our business to meet near-term and long-term debt repayment obligations is dependent on maintaining sufficient liquidity.
Liquidity
Working capital at December 31, 2020 was approximately $148.0 million compared with $73.0 million at December 31, 2019. Current assets are highly liquid, consisting principally of cash, interest-bearing deposits and receivables. The Company’s total cash increased by $65.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase reflects cash provided by operating activities of $216.1 million, proceeds from the issuance of debt, net of issuance and deferred financing costs of $363.0 million, proceeds from disposal of vessels and other property of $73.1 million, and net returns of capital and deposits received from affiliated companies of $9.8 million. Such cash inflows were partially offset by $50.6 million in expenditures for vessels and other property, $422.7 million related to extinguishment of the Company’s 2017 Term Loan Facility, ABN Term Loan Facility, 10.75% Subordinated Notes and Transition Term Loan Facility, scheduled principal amortization for the Company’s debt facilities totaling $82.0 million, which included a $20.0 million repayment of the outstanding balance under the Core Revolving Facility that was initially drawn down in connection with the January 2020 refinancing, cash dividends of $6.8 million, and $30.0 million in repurchases of common stock.
Our cash and cash equivalents balances generally exceed Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insured limits. We place our cash and cash equivalents in what we believe to be credit-worthy financial institutions. In addition, certain of our money market accounts invest in U.S. Treasury securities or other obligations issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government or its agencies, floating rate and variable demand notes of U.S. and foreign corporations, commercial paper rated in the highest category by Moody’s Investor Services and Standard & Poor’s, certificates of deposit and time deposits, asset-backed securities, and repurchase agreements.
As of December 31, 2020 we had total liquidity on a consolidated basis of $255.7 million comprised of $215.7 million of cash (including $16.3 million of restricted cash) and $40 million of undrawn revolver capacity. Restricted cash of $16.3 million as of December 31, 2020 represents legally restricted cash relating to the Sinosure Credit Facility. Such facility stipulates that cash accounts be maintained which are limited in their use to pay expenses related to drydocking the vessels and servicing the debt facility.
As of December 31, 2020, we had total debt outstanding (net of original issue discount and deferred financing costs) of $535.8 million and a net debt to total capitalization of 24.8%, which compares with 33.3% at December 31, 2019.
International Seaways, Inc.
Sources, Uses and Management of Capital
We have maintained a strong balance sheet which has allowed us to take advantage of attractive strategic opportunities during the low end of the tanker cycle and we have maintained what we believe to be a prudent financial leverage for the current point in the tanker cycle and one of the lowest loan to value profiles in the public company shipping sector.
In addition to future operating cash flows, our other future sources of funds are proceeds from issuances of equity securities, additional borrowings as permitted under our loan agreements and proceeds from the opportunistic sales of our vessels. Our current uses of funds are to fund working capital requirements, maintain the quality of our vessels, purchase vessels, comply with international shipping standards and environmental laws and regulations, repay or repurchase our outstanding loan facilities, pay a regular quarterly cash dividend, and from time-to-time, repurchase shares of our common stock.
The following is a summary of the significant capital allocation activities the Company has executed during the past twelve months and sources of capital the Company has at its disposal for future use as well as the Company’s current commitments for future uses of capital:
On January 23, 2020, International Seaways, Inc., International Seaways Operating Corporation (the “Borrower”) and certain of their subsidiaries entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) comprising $390 million of secured debt facilities (the “2020 Debt Facilities”) with Nordea Bank Abp, New York Branch (“Nordea”), ABN AMRO Capital USA LLC (“ABN”), Crédit Agricole Corporate & Investment Bank, DNB Capital LLC and Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB (PUBL), or their respective affiliates, as mandated lead arrangers and bookrunners, and BNP Paribas and Danish Ship Finance A/S, as lead arrangers. Nordea is acting as administrative agent, collateral agent and security trustee under the Credit Agreement, and ABN is acting as sustainability coordinator.
The proceeds from the draw down on the 2020 Debt Facilities on January 28, 2020 were primarily used to (i) repay the $331.5 million outstanding principal balance under the 2017 Debt Facilities due 2022 and the $23.2 million outstanding principal balance under the ABN Term Loan Facility due 2023, and (ii) to repurchase the $27.9 million outstanding principal amount of the Company’s 10.75% subordinated notes due 2023 issued pursuant to an indenture dated June 13, 2018 with GLAS Trust Company LLC, as trustee, as amended.
The 2020 Debt Facilities consist of (i) a five-year senior secured term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $300 million (the “Core Term Loan Facility”); (ii) a five-year revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $40 million (the “Core Revolving Facility”); and (iii) a senior secured term loan credit facility with a maturity date of June 30, 2022 in an aggregate principal amount of $50 million (the “Transition Term Loan Facility”). The Core Term Loan Facility contains an uncommitted accordion feature whereby, for a period of up to 18 months following the closing date, the amount of the loan thereunder may be increased up to an additional $100 million for the acquisition of Additional Vessels, subject to certain conditions.
The Core Term Loan Facility amortizes in 19 quarterly installments of approximately $9.5 million commencing June 30, 2020 and matures on January 23, 2025, with a balloon payment of approximately $120.0 million due at maturity. The Core Revolving Facility also matures on January 23, 2025. The Transition Term Loan Facility was scheduled to amortize in 10 quarterly installments of $5.0 million commencing March 31, 2020 and mature on June 30, 2022. The maturity dates for the 2020 Debt Facilities are subject to acceleration upon the occurrence of certain events as described in the Credit Agreement.
The combined effect of (i) the entry into the 2020 Debt Facilities, which lowered our average interest rates on the refinanced portion of our debt by 350 basis points, and our overall average interest rates by 200 basis points, (ii) lower LIBOR rates during 2020, and (iii) lower average debt outstanding during 2020, reduced our annual cash interest expense by approximately $25.0 million.
On March 4, 2020, the $20.0 million outstanding balance under the Core Revolving Facility was repaid in full using available cash on hand.
On August 10, 2020, the $40.0 million outstanding principal balance under the Transition Term Loan Facility was repaid in full using available cash on hand, which further reduced interest expense in 2020.
See Note 8, “Debt,” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements as set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further details on the Company’s debt facilities.
International Seaways, Inc.
During 2020, the Company sold and delivered a 2002-built Aframax, a 2001-built Aframax, a 2003-built VLCC, and a 2002-built VLCC for net proceeds of $73.1 million.
In February 2020, the Company took delivery of a 2009-built LR1 pursuant to a memorandum of agreement entered into in December 2019 for a purchase price of $18.8 million, of which 10% was previously paid in 2019.
On February 26, 2020, May 20, 2020, August 4, 2020, and October 28, 2020 the Company’s Board of Directors declared regular quarterly cash dividends of $0.06 per share. Pursuant to these declarations, the Company made dividend payments totaling $1.7 million on each of March 30, 2020, June 22, 2020, September 23, 2020, and December 23, 2020, respectively, to stockholders of record as of March 17, 2020, June 8, 2020, September 9, 2020, and December 8, 2020, respectively. The Company’s Board of Directors declared a regular quarterly cash dividend of $0.06 per share of common stock on February 23, 2021. The dividend will be paid on March 26, 2021 to shareholders of record at the close of business on March 11, 2021.
Pursuant to the Company’s $30.0 million stock repurchase program expiring on March 5, 2021, during the first half of 2020, the Company repurchased and retired 1,417,292 shares of its common stock in open-market purchases for a total cost of $30.0 million, which completed the remaining amount under this program. On August 4, 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized the renewal of the share repurchase program in the amount of $30.0 million for another 24-month period ending August 4, 2022. Subsequently, on October 28, 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized an increase in the share repurchase program from $30.0 million to $50.0 million. No shares were repurchased during the second half of 2020.
On October 19, 2018, the Company filed a Registration Statement on Form S-3 (“Shelf Registration”) with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). Following the effective date of the Shelf Registration, the Company may from time to time offer equity or debt securities at an aggregate offering price not to exceed $100 million. This Shelf Registration replaced the remaining $75 million balance of a shelf registration on Form S-3 that was declared effective in May 2018.
As described in Item 5, “Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stock Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities,” on January 9, 2019, the Company entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “Distribution Agreement”) with Evercore Group L.L.C. and Jefferies LLC, as our sales agents, relating to the common shares of the Company. In accordance with the terms of the Distribution Agreement, we may offer and sell common shares having an aggregate offering price of up to $25 million from time to time through the sales agents. The sales agents are not required to sell any specific number or dollar amount of our common shares but will use their commercially reasonable efforts, as our agents and subject to the terms of the Distribution Agreement, to sell the common shares offered, as instructed by us.
We intend to use the net proceeds of such offering, after deducting the sales agents’ commissions and our offering expenses, for general corporate purposes. This may include, among other things, additions to working capital, repayment or refinancing of existing indebtedness or other corporate obligations, financing of capital expenditures and acquisitions and investment in existing and future projects. As of the date hereof, the Company has neither sold or undertaken to sell any shares pursuant to the Distribution Agreement.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has remaining contractual commitments for the purchase and installation of scrubbers on three of its 10 modern VLCCs. Through January 2021, scrubber installations have been completed on eight of our modern VLCCs and installations on the two remaining VLCCs are scheduled for completion later in 2021. The Company also has outstanding contractual commitments for the purchase and installation of ballast water treatment systems on six vessels. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s aggregate purchase commitments for vessel betterments are approximately $6.7 million (see Aggregate Contractual Obligations table below). These systems are intended to be funded with available liquidity and proceeds from the sales of vessels.
On March 11, 2021, the Company entered into agreements to construct three dual-fuel LNG VLCCs at Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering’s shipyard, subject to certain conditions customary to similar transactions. The VLCCs will be able to burn LNG in their power plant, which will significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Upon delivery to the Company in 2023, the vessels will be employed on seven-year time charter contracts with oil major - Shell. The total construction cost for the vessels will be approximately $290 million, which will be paid for through a combination of long-term financing and available liquidity.
Outlook
We believe that 2021 will likely be a weaker rate environment for tankers than 2020. Crude and product oil inventories that were built up during the second and third quarters of 2020 are in the process of being drawn down at sea and ashore, both causing more tankers
International Seaways, Inc.
to reenter the market, and fewer barrels to move to demand centers. Further incentivizing the use of oil already in storage is the fact that crude oil pricing is in backwardation. COVID-19 also continues to negatively impact oil demand even though vaccination rates are starting to ramp up worldwide.
To prepare for the market lows of 2021 and in an effort to take advantage of the dynamic oil tanker markets, maximize significant near-term cash generation and reduce risk, during the second and third quarters of 2020, we opportunistically locked in four of our VLCCs and our LR2 on time charters for periods ranging from seven months to 36 months at high rates with major oil producing and trading companies. We continue to expect that oil supply and demand will start to come back into balance during 2021, creating a market rebound when worldwide demand for oil increases.
We paid down high interest rate debt over the last 24-months, putting the Company in a strong position to navigate through the expected period of weaker rates during 2021. Our balance sheet, coupled with our time charter coverage, positions us to support our operations over the next twelve months as we continue to advance our disciplined capital allocation strategy and provides us with flexibility to continue pursuing potential strategic opportunities that may arise within the diverse sectors in which we operate.
While the Company was in compliance with all of its debt covenants as of December 31, 2020 (See Note 8, “Debt,” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements as set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further details), the currently forecasted decline in average daily TCE rates across all vessel classes during 2021 could cause the Company to breach one of the financial covenants under the Core Term Loan Facility and the Sinosure Credit Facility at the end of the third quarter of 2021. Such covenant requires the Company to ensure that the ratio of Consolidated EBITDA to Consolidated Cash Interest Expense (“Interest Coverage Ratio”) will not be lower than 2.50:1.00. If the Company breaches such covenant and is unable to remedy the relevant breach or obtain a waiver, the Company’s lenders could accelerate its debt and the lenders under the 2020 Debt Facilities and the Sinosure Credit Facility could foreclose on the 20 vessels pledged by the Company. In addition to obtaining a waiver from its lenders or deploying additional vessels on time charters at rates above the currently forecasted spot rates in order to increase the Company’s Consolidated EBITDA, the Company has a number of actions it can independently take to avoid a potential covenant breach. Such possible actions include reducing interest expense by paying off the Company’s outstanding interest rate swaps during the first quarter of 2021.
Carrying Value of Vessels
At December 31, 2020, 20 of the Company’s owned vessels were pledged as collateral under certain of the Company’s debt facilities including the 2020 Debt Facilities and Sinosure Credit Facility. The following table presents information with respect to the carrying amount of the Company’s vessels by type and indicates whether their fair market values, which are estimated by taking an average of two third-party vessel appraisals, are below their carrying values as of December 31, 2020. The carrying value of each of the Company’s vessels does not necessarily represent its fair market value or the amount that could be obtained if the vessel were sold. The Company’s estimates of market values for its vessels assume that the vessels are all in good and seaworthy condition without need for repair and, if inspected, would be certified as being in class without notations. In addition, because vessel values are highly volatile, these estimates may not be indicative of either the current or future prices that the Company could achieve if it were to sell any of the vessels. The Company would not record a loss for any of the vessels for which the fair market value is below its carrying value unless and until the Company either determines to sell the vessel for a loss or determines that the vessel is impaired as discussed below in “Critical Accounting Policies - Vessel Impairment.” The Company believes that the future undiscounted cash flows expected to be earned over the estimated remaining useful lives for those vessels that have experienced declines in market values below their carrying values would exceed such vessels’ carrying values.
International Seaways, Inc.
Footnotes to the following table exclude those vessels with an estimated market value in excess of their carrying value.
(1) As of December 31, 2020, the Crude Tankers segment includes vessels with an aggregate carrying value of $695.3 million, which the Company believes exceeds their aggregate market value of approximately $584.0 million by $111.3 million.
(2) As of December 31, 2020, the Product Carriers segment includes vessels with an aggregate carrying value of $106.3 million, which the Company believes exceeds their aggregate market value of approximately $75.6 million by $30.7 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, the FSO Joint Venture had total bank debt outstanding of $90.4 million, of which $45.2 million was nonrecourse to the Company.
The FSO Joint Venture is a party to a number of contracts: (a) the FSO Joint Venture is an obligor pursuant to a guarantee facility agreement dated as of July 14, 2017, by and among, the FSO Joint Venture, ING Belgium NV/SA, as issuing bank, and Euronav and INSW, as guarantors (the ‘‘Guarantee Facility’’); (b) the FSO Joint Venture is party to two service contracts with NOC (the ‘‘NOC Service Contracts’’); and (c) the FSO Joint Venture is a borrower under a $220 million secured credit facility by and among TI Africa and TI Asia, as joint and several borrowers, ABN AMRO Bank N.V. and ING Belgium SA/NV, as Lenders, Mandated Lead Arrangers and Swap Banks, and ING Bank N.V., as Agent and as Security Trustee. INSW severally guarantees the obligations of the FSO Joint Venture pursuant to the Guarantee Facility.
The FSO Joint Venture drew down on a $220 million secured credit facility on April 26, 2018 (See Note 6, “Equity Method Investments” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements). The Company provided a guarantee for the $110 million FSO Term Loan portion of the facility, which has an interest rate of LIBOR plus two percent and amortizes through July 2022 and September 2022. INSW’s guarantee of the FSO Term Loan has financial covenants that provide (i) INSW’s Liquid Assets shall not be less than the higher of $50 million and 5% of Total Indebtedness of INSW, (ii) INSW shall have Cash of at least $30 million and (iii) INSW is in compliance with the Loan to Value Test (as such capitalized terms are defined in the Company guarantee). The FSO Joint Venture has entered into floating-to-fixed interest rate swap agreements with the aforementioned Swap Banks, which cover the notional amounts outstanding under the FSO Loan Facility and pay fixed rates of approximately 4.858% and receive a floating rate based on LIBOR. These agreements have an effective date of June 29, 2018, and maturity dates ranging from July to September 2022. As of December 31, 2020, the maximum potential amount of future payments that INSW could be required to make in relation to its equity method investees secured bank debt and interest rate swap obligations was $46.4 million and the carrying value of the Company’s guaranty in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet was $44 thousand.
See Note 6, “Equity Method Investments,” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information.
In addition and pursuant to an agreement between INSW and the trustees of the OSG Ship Management (UK) Ltd. Retirement Benefits Plan (the “Scheme”), INSW guarantees the obligations of INSW Ship Management UK Ltd., a subsidiary of INSW, to make
International Seaways, Inc.
payments to the Scheme. See Note 16, “Pension and other postretirement benefit plans,” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for additional information.
On November 30, 2016, INSW was spun off from OSG as a separate publicly traded company. In connection with the spin-off, INSW and OSG entered into several agreements, including a separation and distribution agreement, an employee matters agreement and a transition services agreement. While most of the obligations under those agreements were subsequently fulfilled, certain provisions (including in particular mutual indemnification provisions under the separation and distribution agreement and the employee matters agreement) continue in force.
Aggregate Contractual Obligations
A summary of the Company’s long-term contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 follows:
(1) Amounts shown include contractual interest obligations of floating rate debt estimated based on the applicable margin for the Core Term Loan Facility of 2.40%, plus (i) the fixed rate stated in the related floating-to-fixed interest rate swap of 1.97% for the $226.3 million notional amount and 0.50% for the $25.0 million notional amount covered in the interest rate swaps (as described below under Risk Management) and (ii) the effective three-month LIBOR rate of 0.25% as of December 31, 2020 for the remaining outstanding balance.
(2) Amounts shown include contractual interest obligations of floating rate debt estimated based on the applicable margin for the Sinosure Credit Facility of 2.00% plus (i) the fixed rate stated in the related floating-to-fixed interest rate swap of 2.35% through the maturity date of December 21, 2027 (as described below under Risk Management), or (ii) the effective three-month LIBOR rate of 0.24% as of December 31, 2020 for periods after the swap maturity date.
(3) As of December 31, 2020, the Company had charter-in commitments for three vessels and one workboat employed in the Crude Tankers Lightering business on leases that are accounted for as operating leases. Certain of these leases provide the Company with various purchase options. The future minimum commitments for time charters-in have been reduced to reflect estimated days that the vessels will not be available for employment due to drydock and any days paid for in advance. The full amounts due under bareboat charter-ins, office and other space leases, and lease component of the amounts due under long term time charter-ins are discounted and reflected on the Company’s consolidated condensed balance sheet as lease liabilities with corresponding right of use asset balances.
(4) Represents the Company’s commitments for the purchase and installation of ballast water treatment systems on six vessels, and the purchase and installation of scrubbers on three of its VLCC tankers.
(5) Represents the Company’s commitments for its share of charter hire payments due pursuant to a 12-month profit share agreement entered into in March 2020.
International Seaways, Inc.
In addition to the above long-term contractual obligations we have certain obligations for our shore-based employees as of December 31, 2020, related to a defined benefit pension plan in the U.K. as follows:
(1) Represents estimated employer contributions under the OSG Ship Management (UK) Ltd. Retirement Benefits Plan (the “Scheme”), pursuant to the Scheme's deficit funding plan. The contributions are subject to change after an actuarial estimate of the Scheme's funding level is produced. The employer contributions in respect of the deficit funding plan will cease and no longer apply if the actuarial estimate reveals a funding level of at least 100% of the deficit funding plan.
Risk Management
Interest rate risk
The Company is exposed to market risk from changes in interest rates, which could impact its results of operations and financial condition. The Company manages this exposure to market risk through its regular operating and financing activities and, when deemed appropriate, through the use of derivative financial instruments. To manage its interest rate risk in a cost-effective manner, the Company, from time to time, enters into interest rate swap or cap agreements, in which it agrees to exchange various combinations of fixed and variable interest rates based on agreed upon notional amounts or to receive payments if floating interest rates rise above a specified cap rate. The Company uses such derivative financial instruments as risk management tools and not for speculative or trading purposes. In addition, derivative financial instruments are entered into with a diversified group of major financial institutions in order to manage exposure to nonperformance on such instruments by the counterparties.
The Company uses interest rate caps, collars and swaps for the management of interest rate risk exposure associated with changes in LIBOR interest rate payments due on its credit facilities. In connection with its entry into the Core Term Loan Facility (see Note 8, “Debt”) on January 28, 2020, the Company, in a cashless transaction, converted the $350 million notional Interest Rate Collar into an amortizing $250 million notional pay-fixed, receive-three-month LIBOR interest rate swap subject to a 0% floor. The term of the new hedging arrangement was extended to coincide with the maturity of the Core Term Loan Facility of January 23, 2025 at a fixed rate of 1.97%. The interest rate swap agreement has been re-designated and qualifies as a cash flow hedge and contains no leverage features. Changes in the fair value of the Interest Rate Collar prior to the re-designation on January 28, 2020 that were recorded through earnings during the first quarter of 2020 totaled a loss of $1.3 million.
On April 16, 2020, the Company entered into an interest rate swap agreement with a major financial institution covering a notional amount of $25 million of the Core Term Loan Facility that effectively converts the Company’s interest rate exposure from a three-month LIBOR floating rate to a fixed rate of 0.50% through the maturity date of January 23, 2025, effective June 30, 2020. The interest rate swap agreement, which contains no leverage features, is designated and qualifies as a cash flow hedge.
The Company was also party to a floating-to-fixed interest rate swap agreement with a major financial institution covering the balance outstanding under the Sinosure Credit Facility that effectively converts the Company’s interest rate exposure from a floating rate based on three-month LIBOR to a fixed rate of 2.99% through the termination date of March 21, 2022. The interest rate swap agreement was designated and qualified as a cash flow hedge and contained no leverage features. In May 2019, the Company extended the maturity date of the interest rate swap from March 21, 2022 to March 21, 2025 and reduced the fixed three-month rate from 2.99% to 2.76%, effective March 21, 2019. In July 2020, the Company extended the maturity date of the interest rate swap from March 21, 2025 to December 21, 2027 and reduced the fixed three-month LIBOR rate from 2.76% to 2.35%, effective June 21, 2020. The new interest rate swap agreement does not in its entirety meet the definition of a derivative instrument because of its off market fixed rate at inception and is deemed to be a hybrid instrument with a financing component and an embedded at-the-market derivative. Such embedded derivative is bifurcated and accounted for separately in the same manner as our other derivatives. The financing component is recorded in current and noncurrent other liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet at amortized cost. Due to an other-than-insignificant financing element on a portion of such hybrid instrument, the cash flows associated with this hybrid instrument are classified as financing activities in the consolidated statement of cash flows.
International Seaways, Inc.
In light of the expected discontinuation of the use of LIBOR at some point after December 31, 2021, the Company performed an assessment of the risks associated with the expected transition to an alternative reference rate and has determined that its primary exposure to LIBOR is in relation to its floating rate debt facilities and the interest rate derivatives to which it is a party. Through a review of the Company’s debt agreements and interest rate derivative contracts the Company believes there are adequate provisions within such agreements that provide guidance on how the Company and its counterparties under such agreements will address what happens when LIBOR is no longer available. Based on information available today, the Company’s current view is that the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) will be the alternative reference rate that the Company’s LIBOR-based agreements will transition to as the 2021 sunset date draws closer.
Currency and exchange rate risk
The shipping industry’s functional currency is the U.S. dollar. All of the Company’s revenues and most of its operating costs are in U.S. dollars. The Company incurs certain operating expenses, such as vessel and general and administrative expenses, in currencies other than the U.S. Dollar, and the foreign exchange risk associated with these operating expenses is immaterial. If foreign exchange risk becomes material in the future, the Company may seek to reduce its exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates through the use of short-term currency forward contracts and through the purchase of bulk quantities of currencies at rates that management considers favorable. For contracts which qualify as cash flow hedges for accounting purposes, hedge effectiveness would be assessed based on changes in foreign exchange spot rates with the change in fair value of the effective portions being recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss.
Fuel price volatility risk
In addition to the Company’s current program of installing scrubbers on certain vessels in its fleet, significant consideration continues to be given to other ways of managing the risk of volatility in the price spread between high-sulfur fuel and low-sulfur fuel as well as the risk of limited supply of compliant fuel or HFO along the routes that the Company’s vessels typically travel.
Interest Rate Sensitivity
The following table presents information about the Company’s financial instruments that are sensitive to changes in interest rates. For debt obligations, the table presents the principal cash flows and related weighted average interest rates by expected maturity dates of the Company’s debt obligations.
Principal (Notional) Amount (dollars in millions) by Expected Maturity and Average Interest (Swap) Rate
(1) Includes amounts outstanding under the Sinosure Credit Facility as floating rate debt estimated based on the applicable margin of 2.00% plus (i) the fixed rate stated in the related floating-to-fixed interest rate swap of 2.35% through the maturity date of December 21, 2027, or (ii) the effective three-month LIBOR rate of 0.24% as of December 31, 2020 for periods after the swap maturity date, and amounts outstanding under the Core Term Loan facility as floating rate debt estimated based on the applicable margin for the Core Term Loan Facility of 2.40%, plus (i) the fixed rate stated in the related floating-to-fixed interest rate swap of 1.97% for the $226.3 million notional amount and 0.50% for the $25 million notional amount covered in the interest rate swaps and (ii) the effective three-month LIBOR rate of 0.25% as of December 31, 2020 for the remaining outstanding balance.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had secured term loans (the Core Term Loan Facility and the Sinosure Credit Facility) and a revolving credit facility (the Core Revolving Facility) under which borrowings bear interest at a rate based on LIBOR, plus the applicable margin, as stated in the respective loan agreements. As discussed in Interest rate risk section above, the Company has
International Seaways, Inc.
entered into interest rate swaps agreements for the Core Term Loan Facility and the Sinosure Credit Facility to limit the floating interest rate exposure associated with the debt facilities. Only $20.3 million of the Core Term Loan Facility is unhedged as of December 31, 2020. There was no outstanding balance under the Core Revolving Facility as of December 31, 2020.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND POLICIES
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, which require the Company to make estimates in the application of its accounting policies based on the best assumptions, judgments, and opinions of management. Following is a discussion of the accounting policies that involve a higher degree of judgment and the methods of their application. For a description of all of the Company’s material accounting policies, see Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Revenue Recognition
The Company’s contract revenues consist of revenues from time charters, bareboat charters, voyage charters and pool revenues. The majority of the Company's contracts for pool revenues, time and bareboat charter revenues, and voyage charter revenues are accounted for as lease revenue under ASC 842, Leases (ASC 842). Lightering services provided by the Company's Crude Tanker Lightering Business and voyage charter contracts that do not meet the definition of a lease are accounted for as service revenues under ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606).
Under ASC 842, lease revenue for fixed lease payments are recognized over the lease term on a straight-line basis and lease revenue for variable lease payments (e.g., demurrage) are recognized in the period in which the changes in facts and circumstances on which the variable lease payments are based occur. Initial direct costs are expensed over the lease term on the same basis as lease revenue. The Company has elected the lessor practical expedient to aggregate non-lease components with the associated lease components and to account for the combined components as required by the practical expedient since its primary revenue streams described above meet the conditions required to adopt the practical expedient. Furthermore, the Company has performed a qualitative analysis of each of its primary revenue contract types to determine whether the lease component or the non-lease component is the predominant component of the contract. The Company concluded that the lease component is the predominant component for all of its primary revenue contract types, as the lessee would ascribe more value to the control and use of the underlying vessel rather than to the technical services to operate the vessel which is an add-on service to the lessee. Accordingly, effective January 1, 2019, the Company’s primary revenue streams are accounted for as lease revenue under ASC 842, except for revenue from voyage charters that do not meet the definition of a lease.
Revenues from time charters are accounted for as fixed rate operating leases with an embedded technical management service component and are recognized ratably over the rental periods of such charters. Bareboat charters are also accounted for as fixed rate operating leases and the associated revenue is recognized ratably over the rental periods of such charters.
Voyage charters contain a lease component if the contract (i) specifies a specific vessel asset; and (ii) has terms that allow the charterer to exercise substantive decision-making rights, which have an economic value to the charterer and therefore allow the charterer to direct how and for what purpose the vessel is used. Voyage charter revenues and expenses are recognized ratably over the estimated length of each voyage. For a voyage charter which contains a lease component, revenue and expenses are recognized based on a lease commencement-to-discharge basis and the lease commencement date is the latter of discharge of the previous cargo or voyage charter contract signing. For voyage charters that do not have a lease component, revenue and expenses are recognized based on a load-to-discharge basis. Accordingly, voyage expenses incurred during a vessel’s positioning voyage to a load port in order to serve a customer under a voyage charter not containing a lease are considered costs to fulfill a contract and are deferred and recognized ratably over the load-to-discharge portion of the contract.
Under voyage charters, expenses such as fuel, port charges, canal tolls, cargo handling operations and brokerage commissions are paid by the Company whereas, under time and bareboat charters, such voyage costs are paid by the Company’s customers.
For the Company’s vessels operating in pools, revenues and voyage expenses are pooled and allocated to each pool’s participants on a time charter equivalent (“TCE”) basis in accordance with an agreed-upon formula. Accordingly, the Company accounts for its agreements with commercial pools as variable rate operating leases. For the pools in which the Company participates, management monitors, among other things, the relative proportion of the Company’s vessels operating in each of the pools to the total number of
International Seaways, Inc.
vessels in each of the respective pools and assesses whether or not the Company’s participation interest in each of the pools is sufficiently significant so as to determine that the Company has effective control of the pool.
Demurrage earned during a voyage charter represents variable consideration. The Company estimates demurrage at contract inception using either the expected value or most likely amount approaches. Such estimate is reviewed and updated over the term of the voyage charter contract.
The Company recognizes revenues from services in accordance with the provisions of ASC 606. The standard provides a unified model to determine how revenue is recognized. In doing so, the Company makes judgments including identifying performance obligations in the contract, estimating the amount of variable consideration to include in the transaction price, and allocating the transaction price to each performance obligation. Revenues are recognized to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as it fulfills its obligations under its agreements, the Company performs the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation.
As the Company’s performance obligations are services which are received and consumed by its customers as it performs such services, revenues are recognized over time proportionate to the days elapsed since the service commencement compared to the total days anticipated to complete the service. The minimum duration of services is less than one year for each of the Company’s current contracts.
Leases
The Company currently has two major categories of lease contracts under which the Company is a lessee - chartered-in vessels and leased office and other space. Chartered-in vessels include bareboat charters which have a lease component only and time charters which have both lease and non-lease components. The lease component relates to the cost to a lessee to control the use of the vessel and the non-lease components relate to the cost to the lessee for the lessor to operate the vessel (technical management service components). For time charters-in, the Company has separated non-lease components from lease component and scoped out non-lease components from the application of ASC 842. For leased office and other space, the Company has elected the ASC 842 practical expedient to account for the lease and non-lease components as a single lease component as it is not practical to separate the insignificant non-lease components from the associated lease components for these types of leases. The Company has elected not to apply ASC 842 to its portfolio of short-term leases.
Right-of-use (“ROU”) assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. The operating lease ROU asset also includes any prepaid lease payments made and excludes accrued lease payments and lease incentives. Our lease terms take into consideration options to extend or terminate the lease, or purchase the underlying asset when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise such options. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
As most of our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. The Company makes significant judgements and assumptions to estimate its incremental borrowing rate that a lessee would have to pay to borrow on a 100% collateralized basis over a term similar to the lease term and in an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. The Company performs the following steps in estimating its incremental borrowing rate: (i) gather observable debt yields of the Company’s recently issued debt facilities; and (ii) make adjustments to the yields of the actual debt facilities to reflect changes in collateral level, terms, the risk-free interest rate, and credit ratings. In addition, the Company performs sensitivity analyses to evaluate the impact of selected discount rates on the estimated lease liability.
The Company makes significant judgements and assumptions to separate the lease component from the non-lease component of its time chartered-in vessels. For purposes of determining the standalone selling price of the vessel lease and technical management service components of the Company’s time charters, the Company concluded that the residual approach would be the most appropriate
International Seaways, Inc.
method to use given that vessel lease rates are highly variable depending on shipping market conditions, the duration of such charters, and the age of the vessel. The Company believes that the standalone transaction price attributable to the technical management service component is more readily determinable than the price of the lease component and, accordingly, the price of the service component is estimated using observable data (such as fees charged by third-party technical managers) and the residual transaction price is attributed to the vessel lease component.
Provision for Credit Losses
The Company’s voyage receivables consist of (i) operating lease receivables associated with revenues from leases accounted for under ASC 842, which are primarily unbilled amounts due from pools; and (ii) billed and unbilled non-operating lease receivables associated with revenues from services accounted for under ASC 606, which are due within one year. We perform ongoing evaluations to determine customer credit and we limit the amount of credit we extend. We maintain allowances for estimated credit losses and these losses have generally been within our expectations. Under ASC 842, no lease income should be recognized if collectability is not deemed probable. Accordingly, the Company does not record operating lease receivables for which collection is not deemed probable.
With respect to non-operating lease receivables, the Company recognizes as an allowance its estimate of expected credit losses in accordance with ASC 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (ASC 326), based on troubled accounts, historical experience, other currently available evidence, and reasonable and supportable forecasts about the future. The Company makes significant judgements and assumptions to estimate its expected losses. We make judgments about the creditworthiness of customers based on ongoing credit evaluations including analysis of the counterparty’s established credit rating or assessment of the counterparty’s creditworthiness based on our analysis of their financial statements when a credit rating is not available, country and political risk of the counterparty, and their business strategy. We manage our non-operating lease receivable portfolios using delinquency as a key credit quality indicator. The Company performs the following steps in estimating expected losses: (i) gather historical losses over 5 years; (ii) assume outstanding billed amounts over 180 days as additional expected losses; and (iii) make forward-looking adjustments to the expected losses to reflect future economic conditions by comparing credit default swap rates of significant customers over time. In addition, the Company performs individual assessments for customers that do not share risk characteristics with other customers (for example a customer under bankruptcy or a customer with known disputes or collectability issues).
Vessel Lives and Salvage Values
The carrying value of each of the Company’s vessels represents its original cost at the time it was delivered or purchased less depreciation calculated using an estimated useful life of 25 years (except for FSO service vessels for which estimated useful lives of 30 years are used) from the date such vessel was originally delivered from the shipyard. A vessel’s carrying value is reduced to its new cost basis (i.e. its current fair value) if a vessel impairment charge is recorded.
If the estimated economic lives assigned to the Company’s vessels prove to be too long because of new regulations, an extended period of weak markets, the broad imposition of age restrictions by the Company’s customers, or other future events, it could result in higher depreciation expense and impairment losses in future periods related to a reduction in the useful lives of any affected vessels.
Company management estimates the scrap steel value of all of its vessels to be $300 per lightweight ton. The Company’s assumptions used in the determination of estimated salvage value take into account current scrap steel prices, the historic pattern of annual average scrap steel rates over the five years ended December 31, 2020, which ranged from $235 to $440 per lightweight ton, estimated changes in future market demand for scrap steel and estimated future demand for vessels. Scrap steel prices also fluctuate depending upon type of ship, bunkers on board, spares on board and delivery range. Market conditions that could influence the volume and pricing of Vessel Recycling activity in 2020 and beyond include the combined impact of scheduled newbuild deliveries and charter rate expectations for vessels potentially facing age restrictions imposed by oil majors as well as the impact of ballast water treatment systems regulatory requirements or proposals, costs and timing of pending special surveys, which are likely to be expensive for vessels over 15 years of age and IMO 2020 requirements for the use of low-sulfur fuels and other carbon reduction initiatives. These factors will influence owners’ decisions to accelerate the disposal of older vessels, especially those with upcoming special surveys.
Although management believes that the assumptions used to determine the scrap steel value for its vessels are reasonable and appropriate, such assumptions are highly subjective, in part, because of the cyclicality of the nature of future demand for scrap steel.
International Seaways, Inc.
Vessel Impairment
The carrying values of the Company’s vessels may not represent their fair market value or the amount that could be obtained by selling the vessel at any point in time since the market prices of second-hand vessels tend to fluctuate with changes in charter rates and the cost of newbuildings. Historically, both charter rates and vessel values tend to be cyclical. Management evaluates the carrying amounts of vessels held and used by the Company for impairment only when it determines that it will sell a vessel or when events or changes in circumstances occur that cause management to believe that future cash flows for any individual vessel will be less than its carrying value. In such instances, an impairment charge would be recognized if the estimate of the undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the vessel and its eventual disposition is less than the vessel’s carrying amount. This assessment is made at the individual vessel level as separately identifiable cash flow information for each vessel is available.
In developing estimates of future cash flows, the Company must make assumptions about future performance, with significant assumptions being related to charter rates, operating expenses, utilization, drydocking and capital expenditure requirements, residual value and the estimated remaining useful lives of the vessels. These assumptions are based on historical trends as well as future expectations. Specifically, in estimating future charter rates, management takes into consideration rates currently in effect for existing time charters and estimated daily time charter equivalent rates for each vessel class for the unfixed days over the estimated remaining lives of each of the vessels. The estimated daily time charter equivalent rates used for unfixed days are based on a combination of (i) rates as forecasted by third party analysts, and (ii) the trailing 12-year historical average rates, based on monthly average rates published by a third party maritime research service. Management uses the published 12-year historical average rates in its assumptions because it is management’s belief that the 12-year period captures a distribution of strong and weak charter rate periods, which results in the use of an average mid-cycle rate that is more in line with management’s forecast of a return to mid-cycle charter rate levels in the medium term. Recognizing that the transportation of crude oil and petroleum products is cyclical and subject to significant volatility based on factors beyond the Company’s control, management believes the use of estimates based on the combination of internally forecasted rates and 12-year historical average rates calculated as of the reporting date to be reasonable.
Estimated outflows for operating expenses and capital expenditures and drydocking requirements are based on historical and budgeted costs and are adjusted for assumed inflation. Utilization is based on historical levels achieved and estimates of residual value for recyclings are based upon the pattern of scrap rates used in management’s evaluation of salvage value for purposes of recording depreciation. Finally, for vessels that are being considered for disposal before the end of their respective useful lives, the Company utilizes weighted probabilities assigned to the possible outcomes for such vessels being sold or scraped before the end of their respective useful lives.
The determination of fair value is highly judgmental. In estimating the fair value of INSW’s vessels for purposes of Step 2 of the impairment tests, the Company considers the market and income approaches by using a combination of third party appraisals and discounted cash flow models prepared by the Company. In preparing the discounted cash flow models, the Company uses a methodology consistent with the methodology discussed above in relation to the undiscounted cash flow models prepared by the Company and discounts the cash flows using its current estimate of INSW’s weighted average cost of capital.
The more significant factors that could impact management’s assumptions regarding time charter equivalent rates include (i) loss or reduction in business from significant customers, (ii) unanticipated changes in demand for transportation of crude oil and petroleum products, (iii) changes in production of or demand for oil and petroleum products, generally or in particular regions, (iv) greater than anticipated levels of tanker newbuilding orders or lower than anticipated levels of tanker recyclings, and (v) changes in rules and regulations applicable to the tanker industry, including legislation adopted by international organizations such as IMO and the EU or by individual countries. Although management believes that the assumptions used to evaluate potential impairment are reasonable and appropriate at the time they were made, such assumptions are highly subjective and likely to change, possibly materially, in the future.
Drydocking
Within the shipping industry, there are two methods that are used to account for dry dockings: (1) capitalize drydocking costs as incurred (deferral method) and amortize such costs over the period to the next scheduled drydocking, and (2) expense drydocking costs as incurred. Since drydocking cycles typically extend over two and a half years or five years, management uses the deferral method because management believes it provides a better matching of revenues and expenses than the expense-as-incurred method.
International Seaways, Inc.
Pension Benefits
The Company has obligations outstanding under the OSG Ship Management (UK) Ltd. Retirement Benefits Plan (the “Scheme”), a defined benefit pension plan maintained by a subsidiary in the U.K., who is the principal employer of the Scheme. The plan has been closed to new entrants and accrual since June 2014. The Company has recorded pension benefit costs based on valuations developed by its actuarial consultants. These valuations are based on key estimates and assumptions, including those related to the discount rates, the rates expected to be earned on investments of plan assets and the life expectancy/mortality of plan participants. The Company is required to consider market conditions in selecting a discount rate that is representative of the rates of return currently available on high-quality fixed income investments. A higher discount rate would result in a lower benefit obligation and a lower rate would result in a higher benefit obligation. The expected rate of return on plan assets is management’s best estimate of expected returns on plan assets. A decrease in the expected rate of return will increase net periodic benefit costs and an increase in the expected rate of return will decrease benefit costs. The mortality assumption is management’s best estimate of the expected duration of future benefit payments at the measurement date. The estimate is based on the specific demographics and other relevant facts and circumstances of the Scheme and considers all relevant information available at the measurement date. Longer life expectancies would result in higher benefit obligations and a decrease in life expectancies would result in lower benefit obligations.
In determining the benefit obligations at the end of year measurement date, the Company continues to use an equivalent single weighted-average discount rate, at December 31, 2020 (1.20%) and 2019 (2.00%), respectively. Management believes these rates to be appropriate for ongoing plans, such as the Scheme, with a long duration. The Company also assumed a long-term rate of return on the Scheme assets of 3.36% and 3.89% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, based on the asset mix as of such dates and management’s estimate of the long-term rate of return that could be achieved over the remaining duration of the Scheme.