Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto appearing within "Part IV. Item 15. Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements" in this 2020 10-K Report. The following discussion may contain forward-looking statements, and our actual results may differ materially from the results suggested by these forward-looking statements. Some factors that may cause our results to differ materially from the results and events anticipated or implied by such forward- looking statements are described in “Item 1A - Risk Factors” and under “Forward-Looking Statements.”
We have elected to omit in this 2020 10-K Report, discussion on the earliest of the three years covered by the Consolidated Financial Statements presented. Refer to "Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" located in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 (herein incorporated by reference), filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020, for management's discussion of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018.
Business Overview
We are a leading global fuel services company, principally engaged in the distribution of fuel and related products and services in the aviation, land and marine transportation industries. In recent years, we have expanded our land product and service offerings to include energy advisory services and supply fulfillment for natural gas and power to commercial, industrial and government customers. Our intention is to become a leading global energy management company offering a full suite of energy advisory, management and fulfillment services, technology solutions, payment management solutions, as well as sustainability products and services across the energy product spectrum. We will continue to focus on enhancing the portfolio of products and services we provide based on changes in customer demand, including sustainability offerings and renewable energy solutions.
COVID-19
Beginning in the first quarter of 2020 and through the date of this filing, the aviation, marine and land transportation industries, along with global economic conditions generally, have been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. A large number of our customers in these industries have experienced a substantial decline in business activity, especially commercial airlines and cruise lines, which have been particularly impacted by ongoing travel restrictions. Customers in our marine and land segments have also been adversely affected by these restrictions and the reduction in operations of various businesses in affected regions. These impacts have consequently increased the credit risk associated with a number of these customers, particularly in industries that are largely dependent on travel or consumer spending. In response to these developments, we took swift action to ensure the safety of our employees and other stakeholders and initiated a number of initiatives relating to cost reduction, liquidity and operating efficiencies.
While the pandemic and associated impacts on economic activity had a limited adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition in the beginning of 2020, we experienced a sharp decline in demand and related sales during the second quarter, as large sectors of the global economy were adversely impacted by the crisis. Demand showed some moderate improvement through the second half of 2020, however, our results remained well below pre-pandemic levels as described in greater detail below. Since the level of activity in our business and that of our customers has historically been driven by the level of economic activity globally, we generally expect these negative impacts to continue through 2021. Any subsequent recovery will be dependent on, among other things, the actions taken by governments and businesses to contain and combat the virus, the speed and effectiveness of vaccine development and distribution, as well as how quickly, and to what extent, normal economic and operating conditions can resume on a sustainable basis globally.
Aviation Segment
Our aviation segment has benefited from growth in our fuel and related services offerings, as well as our improving logistics capability and the impact of expanding our aviation fueling operations footprint into additional international airport locations. However, as a result of COVID-19, the overall aviation market, principally commercial passenger airlines, has been significantly impacted by global travel restrictions and a sharp decrease in demand for air travel. Accordingly, during the second and through the fourth quarter of 2020, we experienced a material volume decline in our commercial aviation business as compared to 2019 and, to a somewhat lesser extent, a significant reduction in our business and general aviation activities. Our results of operations in these lines of business for 2021 will be highly contingent on the timing and extent to which international border and travel restrictions are lifted and the global economy begins to recover from the effects of the current crisis.
Furthermore, our aviation segment has benefited from significant sales to NATO in Afghanistan, which accounts for a material portion of our aviation segment's profitability. The level of troop deployments and military-related activities can cause our government customer sales to vary significantly and materially impact our operating results. Specifically, the U.S. government has significantly reduced the level of U.S. troops in the Middle East, including the troops supporting NATO in Afghanistan. In connection therewith, in the early part of 2020, the U.S. entered into an agreement with the Taliban where it agreed to reduce the level of troops and negotiate a full withdrawal by 2021, subject to various conditions including a peace agreement being reached between the government of Afghanistan and the Taliban. The U.S. government has since moved forward with a significant reduction in the level of troops. While the exact timing and full impact of the troop withdrawal remain uncertain, we have experienced a material decline in demand since the end of the first quarter of 2020 and may continue to experience further reductions in demand into 2021.
Land Segment
Our land segment primarily consists of land fuel distribution in the U.S. and the U.K., further complemented by our expansion into energy advisory, brokerage and fulfillment solutions with respect to power, natural gas and other energy products. We also offer sustainability consulting, renewable fuel products, and carbon management and renewable energy solutions through World Kinect, our global energy management brand. Due to the diverse portfolio of customers, businesses and activities within our land segment, the COVID-19 related impacts are more difficult to predict. For example, during the second quarter of 2020, our operating results in our land segment benefited from improvements in the U.K. However, this increase was largely offset by a decline in profitability in North America, primarily due to a decrease in sales to retail, commercial and industrial customers in connection with the continued negative impacts of the pandemic, particularly throughout much of the U.S. The extent of any improvements in these activities will continue to be dependent on the timing and extent to which quarantine restrictions are lifted and local business activities fully reopen. Furthermore, for the same reasons as those described in the aviation segment, we have experienced a material decline in demand in our government business since the end of the first quarter of 2020 and may continue to experience further reductions in demand into 2021.
Marine Segment
Overall, throughout 2019 and into early 2020, higher average fuel prices, combined with our focus on reshaping our portfolio and cost management, improved profitability in our marine segment. In addition, the implementation of the International Maritime Organization's mandatory low sulfur regulations that took effect on January 1, 2020 ("IMO 2020") resulted in certain supply imbalances and price volatility in late 2019 and through much of the first quarter of 2020 that positively impacted our operating results in those periods. However, beginning in the latter part of the first quarter of 2020 and throughout the balance of 2020, we experienced a decline in volume and profitability primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic coupled with the significant decline in fuel prices. We expect our marine segment’s volume and profitability to continue to be impacted by the pandemic into 2021, particularly with respect to weakened demand from cruise lines and certain other sectors of the shipping industry, as well as lower fuel prices.
Other Actions
With respect to our own operations, we have implemented our business continuity and emergency response plans in alignment with mandates from local authorities. To ensure the safety of our employees who are continuing to work, we have provided instructions on how to work safely in light of the pandemic and elevated our cleaning protocols for our offices, facilities and equipment. We are maximizing remote work throughout our global offices and our employees are collaborating virtually with our customers, suppliers and each other using the information-sharing tools and technology that we have invested in during the last several years.
Due to the ongoing and expected adverse impacts of the COVID-19 crisis, we immediately made cost-related decisions as the pandemic began impacting our business activities. For example, we immediately instituted a hiring freeze and implemented travel restrictions for our employees across the organization, postponed or eliminated all non-essential capital expenditures and other projects and initiatives, significantly reduced or deferred professional fees, marketing expenses and other similar costs. In addition, while we have continued to focus on improving operating efficiencies and returns, we have also concentrated on lowering our operating costs, including those of our land segment, which has historically had a higher expense ratio than other parts of our business. Accordingly, during the first quarter of 2020, we commenced a restructuring initiative focused on further streamlining our operations and sharpening our deployment of resources, not only in our land segment but also in our other segments due to the adverse impacts of the pandemic. During the second quarter of 2020, we completed a rationalization of our global office footprint and approved the abandonment of certain office leases, including the transition of select offices to smaller or more cost-effective locations. See "Note 5. Restructuring" accompanying our Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Part IV. Item 15. Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements" included in this 2020 10-K Report for additional information regarding this restructuring.
The ultimate duration and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and our customers' operations continue to be unclear. Furthermore, the extent to which we or our customers will ultimately be impacted by the pandemic is not fully ascertainable as it is closely related to the timing and extent to which the global economy, and the aviation, land and marine transportation industries, in particular, recover from the crisis. For additional discussion on the risks relating to the pandemic, see Item 1A. Risk Factors in Part I of this 10-K Report.
Reportable Segments
We operate in three reportable segments consisting of aviation, land and marine, where we offer fuel and related products and services to commercial and industrial customers in each of these transportation industries. Within each of our segments, we may enter into derivative contracts to mitigate the risk of market price fluctuations and also to offer our customers fuel pricing alternatives to meet their needs.
In our aviation and land segments, we primarily purchase and resell fuel and other products. Profit from our aviation and land segments is primarily determined by the volume and the gross profit achieved on fuel sales and related services. In our marine segment, we primarily purchase and resell fuel and also act as brokers for others. Profit from our marine segment is determined mostly by the volume and unit margin achieved on fuel resales. Profitability in our segments also depends on our operating expenses, which may be materially affected to the extent that we are required to provide for potential bad debt.
Corporate expenses are allocated to each segment based on usage, where possible, or other factors according to the nature of the activity. We evaluate and manage our business segments using the performance measurement of income from operations.
Selected financial information with respect to our business segments is provided in "Note 13. Business Segments, Geographic Information and Major Customers" within "Part IV. Item 15. Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements" included in this 2020 10-K Report.
Results of Operations
2020 compared to 2019
Revenue. Our revenue for 2020 was $20.4 billion, a decrease of $16.5 billion, or 45%, compared to 2019. Our revenue during these periods was attributable to the following segments (in millions):
Revenues in our aviation segment were $8.2 billion for the year ended 2020, a decrease of $10.3 billion, or 56% compared to 2019. A significant volume decline associated with the COVID-19 pandemic combined with lower average jet fuel prices drove the decrease in aviation revenue during the year ended 2020. Specifically, total volumes in our aviation segment for the year ended 2020 were 4.7 billion gallons, a decrease of 3.8 billion gallons, or 45%, compared to 2019. The decline in volumes was attributable to a significant decrease in our commercial aviation business activity due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on air travel. Additionally, the average price per gallon sold during the year ended 2020 was $1.46, compared to $2.05 in 2019.
Revenues in our land segment were $6.7 billion for the year ended 2020, a decrease of $3.6 billion, or 35%, compared to 2019. The overall decrease in land revenues was primarily due to lower average fuel prices, where the average price per gallon sold was $1.30, compared to $1.87 in 2019. Volumes in our land segment for the year ended 2020 were 5.1 billion gallons, a decrease of 387.6 million gallons, or 7%, compared to 2019, driven principally by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our retail, commercial and industrial and wholesale operations.
Revenues in our marine segment were $5.5 billion for the year ended 2020, a decrease of $2.5 billion, or 32%, compared to 2019. The decrease in revenues was driven by lower average prices and volume sold in 2020. The average bunker price per metric ton sold was $315.74, compared to $385.49 in 2019. Volumes in our marine segment for the year ended 2020 were 17.5 million metric tons, a decrease of 3.4 million metric tons or 16%, from 2019. The volume decrease was driven principally by the effects of the pandemic on demand across our core resale and physical businesses.
Gross Profit. Our gross profit for the year ended 2020 was $0.9 billion, a decrease of $260.1 million, or 23%, compared to 2019. Our gross profit was attributable to the following segments (in millions):
Our aviation segment gross profit for the year ended 2020 was $352.9 million, a decrease of $198.6 million, or 36%, compared to 2019. The decrease in aviation gross profit was primarily due to a 45% decline in volume as a consequence of the depressed demand for air travel due to the pandemic, together with a reduction in our government-related activity in Afghanistan as a result of the drawdown of troops in Afghanistan. Partially offsetting the decline in gross profit were certain situation-specific activities arising from the pandemic, such as repatriation flights and increased cargo activity, as well as physical supply gains associated with the historic volatility in jet fuel prices during the period.
Our land segment gross profit for the year ended 2020 was $347.6 million, a decrease of $31.3 million, or 8%, compared to 2019. The decrease in land segment gross profit was primarily attributable to the sale of our Multi Service payment solutions business, and the decline in volumes in our core domestic retail, commercial and industrial activities, as well as a decrease in our government-related activities in Afghanistan. These decreases were partially offset by improved results in the U.K. and growth in World Kinect, our global energy management brand.
Our marine segment gross profit for the year ended 2020 was $151.4 million, a decrease of $30.2 million, or 17%, as compared to 2019. The gross profit decrease was attributable to lower volume and profitability, particularly in our core resale business, due to a decline in demand as a consequence of the pandemic in certain sectors of the marine shipping and travel industry. The decrease in gross profit income was partially offset by higher profitability during the first two months of 2020, resulting from the shift to very low sulfur fuel oil, as mandated by the IMO 2020 regulations that took effect on January 1, 2020.
Operating Expenses. Total operating expenses for 2020 were $714.0 million, a decrease of $98.3 million, or 12%, compared to 2019. The following table sets forth our expense categories (in millions):
The decrease in total operating expenses was primarily due to lower employee compensation and benefits costs, including lower incentive bonuses. Furthermore, as part of our cost-reduction initiatives, we materially reduced certain general and administrative expenses during 2020, which were offset by a higher provision for bad debt, principally due to the effects of the pandemic on our accounts receivable. Total operating expenses were also impacted by impairment charges of $25.6 million, principally associated with our decision to rationalize our global office footprint.
Income (loss) from Operations. Our income from operations for 2020 was $137.9 million, a decrease of $161.8 million, or 54%, compared to 2019. Income from operations during these periods was attributable to the following segments (in millions):
Our income from operations, including unallocated corporate overhead, for the year ended 2020 was $137.9 million, a decrease of $161.8 million, or 54%, compared to 2019. The overall decrease was primarily attributable to the performance in our aviation segment.
Income from operations in our aviation segment for the year ended 2020 was $84.5 million, a decrease of $199.4 million as compared to 2019. Our aviation segment was significantly impacted by lower volumes and the correspondingly reduced profit contribution as a consequence of the decline in air travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a reduction in government-related activity in Afghanistan. Aviation operating income also decreased during the year ended 2020 compared to 2019 due to increased expenses resulting from a materially higher bad debt expense because of the impact of the pandemic on the aviation industry, as well as the global office footprint rationalization impairment charge. Partially offsetting these higher expenses were significant reductions in compensation and administrative expenses over the course of 2020.
In our land segment, income from operations for the year ended 2020 was $72.6 million, an increase of $17.6 million compared to 2019. The higher profitability was primarily attributable to a reduction in compensation costs and general and administrative expenses, improved results in the U.K., together with growth in World Kinect. This was partially offset by lower volumes as a result of the pandemic, particularly in our retail, commercial and industrial activities in North America, as well as a decrease in our government-related activities in Afghanistan and the global office footprint rationalization impairment charge.
Our marine segment income from operations for the year ended 2020 was $58.5 million, a decrease of $8.6 million compared to 2019, driven by lower average prices and volume of activity in our core resale business and an impairment charge resulting from our global office footprint rationalization. The decrease in operating income was partially offset by higher profitability during the first two months of 2020, resulting from the shift to very low sulfur fuel oil, as mandated by the IMO 2020 regulations that took effect on January 1, 2020. Further offsetting the decrease in operating profitability was a reduction in compensation expense during 2020 compared to 2019.
Corporate overhead costs not charged to the business segments in 2020 were $77.8 million, a decrease of $28.6 million, or 27%, compared to 2019, primarily attributable to a reduction in compensation costs and general and administrative expenses.
Non-Operating Income (Expenses), net. We had non-operating income of $23.9 million, compared to expenses of $62.4 million for the years ended 2020 and 2019, respectively. The positive variance of $86.2 million compared to 2019 was driven principally by a gain on the sale of our Multi Service payment solutions business of $80.0 million principally in the land segment, as well as a reduction in interest expense and lower fees associated with our receivables purchasing programs.
Income Taxes. For the year ended 2020, our effective income tax rate was 32%, and our income tax provision was $52.1 million, compared to an effective income tax rate of 24% and an income tax provision of $56.2 million in 2019. The higher effective income tax rate for 2020, compared to 2019, resulted primarily from the impact of recording valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets in various foreign jurisdictions and the differences in the results of our subsidiaries in tax jurisdictions with different tax rates.
Net Income Attributable to World Fuel and Diluted Earnings per Common Share. Our net income for the year ended 2020 was $109.6 million compared to net income of $178.9 million in 2019. Diluted earnings per common share for the year ended 2020 was $1.71 per common share as compared to diluted earnings per common share of $2.69 in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity, consisting of cash, cash equivalents and availability under the Credit Facility fluctuates based on a number of factors, including the timing of receipts from our customers, payments to our suppliers, changes in fuel prices, as well as our financial performance, which drives availability under our Credit Facility. Our availability under our Credit Facility, for example, is limited by, among other things, our consolidated total leverage ratio, which is defined in the Credit Facility and is based in part on our adjusted consolidated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”) for the four immediately preceding fiscal quarters. Accordingly, significant fluctuations in our Adjusted EBITDA for a particular quarter can impact our availability to the extent it significantly alters our Adjusted EBITDA for the applicable preceding four quarters. See Item 1A. Risk Factors in Part I of this 10-K Report for additional information.
Cash and liquidity are significant priorities for us and our primary use of cash and liquidity is to fund working capital and strategic investments. Increases in fuel prices can negatively affect liquidity by increasing the amount of cash required to fund fuel purchases. In addition, while we are usually extended unsecured trade credit from our suppliers for our fuel purchases, higher fuel prices may reduce the amount of fuel which we can purchase on an unsecured basis, and in certain cases, we may be required to prepay fuel purchases, which would negatively impact our liquidity. Fuel price increases may also negatively impact our customers, in that they may not be able to purchase as much fuel from us because of their credit limits with us and the resulting adverse impact on their business could cause them to be unable to make payments owed to us for fuel purchased on credit. They may also choose to reduce the amount of fuel they consume in their operations to reduce costs. In any such event, the volume of orders from our customers may thereafter decrease and we may not be able to replace lost volumes with new or existing customers.
As described in greater detail above, the COVID-19 pandemic is expected to continue to have an adverse impact on our customers, and therefore our own operating results through the first half of 2021, which could have a negative impact on our liquidity in the future. However, based on the information currently available, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 and available funds from our Credit Facility, together with cash flows generated by operations, are sufficient to fund our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months. We may choose to raise additional funds to further enhance our liquidity profile, which may be used for working capital, capital expenditures or other strategic investments. Our opinions concerning liquidity are based on currently available information and if circumstances change significantly, whether as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise, the future availability of trade credit or other sources of financing may be reduced, and our liquidity would be adversely affected. Factors that may affect the availability of trade credit or other forms of financing include our financial performance (as measured by various factors, including cash provided by operating activities), the state of worldwide credit markets, and our levels of outstanding debt. Depending on the severity and direct impact of these factors on us, financing may be limited or unavailable on terms favorable to us.
Cash Flows
The following table reflects the major categories of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in millions). For additional details, please see the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
2020 compared to 2019
Operating Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $604.1 million compared to $228.8 million provided during the year ended December 31, 2019. The $375.4 million change in operating cash flows was principally due to favorable year-over-year changes in working capital, excluding cash, of $538.6 million, offset by: i) $90.9 million of noncash adjustments principally associated with a gain on sale of a business, ii) decrease of $71.4 million in Net income including noncontrolling interest, iii) $0.8 million decrease in certain other long term assets and liabilities. The changes in working capital, excluding cash, primarily reflect a $1.9 billion net decrease in accounts receivable, inventories, and prepaid expenses, offset by a $1.3 billion net decrease in accounts payable, customer deposits, and accrued expenses and other current liabilities.
Investing Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was $72.8 million compared to net cash used of $50.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $123.4 million increase in cash flows was primarily due to an increase in net cash proceeds of $228.9 million received from the sales of businesses and a $29.6 million decrease in capital expenditures, partially offset by $128.6 million in cash paid to acquire our UVair fuel business.
Financing Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $213.0 million compared to net cash used of $204.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $8.2 million change was principally due to a $33.5 million increase in net repayments of debt under our credit facility, increases of $4.5 million and $2.9 million in dividends and common stock repurchases, respectively, partially offset by a $32.8 million decrease related to the 2019 acquisition of a noncontrolling interest in a consolidated subsidiary.
Other Liquidity Measures
Cash and Cash Equivalents. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash and cash equivalents of $658.8 million and $186.1 million, respectively. Our primary uses of cash and cash equivalents are to make strategic investments, primarily acquisitions, and to purchase inventory. We are provided unsecured trade credit by nearly all of our suppliers for our fuel purchases; however, a small number of suppliers require us to either prepay or provide a letter of credit. Increases in oil prices can negatively affect liquidity by increasing the amount of cash needed to fund fuel purchases as well as reducing the amount of fuel that we can purchase on an unsecured basis from our suppliers.
Credit Facility and Term Loans. Our Credit Agreement, as amended through December 31, 2020, consists of a revolving loan under which up to $1.3 billion aggregate principal amount could be borrowed, repaid and redrawn, based upon specific financial ratios and subject to the satisfaction of other customary conditions to borrowing. Our Credit Facility includes a sublimit of $400.0 million for the issuance of letters of credit and bankers' acceptances. Under the Credit Facility, we have the right to request increases in available borrowings up to an additional $400.0 million, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions and we have the right to request increases in available borrowings up to an additional $200.0 million. In addition, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $503.2 million and $515.6 million in Term Loans outstanding, respectively. We had no outstanding borrowings under our Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2019 we had outstanding borrowings of $55.0 million. Our issued letters of credit under the Credit Facility totaled $3.4 million and $4.3 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the unused portion of our Credit Facility was $1.3 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively. The unused portion of our Credit Facility is limited by, among other things, our financial leverage ratio, which limits the total amount of indebtedness we may incur, and may, therefore, fluctuate from period to period.
Borrowings under our Credit Facility and Term Loans related to base rate loans or Eurodollar rate loans bear floating interest rates plus applicable margins. As of December 31, 2020, the applicable margins for base rate loans and Eurodollar rate loans were 0.75% and 1.75%, respectively.
Our liquidity, consisting of cash and cash equivalents and availability under the Credit Facility, fluctuates based on a number of factors, including the timing of receipts from our customers and payments to our suppliers as well as commodity prices. Availability under our Credit Facility is principally limited by the ratio of adjusted total debt to adjusted EBITDA, as defined in the agreement, which limits the total amount of indebtedness we may incur to not more than 3.75 to 1. Accordingly, our availability under the Credit Facility may fluctuate from period to period.
Our Credit Facility and Term Loans contain certain financial and other covenants with which we are required to comply. Our failure to comply with the covenants contained in our Credit Facility and our Term Loans could result in an event of default. An event of default, if not cured or waived, would permit acceleration of any outstanding indebtedness under the Credit Facility and our Term Loans, trigger cross-defaults under certain other agreements to which we are a party and impair our ability to obtain working capital advances and issue letters of credit, which would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all financial covenants contained in our Credit Facility and our Term Loans.
Other Credit Lines and Receivables Purchase Agreements. Additionally, we have other uncommitted credit lines primarily for the issuance of letters of credit, bank guarantees and bankers’ acceptances. These credit lines are renewable on an annual basis and are subject to fees at market rates. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our outstanding letters of credit and bank guarantees under these credit lines totaled $328.4 million and $375.2 million, respectively.
We also have accounts receivable financing programs under receivables purchase agreements (“RPAs”) with Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. and Citibank, N.A. that allow for the sale of our accounts receivable in an amount up to 100% of our outstanding qualifying accounts receivable balances and receive cash consideration equal to the total balance, less a discount margin equal to LIBOR plus 1.00% to 3.25%, which varies based on the outstanding accounts receivable at any given time and assumes maximum utilization of the RPA facilities. During the third quarter of 2020, we amended our RPA with Citibank N.A. to, among other things, extend the renewal option term of the RPA through 2024. The RPA agreements provide the banks with the ability to add or remove customers from these programs based on, among other things, the level of risk exposure the bank is willing to accept with respect to any customer. The fees the banks charge us to purchase the receivables from these customers can also be impacted for these reasons. Under the RPAs, accounts receivable sold which remained outstanding at December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $306.9 million and $405.9 million, respectively. The reduction in accounts receivable sold and outstanding at December 31, 2020 was driven primarily by lower fuel prices and the decline in activity in our commercial aviation and marine businesses due to the impact of the pandemic on airlines and cruise lines.
Short-Term Debt. As of December 31, 2020, our short-term debt of $22.9 million primarily represents the current maturities (within the next twelve months) of Term Loan borrowings and finance lease obligations.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Our contractual obligations and off-balance sheet arrangements are set forth below. For additional information on any of the following and other contractual obligations and off-balance sheet arrangements, see "Note 8. Debt, Interest Income, Expense and Other Finance Costs" and "Note 9. Commitments and Contingencies" within "Part IV. Item 15. Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements" included in this 2020 10-K Report.
Contractual Obligations
Debt and Interest Obligations. These obligations include principal and interest payments on fixed-rate and variable-rate, fixed-term debt based on the expected payment dates.
Other Obligations. These obligations primarily consist of deferred compensation arrangements.
Unrecognized Income Tax Liabilities. As of December 31, 2020, our gross liabilities for unrecognized income tax benefits (“Unrecognized Tax Liabilities”), including penalties and interest, were $99.0 million. The timing of any settlement of our Unrecognized Tax Liabilities with the respective taxing authority cannot be reasonably estimated.
As of December 31, 2020, our contractual obligations were as follows (in millions):
Additionally, we have certain purchase contracts, that run through 2026, under which we agreed to purchase annually between 1.83 million barrels and 2.02 million barrels of aviation fuel at future market prices.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Letters of Credit and Bank Guarantees. In the normal course of business, we are required to provide letters of credit to certain suppliers. A majority of these letters of credit expire within one year from their issuance, and expired letters of credit are renewed as needed. As of December 31, 2020, we had issued letters of credit and bank guarantees totaling $331.9 million under our Credit Facility and other uncommitted credit lines. For additional information on our Credit Facility and other credit lines, see the discussion in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” above.
Surety Bonds. In the normal course of business, we are required to post bid, performance and other surety-related bonds. The majority of the surety bonds posted relate to our aviation and land segments. We had outstanding bonds that were executed in order to satisfy various security requirements of $50.6 million as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this 2020 10-K Report, which has been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to unbilled revenue and associated costs of sales, allowance for credit losses, goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, certain accrued liabilities, and income taxes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We have identified the areas described below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations given the uncertainties associated with the assumptions underlying each estimate. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other significant accounting policies, see "Note 1. Basis of Presentation, New Accounting Standards and Significant Accounting Policies" within "Part IV. Item 15. Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements" included in this 2020 10-K Report.
Impairment Assessments of Goodwill, Long-Lived Assets and Equity Investments
We assess accounting estimates that require consideration of forecasted financial information, including, but not limited to, the recoverability of the carrying value of our goodwill, long-lived assets (property and equipment, identifiable intangible assets and leases) and equity investments. Significant judgment is involved in performing these estimates as they are developed based on forecasted assumptions. As of December 31, 2020, the assumptions used, particularly the expected growth rates, the profitability embedded in our projected cash flow, the discount rate and the market-based multiples, were defined in the context of current and future potential impacts of COVID-19 on our business and other business factors such as the reduction in our government-related activity in Afghanistan. Management also considered the volatility in the company's market capitalization since the beginning of the pandemic and evaluated the potential impact that this volatility may have had on the estimated fair value of our reporting units.
Based on the assessments performed, and supported by the available information as of December 31, 2020, we concluded that the fair value of our land and aviation reporting units were not less than their respective carrying values. However, at this time, we are unable to predict with specificity the ultimate impact of the pandemic, as it will depend on the magnitude, severity and duration, as well as how quickly, and to what extent, normal economic and operating conditions resume on a sustainable basis globally. Accordingly, if the impact of the pandemic, and it’s associated reduction in business are more severe or longer in duration than we have assumed, such impact could potentially result in impairments.
For further information pertaining to our 2020 impairment assessments, see "Note 5. Restructuring" and “Note 7. Goodwill and Identifiable Intangible Assets” within "Part IV. Item 15. Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements" included in this 2020 10-K Report.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Credit Losses
We maintain a provision for estimated credit losses based upon our historical experience with our customers, any specific customer collection issues that we have identified from current financial information and business prospects, as well as forward-looking information from market sources. Historical payment trends of our customers together with internal and external information about the economic outlook, geopolitical risks and macroeconomic events may not fully capture the current or future creditworthiness of our customers, particularly in difficult economic periods. As a result of the challenges inherent in estimating which customers are less likely to remit amounts owed to us, our provision for estimated credit losses may not always be sufficient. Any write-off of accounts receivable in excess of our provision for credit losses could adversely affect our results of operations and cash flow. For additional information on the credit risks inherent in our business, see “Item 1A - Risk Factors” in this 2020 10-K Report.
Inventories
When estimating the net realizable value of inventory, we utilize a variety of observable fuel indices and other indicators. Sharp negative changes in these indices can result in a reduction of our inventory valuation, which could have an adverse material impact on our results of operations in the period in which we take the adjustment.
Business Combinations
Business combinations are accounted for using a fair value model. This model is required when the definition of a business is met. In contrast, asset acquisitions are accounted for using a cost accumulation and allocation model. The initial and subsequent measurement of certain assets acquired and, consequently, our results of operations are impacted differently depending on the model. In a business combination, the residual fair value generated in the acquisition is recognized as goodwill which is tested for impairment but not amortized, while in an asset acquisition, any residual fair value is allocated on a relative fair value basis to all qualifying identifiable net assets acquired and subsequently amortized. To conclude if the definition of a business is met, we need to conclude whether substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or a group of similar identifiable assets which requires significant judgment to determine the fair value and if and how assets should be grouped.
Revenue Recognition
The majority of our consolidated revenues are generated through the sale of fuel and fuel-related products. We generally recognize fuel sales and services revenue on a gross basis as we have control of the products or services before they are delivered to our customers. In drawing this conclusion, we consider various factors, including inventory risk management, latitude in establishing the sales price, discretion in the supplier selection and that we are normally the primary obligor in our sales arrangements.
Income Taxes
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”), enacted on December 22, 2017, significantly changed the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, by, among other things, reducing the U.S. corporate income tax rate, modifying or repealing many business deductions and credits, adopting elements of a territorial tax system, taxing global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”), assessing a repatriation tax or “toll-charge” on undistributed earnings and profits of U.S.-owned foreign corporations, and introducing certain base erosion and anti-abuse minimum tax (“BEAT”) provisions. Several final and proposed regulations were issued during 2020 regarding foreign tax credits, and GILTI, among other areas.
Because of the complexity of the GILTI tax rules effective in 2018, we previously evaluated this provision of the Tax Act and the application of ASC 740, Income Taxes. Under US GAAP, we made an accounting policy choice to treat taxes due on future US GILTI inclusions as a current period expense when incurred (the "period cost method"). The Tax Act legislation will continue to require further interpretations and implementing regulations by the IRS, as well as state tax authorities, and the legislation could be subject to potential amendments and changes, any of which could increase certain adverse impacts or other effects of the legislation. The changes included in the Tax Act are broad and complex. The final transition impacts of the Tax Act may differ from our estimates, possibly materially, due to, among other items, changes in interpretations of the Tax Act, any legislative action to address questions that arise because of the Tax Act, any changes in accounting standards for income taxes or related interpretations in response to the Tax Act, or any updates or changes to current year earnings and tax estimates.
Leases
Determining whether a contract contains a lease requires judgment regarding whether the contract conveys the right to control the use of identified property or equipment for a period of time in exchange for consideration. Assessing whether we have obtained the right to substantially all of the economic benefits and the ability to direct how, and for what purpose, the asset is used requires more judgment in storage arrangements where we must determine whether our rights to capacity may represent substantially all of the available capacity at a location. We also make estimates about the lease term, as some of these arrangements may include optional renewals, terminations or purchase options, which are considered in our assessments when they are reasonably certain to occur. Determining the incremental borrowing rate at lease commencement (or modification) requires judgment as it is based on our estimated credit rating, the lease term at commencement, and the contract currency of the lease arrangement. All these estimates could lead to higher or lower lease related assets and liabilities.
Derivatives
We enter into financial derivative contracts to mitigate our risk of fuel market price fluctuations in aviation, land and marine fuel as well as changes in interest and foreign currency exchange rates. Also, to offer our customers fuel pricing alternatives to meet their needs. While we currently believe that our derivative contracts will be effective in mitigating the associated price risks, it is possible that our derivative instruments will be ineffective at mitigating material changes in prices, which could have an adverse impact on our financial position and results of operations.
Measurement of the fair value of our derivatives also requires the assessment of certain risks related to non-performance, which requires a significant amount of judgment.
Loss Contingencies
A number of claims, complaints or proceedings may arise in the ordinary course of business and may be outstanding against the company. Our estimates regarding potential losses are based on our judgment and assessment of currently available information. Any adverse resolution could have a material adverse effect on our Consolidated Financial Statements or disclosures. Although we continue to reassess our reserves and estimates based on new developments, our objective assessment of the legal merits of such claims may not always be predictive of the outcome and actual results may vary from our current estimates. For additional information on contingencies, see “Item 1A - Risk Factors” and "Note 9. Commitments and Contingencies " in this 2020 10-K Report.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding accounting standards adopted during 2020 is included in "Note 1. Basis of Presentation, New Accounting Standards and Significant Accounting Policies" within "Part IV. Item 15. Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements" included in this 2020 10-K Report.