Item 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
This MD&A should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
We are a global supplier of innovative test and process solutions for use in manufacturing and testing across a wide range of markets including automotive, defense/aerospace, industrial, medical, semiconductor and telecommunications. We manage our business as two operating segments: Thermal and EMS. Our Thermal segment designs, manufactures and sells our thermal test and thermal process products while our EMS segment designs, manufactures and sells our semiconductor test products.
Our EMS segment sells its products to semiconductor manufacturers and third-party test and assembly houses (end user sales) and to ATE manufacturers (OEM sales), who ultimately resell our equipment with theirs to both semiconductor manufacturers and third-party test and assembly houses. These sales all fall within the ATE sector of the broader semiconductor market. Our Thermal segment sells its products to many of these same types of customers; however, it also sells to customers in the wafer processing sector within the broader semiconductor market and to customers in a variety of other markets outside the semiconductor market, including the automotive, defense/aerospace, industrial (including consumer products packaging, fiber optics and other sectors within the broader industrial market), medical and telecommunications markets.
Both of our operating segments have multiple products that we design, manufacture and market to our customers. Due to a number of factors, our products have varying levels of gross margin. These factors include, for example, the amount of engineering time required to develop the product, the market or customer to which we sell the product and the level of competing products available from other suppliers. The needs of our customers ultimately determine the products that we sell in a given time period. Therefore, the mix of products sold in a given period can change significantly when compared against the prior period. As a result, our consolidated gross margin may be significantly impacted by a change in the mix of products sold in a particular period.
Markets
Historically, we referred to our markets as “Semiconductor” (which included both the broader semiconductor market as well as the more specialized semiconductor ATE and wafer processing sectors within the broader semiconductor market), and “Non-Semiconductor” (which included all of the other markets we serve). In the second quarter of 2019, we began referring to the semiconductor market, including the ATE and wafer processing sectors within that market, as the “Semi Market.” All other markets are designated as “Multimarket.” Business within our Thermal segment can fall into either the Semi Market or Multimarket, depending upon how our customers utilize our products or upon their respective applications.
While the Semi Market represents the historical roots of inTEST and remains a very important component of our business, Multimarket is where we have focused our strategic growth efforts in the last several years. Our goal was to grow our business, both organically and through acquisition, in these markets as we believe these markets have historically been less cyclical than the Semi Market. Moving forward, with the launch of our new strategic plan which is discussed in Part 1, Item 1 under “Our Strategies”, we intend to broaden our strategic growth efforts to target both organic and inorganic growth in all of our currently served markets, which includes the Semi Market. Our goal is to further expand our existing product lines, strengthen our positions in served markets and drive expansion into new markets.
Prior to our acquisition of Ambrell Corporation (“Ambrell”) in May 2017, we offered only highly specialized engineering solutions used for testing applications in Multimarket, the demand for which is limited and which varies significantly from period to period. Our acquisition of Ambrell not only provided expansion into new markets but also broadened our product offerings to include products sold into process or manufacturing applications. Historically, Ambrell sold its precision induction heating systems almost exclusively to customers in the industrial market but since 2018, has also had significant sales into the Semi Market. Overall, however, the acquisition of Ambrell has helped to diversify our customer base.
The portion of our business that is derived from the Semi Market is substantially dependent upon the demand for ATE by semiconductor manufacturers and companies that specialize in the testing of integrated circuits or, for Ambrell, the demand for wafer processing equipment. Demand for ATE or wafer processing equipment is driven by semiconductor manufacturers that are opening new, or expanding existing, semiconductor fabrication facilities or upgrading equipment, which in turn is dependent upon the current and anticipated market demand for semiconductors and products incorporating semiconductors. Such market demand can be the result of market expansion, development of new technologies or redesigned products to incorporate new features, or the replacement of aging equipment. In addition, we continue to focus on design improvements and new approaches for our own products that contribute to our net revenues as our customers adopt these new products.
In the past, the Semi Market has been highly cyclical with recurring periods of oversupply, which often severely impact the Semi Market's demand for the products we manufacture and sell into the market. This cyclicality can cause wide fluctuations in both our orders and net revenues and, depending on our ability to react quickly to these shifts in demand, can significantly impact our results of operations. Market cycles are difficult to predict and, because they are generally characterized by sequential periods of growth or declines in orders and net revenues during each cycle, year over year comparisons of operating results may not always be as meaningful as comparisons of periods at similar points in either up or down cycles. These periods of heightened or reduced demand can shift depending on various factors impacting both our customers and the markets that they serve. In addition, during both downward and upward cycles in the Semi Market, in any given quarter, the trend in both our orders and net revenues can be erratic. This can occur, for example, when orders are canceled or currently scheduled delivery dates are accelerated or postponed by a significant customer or when customer forecasts and general business conditions fluctuate during a quarter.
Third party market share statistics are not available for the products we manufacture and sell into the Semi Market; therefore, comparisons of period over period changes in our market share are not easily determined. As a result, it is difficult to ascertain if Semi Market volatility in any period is the result of macro-economic or customer-specific factors impacting Semi Market demand, or if we have gained or lost market share to a competitor during the period.
While approximately half of our orders and net revenues are derived from the Semi Market, and our operating results generally follow the overall trend in the Semi Market, in any given period we may experience anomalies that cause the trend in our net revenues to deviate from the overall trend in the Semi Market. We believe that these anomalies may be driven by a variety of factors within the Semi Market, including, for example, changing product requirements, longer periods between new product offerings by OEMs and changes in customer buying patterns. In addition, in recent periods, we have seen instances when demand within the Semi Market is not consistent for each of our operating segments or for any given product within a particular operating segment. This inconsistency in demand can be driven by a number of factors but, in most cases, we have found that the primary reason is unique customer-specific changes in demand for certain products driven by the needs of their customers or markets served. Recently this has become more pronounced for our sales into the wafer processing sector within the broader semiconductor market due to the limited market penetration we have into this sector and the variability of orders we have experienced from the few customers we support. These shifts in market practices and customer-specific needs have had, and may continue to have, varying levels of impact on our operating results and are difficult to quantify or predict from period to period. Management has taken, and will continue to take, such actions it deems appropriate to adjust our strategies, products and operations to counter such shifts in market practices as they become evident.
As previously mentioned, as part of our ongoing strategy to grow our business, we continue to diversify our served markets to address the thermal test and thermal process requirements of several markets outside the Semi Market. These include the automotive, defense/aerospace, industrial, medical, telecommunications and other markets, which we refer to as Multimarket. We believe that these markets are usually less cyclical than the Semi Market. While market share statistics exist for some of these markets, due to the nature of our highly specialized product offerings in these markets, we do not expect broad market penetration in many of these markets and therefore do not anticipate developing meaningful market shares in most of these markets.
In addition, because of our limited market share, our Multimarket orders and net revenues in any given period do not necessarily reflect the overall trends in the markets within Multimarket. Consequently, we are continuing to evaluate buying patterns and opportunities for growth in Multimarket that may affect our performance. The level of our Multimarket orders and net revenues has varied in the past, and we expect will vary significantly in the future, as we work to build our presence in Multimarket and establish new markets for our products.
Restructuring and Other Charges
On September 21, 2020, we notified employees in our Fremont, California facility of a plan to consolidate all manufacturing for our EMS segment into our manufacturing operation located in Mt. Laurel, New Jersey. The consolidation was substantially completed during the fourth quarter of 2020 and resulted in the termination of certain employees at the Fremont location. Prior to the consolidation, our interface products were manufactured in the Fremont facility, and our manipulator and docking hardware products were manufactured in the Mt. Laurel facility. The consolidation was undertaken to better serve customers through streamlined operations and reduce the fixed annual operating costs for the EMS segment. A small engineering and sales office will be maintained in northern California. The costs related to these actions are included in restructuring and other charges on our consolidated statement of operations and are discussed in more detail in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements.
The EMS facility consolidation resulted in the termination of certain employees at the Fremont location, including all of our interface product line assembly staff who were located at that facility. As a result of transitioning our interface manufacturing operations to New Jersey, we have hired new production staff for this product line in our Mt. Laurel facility. These new employees are being trained to assemble our products which may impact customer shipments and quality of our interface products over the next several months. In addition, we have recently experienced difficulty in hiring personnel at the costs projected in our forecasts. This has resulted in the need to increase the labor rates offered for certain positions. If we cannot find savings in other areas or increase the price for which we sell our products in an amount sufficient to cover these additional labor costs, we may experience reduced margins in future periods. See “Risks Related to Our Business Operations” in Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this Report.
During the third quarter of 2020, we made changes in our executive management team and, in connection with these actions, we reduced our administrative footprint in our Mansfield, Massachusetts facility and reestablished our corporate headquarters in our Mt. Laurel, New Jersey office. The costs related to these actions are included in restructuring and other charges on our consolidated statement of operations and are discussed in more detail in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements.
Orders and Backlog
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, a breakdown of the orders received by operating segment and market (in thousands).
Total consolidated orders for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $59.7 million compared to $52.8 million in 2019, an increase of $6.9 million, or 13%. The increase reflects higher levels of demand experienced by both of our segments from customers within the Semi Market. As discussed below under “COVID-19 Pandemic,” the Semi Market, from which approximately half of our net revenues are derived, entered a cyclical downturn in the beginning of 2019. We believe the arrival of COVID-19 lengthened and deepened the level of decline in demand experienced during this downturn. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we saw a significant increase in our orders from the Semi Market which we believe indicates that we have entered the next cyclical upturn.
Multimarket orders in each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $27.4 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, this represented 46% of our consolidated orders compared to 52% for the prior year. Increases in demand from customers in the automotive and defense/aerospace markets were offset by decreases from customers in the industrial and telecommunications markets. The level of our Multimarket orders has varied in the past, and we expect it will vary significantly in the future as we build our presence in these markets and establish new markets for our products.
At December 31, 2020, our backlog of unfilled orders for all products was approximately $11.5 million compared with approximately $5.5 million at December 31, 2019. The significant increase in our backlog primarily reflects the aforementioned increase in demand during the fourth quarter of 2020. Our backlog includes customer orders that we have accepted, substantially all of which we expect to deliver in 2021. While backlog is calculated on the basis of firm purchase orders, a customer may cancel an order or accelerate or postpone currently scheduled delivery dates. Our backlog may be affected by the tendency of customers to rely on short lead times available from suppliers, including us, in periods of depressed demand. In periods of increased demand, there is a tendency towards longer lead times that has the effect of increasing backlog. As a result, our backlog at a particular date is not necessarily indicative of sales for any future period.
Net Revenues
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, a breakdown of the net revenues by operating segment and market (in thousands).
Total consolidated net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $53.8 million compared to $60.7 million in 2019, a decrease of $6.8 million or 11% as compared to 2019. The decrease in net revenues primarily reflects the aforementioned downturn in demand in the Semi Market which began in 2019. As previously mentioned, we saw a significant increase in order levels in the fourth quarter of 2020, which we believe indicates that the downturn in the Semi Market has come to an end. As a result, we expect revenue levels in the first quarter of 2021 will increase significantly from the level in the fourth quarter.
Multimarket net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $27.0 million, or 50% of total consolidated net revenues, compared to $29.7 million, or 49% of total consolidated net revenues in 2019. Our net revenues from Multimarket for the year ended December 31, 2020 declined $2.8 million or 9% from the prior period. The decline primarily reflects reductions experienced from customers in the industrial market. We believe this is a result, in part, of the impact of COVID-19 on demand for our induction heating products and their related service. The level of our Multimarket net revenues has varied in the past, and we expect it will vary significantly in the future as we build our presence in these markets and establish new markets for our products.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Our net revenues from all of the markets we serve were significantly affected by COVID-19 during the first half of 2020. The impact of COVID-19 on our net revenues from the Semi Market was intensified during the first half of the year because our business operations were also being negatively affected by a global downturn in the Semi Market at that time. The Semi Market, from which approximately half of our net revenues are derived, entered a cyclical downturn in the beginning of 2019. During the first quarter of 2020, before the spread of COVID-19, we had started to see indications that the downturn was coming to an end. These indications included increased quoting activity and order levels for the first quarter of 2020 as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. However, we believe COVID-19 delayed the recovery in the Semi Market as the increase in activity leveled off during late March 2020. Although we saw slightly increased order rates from our customers in the Semi Market during the second and third quarters of 2020, it was not until the fourth quarter of 2020 that we saw a significant increase in our orders from the Semi Market which we believe indicates that we have now entered the next cyclical upturn. During the fourth quarter of 2020, our orders from the Semi Market increased 53% sequentially and were 141% higher than in the fourth quarter of 2019, the low point of the prior cyclical downturn for the products that we sell. We believe the level of increase in our orders from the Semi Market during the fourth quarter of 2020 reflects a combination of increased demand in the market resulting from the interruption of the normal recovery in the Semi Market cycle caused by the onset of COVID-19 in the first half of 2020, as well as increased demand for semiconductors, generally. We believe this increase in demand is being driven both by changing technology as well as increased use of technology across all aspects of daily life, such as in devices that facilitate remote work and education, smart technology used in homes and businesses, the increase in the amount of ICs used in the automotive industry and changes occurring in the telecommunications and mobility markets.
As of the date of this filing, all of our operations continue to be deemed “critical and essential business operations” under the various governmental COVID-19 mandates, which has allowed us to continue to operate our business with certain modifications. These modifications include a significant number of our employees working remotely. Such employees have been provided with the tools and technology necessary to do so. Additionally, we have implemented workplace safeguards designed to protect the health and well-being of our employees. Employees who remain in our facilities are following WHO and CDC recommended safety practices, as well as state and local directives. We have had occasions where one or more employees have contracted COVID-19 and entered our facilities while infected. To date, we have managed these occurrences with minimal disruption to our business while protecting other employees, but there can be no assurances that we can avoid similar occurrences in the future or, that in such cases, we can avoid significant disruption of our operations.
The aftermarket service and support that we provide to our customers has been, and we expect may continue to be, adversely impacted by COVID-19. Specifically, the travel restrictions that remain in place, coupled with limitations on visitors into customer facilities, have resulted in the reduction or suspension of certain activities. The net revenues associated with these aftermarket service and support activities typically range from 8% to 10% of our consolidated net revenues. Although these net revenues returned to a more typical range during the third and fourth quarters of 2020, if the spread of COVID-19 or variations of the virus worsen, these revenues may be reduced in future periods.
While the negative impact of COVID-19 on our business was reduced significantly in the second half of 2020, the spread of the virus or variants of the virus could worsen and one or more of our significant customers or suppliers could be impacted, or significant additional governmental regulations and restrictions could be imposed, thus negatively impacting our business in the future. See “Risks Related to COVID-19” under Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Report.
Results of Operations
The results of operations for our two operating segments are generally affected by the same factors described in the Overview section above. Separate discussions and analyses for each segment would be repetitive. The discussion and analysis that follows, therefore, is presented on a consolidated basis and includes discussion of factors unique to each operating segment where significant to an understanding of that segment.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Revenues. Net revenues were $53.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $60.7 million in 2019, a decrease of $6.8 million or 11%. We believe this decrease reflects the factors previously discussed in the Overview section above.
Gross Margin. Gross margin was 45% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 48% in 2019. Our component material costs increased from 32% of net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 34% of net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in our component material costs reflects changes in product mix for both our segments. In addition, although our fixed operating costs decreased $334,000 in absolute dollar terms in 2020 as compared to 2019, as a percentage of net revenues, these costs increased from 17% of net revenues in 2019 to 18% of net revenues in 2020 as a result of not being as fully absorbed by the lower net revenues levels in 2020. The $334,000 decrease in our fixed operating costs primarily reflects a reduction in materials used in service calls and lower levels of travel, both of which are a result of the impact of COVID-19 on the level of service work we were able to perform during 2020 in our Thermal segment. To a lesser extent, there was also a reduction in the use of temporary labor and lower salary and benefits expense for our Thermal segment, reflecting the reduced business levels in 2020 and savings from headcount reductions which occurred early in the second quarter of 2020 in response to the slowdown in business. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in facility costs reflecting higher rent for our facility in Fremont, California, which took effect at the beginning of 2020, as well as the cost for additional space in our office in Mansfield, Massachusetts for our corporate headquarters which we first occupied during the fourth quarter of 2019. As previously discussed in the Overview, we closed our manufacturing operations in Fremont, California during the fourth quarter of 2020. This will result in reduced facility costs in future periods as a result of the reduction in our footprint. Costs incurred in 2020 related to this action are included in restructuring and other charges in our statement of operations and are discussed in more detail below and in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements.
Selling Expense. Selling expense was $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $8.5 million in 2019, a decrease of $938,000 or 11%. The decrease primarily reflects lower levels of travel and trade show related costs for both our segments as a result of COVID-19. To a lesser extent, there was also a reduction in warranty expense in our Thermal segment, reflecting improved warranty claims experience and a reduction in revenues under warranty.
Engineering and Product Development Expense. Engineering and product development expense was $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $5.0 million in 2019, an increase of $106,000, or 2%. Increases in salary and benefits expense as a result of headcount additions in our Thermal segment were partially offset by a decrease in travel and lower levels of spending on third party consultants and materials used in new product development.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense was $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $13.0 million in 2019, a decrease of $1.6 million, or 12%. During 2019, we incurred $683,000 related to an acquisition opportunity that we decided not to pursue. There were no similar costs in 2020. If we had not incurred these costs in 2019, general and administrative expense would have declined $885,000 in 2020 as compared to 2019. This decrease reflects headcount reductions, primarily in corporate staff, lower levels of travel as a result of COVID-19, lower levels of stock-based compensation costs, lower fees for third-party professionals that assist us in compliance related matters and a reduction in profit-based bonus accruals in 2020.
Restructuring and Other Charges. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $1.3 million in restructuring and other charges. Of this amount, $903,000 is related to the consolidation of our EMS manufacturing operations, $189,000 is related to the reduction of the administrative footprint in our Mansfield, Massachusetts corporate office associated with the reestablishment of the Mt. Laurel, New Jersey office as our corporate headquarters, $133,000 is related to the executive management changes that occurred in the third quarter of 2020 and $60,000 is related to other restructuring actions taken during 2020. All of these actions and the related charges are discussed in more detail in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded $240,000 in restructuring charges and other charges, primarily related to the consolidation of Ambrell’s European operations.
Income Tax Expense. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an income tax benefit of $336,000 compared to income tax expense of $282,000 in 2019. Our effective tax rate was 27% for 2020 compared to 11% for 2019. On a quarterly basis, we record income tax expense or benefit based on the expected annualized effective tax rate for the various taxing jurisdictions in which we operate our businesses. The increase in our effective tax rate in 2020 primarily represents the impact of changes in the expected mix of foreign and domestic source income for 2020 and other adjustments related to recently enacted tax regulations where specific application of the regulations is still evolving. See Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements for further detail of the difference between our effective tax rates in 2020 and 2019 and the statutory tax rate of 21%.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As discussed more fully in the Overview, our business and results of operations are substantially dependent upon the demand for ATE by semiconductor manufacturers and companies that specialize in the testing of ICs. The cyclical and volatile nature of demand for ATE makes estimates of future revenues, results of operations and net cash flows difficult especially in light of COVID-19.
Our primary historical source of liquidity and capital resources has been cash flow generated by our operations and we manage our businesses to maximize operating cash flows as our primary source of liquidity. We use cash to fund growth in our operating assets, for new product research and development, for acquisitions and for stock repurchases.
Liquidity
Our cash and cash equivalents and working capital were as follows (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, $3.2 million, or 31%, of our cash and cash equivalents was held by our foreign subsidiaries. We currently expect our cash and cash equivalents, in combination with the borrowing capacity available under our revolving credit facility and the anticipated net cash to be provided by our operations in the next twelve months to be sufficient to support our short-term working capital requirements and other corporate requirements. Our revolving credit facility is discussed in Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements. Although our revolving credit facility will mature on April 9, 2021, we are currently in discussions with our lender to replace this facility with a three-year credit facility. We expect that facility to be put in place in conjunction with, or prior to, the expiration of our current credit facility.
Our material short-term cash requirements include payments due under our various lease agreements, recurring payroll and benefits obligations to our employees and purchase commitments for materials that we use in the products we sell. We estimate that our minimum short-term working capital requirements currently range between $5.0 million and $7.0 million. We also anticipate making investments in our business in the next twelve months including hiring of additional staff, updates to our website and other systems and investments related to our geographic and market expansion efforts. We expect our current cash and cash equivalents, in combination with the borrowing capacity available under our revolving credit facility and the anticipated net cash to be provided by our operations to be sufficient to support these additional investments as well as our current short-term cash requirements. However, should the impact of COVID-19 on our operations, including the disruption to our business that would be caused by any unanticipated facility closures or significantly reduced demand from our customers, be more significant than we currently expect, we may need additional financial resources, including additional debt or equity financings in the long-term. There can be no assurance that any such debt or equity financings would be available on favorable terms or rates or at all.
Our current growth strategy includes pursuing acquisition opportunities for complementary businesses, technologies or products. We currently anticipate that any long-term cash requirements related to our acquisition strategy would be funded all or in part through obtaining additional third-party debt or issuing equity. If we were to obtain additional third-party debt, we do not currently know at what rates or on what terms any such debt would be available.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.2 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a net loss of $895,000. During this same period, we had non-cash charges of $3.2 million for depreciation and amortization that included $1.3 million of amortization related to right-of-use ("ROU") assets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we also recorded $671,000 of non-cash charges for deferred compensation expense related to stock-based awards and a $612,000 impairment charge related to our ROU assets for the leases in Fremont, California and Mansfield, Massachusetts, as discussed more fully in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements. Accounts receivable decreased $887,000 during 2020, primarily reflecting the reduced level of shipments in 2020, while inventories increased $717,000, primarily reflecting purchasing activity in the fourth quarter for products we expect to ship in the first half of 2021. As previously discussed in the Overview, we experienced a significant increase in order levels in the fourth quarter of 2020. Operating lease liabilities decreased $1.3 million during 2020, reflecting payments made under our various lease agreements and accounts payable increased $430,000, primarily reflecting the increase in inventory purchases during the fourth quarter.
Investing Activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, purchases of property and equipment were $658,000, and primarily reflected additions to fixed assets related to products leased to customers and leasehold improvements to our facility in Mt. Laurel, New Jersey using our working capital. During the first quarter of 2021, we expect to spend approximately $230,000 to complete the leasehold improvements to our facility in Mt. Laurel, New Jersey using our working capital. These improvements are being done in connection with reducing the size of that facility and consolidating manufacturing operations from our Fremont, California operation as discussed under the Overview section above and in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements. We have no other significant commitments for capital expenditures in 2021; however, depending upon changes in market demand or manufacturing and sales strategies, we may make such purchases or investments as we deem necessary and appropriate. These additional cash requirements would be funded by our cash and cash equivalents, anticipated net cash to be provided by operations and our revolving credit facility.
Financing Activities. As discussed more fully in Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements in our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the three months ended March 31, 2020 filed on May 13, 2020 with the Securities and Exchange Commission, during April 2020 we applied for and received loans through the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration totaling $2.8 million. We repaid the full amount of the PPP loans on May 5, 2020 with the applicable interest. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we borrowed and repaid $2.8 million on our revolving credit facility. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we utilized $74,000 to repurchase 13,767 shares of our common stock under the 2019 Repurchase Plan. On March 2, 2020, we suspended repurchases under the 2019 Repurchase Plan.
New or Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for information concerning the implementation and impact of new or recently adopted accounting standards.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to inventories, long-lived assets, goodwill, identifiable intangibles and deferred income tax valuation allowances. We base our estimates on historical experience and on appropriate and customary assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Some of these accounting estimates and assumptions are particularly sensitive because of their significance to our consolidated financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting them may differ markedly from what had been assumed when the financial statements were prepared.
Inventory Valuation
Inventories are valued at cost on a first-in, first-out basis, not in excess of market value. On a quarterly basis, we review our inventories and record excess and obsolete inventory charges based upon our established objective excess and obsolete inventory criteria. These criteria identify material that has not been used in a work order during the prior twelve months and the quantity of material on hand that is greater than the average annual usage of that material over the prior three years. In certain cases, additional excess and obsolete inventory charges are recorded based upon current market conditions, anticipated product life cycles, new product introductions and expected future use of the inventory. The excess and obsolete inventory charges we record establish a new cost basis for the related inventories. During 2020 and 2019, we recorded inventory obsolescence charges for excess and obsolete inventory of $444,000 and $391,000, respectively.
Goodwill, Intangible and Long-Lived Assets
We account for goodwill and intangible assets in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 350 (Intangibles- Goodwill and Other). Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful economic life and are carried at cost less accumulated amortization. Goodwill is assessed for impairment at least annually in the fourth quarter, on a reporting unit basis, or more frequently when events and circumstances occur indicating that the recorded goodwill may be impaired. As a part of the goodwill impairment assessment, we have the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, as a result of our qualitative assessment, we determine this is the case, we are required to perform a goodwill impairment test to identify potential goodwill impairment and measure the amount of goodwill impairment loss to be recognized. The test is discussed below. If, as a result of our qualitative assessment, we determine that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amounts, the goodwill impairment test is not required.
The quantitative goodwill impairment test, used to identify both the existence of impairment and the amount of impairment loss, compares the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill of the reporting unit is considered not impaired. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss shall be recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. The goodwill impairment assessment is based upon the income approach, which estimates the fair value of our reporting units based upon a discounted cash flow approach. This fair value is then reconciled to our market capitalization at year end with an appropriate control premium. The determination of the fair value of our reporting units requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions including the selection of control premiums, discount rates, terminal growth rates, forecasts of revenue and expense growth rates, income tax rates, changes in working capital, depreciation, amortization and capital expenditures. Changes in assumptions concerning future financial results or other underlying assumptions could have a significant impact on either the fair value of the reporting unit or the amount of the goodwill impairment charge. At each of December 31, 2020 and 2019, goodwill was $13.7 million. We did not record any impairment charges related to our goodwill during 2020 or 2019.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are assessed for impairment at least annually in the fourth quarter, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. As a part of the impairment assessment, we have the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired. If, as a result of our qualitative assessment, we determine that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount, the quantitative impairment test is required; otherwise, no further testing is required. The quantitative impairment test consists of a comparison of the fair value of the intangible asset with its carrying amount. If the carrying amount of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. At each of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our indefinite-lived intangible assets were trademarks carried at $6.7 million. We did not record any impairment charges related to our indefinite-lived intangible assets during 2020 or 2019.
Long-lived assets, which consist of finite-lived intangible assets, property and equipment and ROU assets, are assessed for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable or that the useful lives of these assets are no longer appropriate. Each impairment test is based on a comparison of the estimated undiscounted cash flows to the recorded value of the asset. If impairment is indicated, the asset is written down to its estimated fair value. The cash flow estimates used to determine the impairment, if any, contain management's best estimates using appropriate assumptions and projections at that time. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, finite-lived intangibles and long-lived assets were $14.4 million and $14.2 million, respectively. We recorded impairment charges totaling $612,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to certain of our ROU assets as discussed further in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements. We did not record any impairment charges related to our long-lived assets during 2019.
Income Taxes
The asset and liability method is used in accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards and for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
Deferred tax assets are analyzed to determine if there will be sufficient taxable income in the future in order to realize such assets. We assess all of the positive and negative evidence concerning the realizability of the deferred tax assets, including our historical results of operations for the recent past and our projections of future results of operations, in which we make subjective determinations of future events. If, after assessing all of the evidence, both positive and negative, a determination is made that the realizability of the deferred tax assets is not more likely than not, we establish a deferred tax valuation allowance for all or a portion of the deferred tax assets depending upon the specific facts. If any of the significant assumptions were changed, materially different results could occur, which could significantly change the amount of the deferred tax valuation allowance established. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had a net deferred tax liability of $1.9 million and $2.3 million, respectively. Our deferred tax valuation allowance at December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $169,000 and $234,000, respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There were no off-balance sheet arrangements during the year ended December 31, 2020 that have or are reasonably likely to have, a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, cash requirements or capital resources.