Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis or Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
SPECIAL NOTE CONCERNING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
We believe that it is important to communicate our future expectations to our security holders and to the public. This report, therefore, contains statements about future events and expectations which are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Sections 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including the statements about our plans, objectives, expectations and prospects under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” You can expect to identify these statements by forward-looking words such as “may,” “might,” “could,” “would,” “will,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “plan,” “estimate,” “project,” “expect,” “intend,” “seek” and other similar expressions. Any statement contained in this report that is not a statement of historical fact may be deemed to be a forward-looking statement. Although we believe that the plans, objectives, expectations and prospects reflected in or suggested by our forward-looking statements are reasonable, those statements involve risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements, and we can give no assurance that our plans, objectives, expectations and prospects will be achieved.
Important factors that might cause our actual results to differ materially from the results contemplated by the forward-looking statements are contained in the “Risk Factors” section of and elsewhere in this Annual Report and in our subsequent filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The following discussion of our results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report.
GENERAL
We were incorporated in the State of Nevada on March 22, 2013 under the name Lightcollar, Inc. On March 22, 2015, we changed our name to EMS Find, Inc., and in July 2017, we changed our name to Integrated Ventures, Inc. We have discontinued our prior operations and changed our business focus from our prior technologies relating to the EMS Find platform to acquiring, launching, and operating companies in the cryptocurrency sector, mainly in digital currency mining and sales of branded mining rigs. Our offices are located at 73 Buck Road, Suite 2, Huntingdon Valley, Pennsylvania 19006.
On November 22, 2017, we successfully launched our cryptocurrency operations, and revenues commenced from cryptocurrency mining operations and from sales of cryptocurrency mining equipment. As of June 30, 2021, the Company owned and operated a total of approximately 914 miners in two locations that mine Bitcoin, Litecoin, ZCash and Ethereum. In addition, as of June 30, 2021, the Company paid deposits totaling $7,544,190 for 2,650 additional miners to be placed into service beginning in September 2021.
The Company will continue to (1) raise capital to purchase new mining equipment, (2) sell older and no longer profitable models and (3) expand cryptocurrency mining operations to new locations.
Financial
As of June 30, 2021, we operated our cryptocurrency mining operations in two hosted facilities located in Carthage, New York and Kearney, Nebraska. The hosting and power purchase agreements for the two facilities require the Company to pay monthly a contractual rate per kilowatt hour of electricity consumed in the Company’s cryptocurrency mining operations.
Revenues from our cryptocurrency mining operations were $1,793,316 and $435,740 for the years ended June 30, 2021, respectively. Revenues from the sales of used equipment and parts were $58,074 and $18,430 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
When funds are available and market conditions allow, we also invest in certain denominations of cryptocurrencies to complement our mining operations. We consider these investments similar to marketable securities where we purchase and hold the cryptocurrencies for sale. We report realized gains and losses on the sales of cryptocurrencies net of transaction costs. As of June 30, 2021, our digital currencies at cost totaled $245,320 and were comprised of multiple denominations, primarily of Bitcoin (BTC), Ethereum (ETH) and Chainlink (LINK).
We have funded our operations primarily from cash generated from our digital currency mining operations and proceeds from convertible notes payable and preferred stock. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we received net proceeds from convertible notes payable of $563,000, Series C preferred stock of $1,125,000, Series D preferred stock of $3,000,000 and common stock of $8,135,000.
As of June 30, 2021, our convertible debt lenders had fully converted all debt to common stock and all derivative liabilities had been extinguished.
The Digital Asset Market
The Company is focusing on the mining of digital assets, as well as blockchain applications (“blockchain”) and related technologies. A blockchain is a shared immutable ledger for recording the history of transactions of digital assets-a business blockchain provides a permissioned network with known identities. A Bitcoin is the most recognized type of a digital asset that is issued by, and transmitted through, an open source, math-based protocol platform using cryptographic security that is known as the “Bitcoin Network.” The Bitcoin Network is an online, peer-to-peer user network that hosts the public transaction ledger, known as the blockchain, and the source code that comprises the basis for the cryptography and math-based protocols governing the Bitcoin Network.
Bitcoins, for example, can be used to pay for goods and services or can be converted to fiat currencies, such as the US Dollar, at rates determined on Bitcoin exchanges or in individual end-user-to-end-user transactions under a barter system. The networks utilized by digital coins are designed to operate without any company or government in charge, governed by a collaboration of volunteer programmers and computers that maintain all the records. These blockchains are typically maintained by a network of participants which run servers while securing their blockchain. Third party service providers such as Bitcoin exchanges and bitcoin third party payment processing services may charge significant fees for processing transactions and for converting, or facilitating the conversion of, bitcoins to or from fiat currency.
This market is rapidly evolving and there can be no assurances that we will remain competitive with industry participants that have or may have greater resources or experience in in this industry than us, nor that the unproven digital assets that we mine will ever have any significant market value.
The Company, like many cryptocurrency mining operators, is currently operating at a non-profitable status following record historic runs in market prices of digital currencies. Market prices of digital currencies have not been high enough to cover the operating costs of mining companies, including significant power costs and high levels of equipment depreciation. The Company is addressing these operational challenges through considering alternative sources of power, further consolidation of facilities, and potential hosting arrangements. There can be no assurance that the Company will be successful in these efforts and attain profitable levels of operations.
Financial Operations Review
We are incurring increased costs because of being a publicly traded company. As a public company, we incur significant legal, accounting, and other expenses that we did not incur as a private company. We also have paid compensation through the issuance of shares of our common stock, Series B preferred stock and warrants, the valuation of which has resulted in significant stock-based compensation. In addition, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as well as new rules subsequently implemented by the Securities and Exchange Commission, have required changes in corporate governance practices of public companies and will require us to comply with these rules. These new rules and regulations have will increase our legal and financial compliance costs and have made some activities more time-consuming and costlier. In addition, these new rules and regulations have made it more difficult and more expensive for us to obtain director and officer liability insurance, which we currently cannot afford to do. As a result of the new rules, it may become more difficult for us to attract and retain qualified persons to serve on our Board of Directors or as executive officers. We cannot predict or estimate the amount of additional costs we may incur as a result of being a public company or the timing of such costs.
To operate our digital currency mining facilities and to fund future operations, we will need to raise additional capital. The amount and timing of future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the timing and results of our ongoing development efforts, the potential expansion of our current development programs, potential new development programs and related general and administrative support. We anticipate that we will seek to fund our operations through further liquidation of our marketable securities, public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, such as potential collaboration agreements. We cannot be certain that anticipated additional financing will be available to us on favorable terms, or at all.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2021 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2020
Revenues
Our cryptocurrency mining revenues increased to $1,793,316 in the year ended June 30, 2021 from $435,740 in the year ended June 30, 2020. This increase in revenues resulted primarily from the Company replacing under-performing, non-serviceable mining equipment during the current fiscal year with new more efficient mining equipment and increasing the number of miners. Also, we expanded our cryptocurrency mining operations to a second location in Kearney, Nebraska near the end of the current fiscal year.
We also have revenues from the sale of cryptocurrency mining units that have been assembled or refurbished for resale and the sale of spare parts. Such sales totaled $58,074 and $18,430 in the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in sales of unused equipment and parts was due to the replacement of under-performing, non-serviceable mining equipment during the current fiscal year with new more efficient equipment. Sales of equipment and parts will fluctuate from period to period depending on the current retail demand for our model of cryptocurrency mining units and parts.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues was $920,376 and $996,409 in the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in cost of revenues in the current fiscal year is due primarily to a decrease in depreciation and amortization expense. Expenses associated with running our cryptocurrency mining operations, such as equipment depreciation and amortization, operating supplies, utilities, and consulting services are recorded as cost of revenues. Also included in cost of revenues are the costs of purchasing or assembling the cryptocurrency mining units sold. We reported a gross profit on revenues of $931,014 in the year ended June 30, 2021 and a gross loss of $542,239 in the year ended June 30, 2020. In prior year periods, we have reported a gross loss on revenues primarily due to lower revenues, high utility costs and a conservative, short useful life for mining equipment depreciation and amortization. Higher cryptocurrency mining revenues in the current year resulting from the implementation of more efficient mining equipment and the increase in the number of miners purchased also contributed to the gross profit on revenues.
Operating Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses increased to $6,061,741 in the year ended June 30, 2021 from $352,399 in the year ended June 30, 2020. The increases resulted primarily from higher professional and consulting fees relating to debt and equity financings and the increase in levels of cryptocurrency mining operations. Fluctuations in operating expenses from period to period result primarily from changes in consulting and professional fees and travel expenses.
We reported non-cash, related party stock-based compensation of $16,537,500 in the year ended June 30, 2021. On February 26, 2021 the Company issued to Steve Rubakh, our President, 350,000 total shares of Series B convertible preferred stock valued on an “as converted to common” basis at $16,537,500, using the closing market price of the Company’s common stock on that date. Each share of Series B preferred stock is convertible into 100 shares of the Company’s common stock. No related party stock-based compensation was incurred in the year ended June 30, 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Our other income (expense) was comprised of the following for the years ended June 30:
Our interest expense includes the amortization of debt discount and original issue discount for our convertible notes payable. These amounts vary from period to period depending on the timing of new borrowings and the conversion of the debt to common stock by the lenders. During the current fiscal year, our lenders completed the full conversion of our convertible notes payable, resulting in a decrease in interest expense compared to the prior fiscal year.
In the current fiscal year, we significantly increased our investing efforts in digital currencies. In addition to the currencies received as compensation for our mining services, we purchased various digital currencies totaling $7,374,678 and also converted currencies from one denomination to another based on our assessment of market conditions for each respective currency. The market values of individual currency denominations continually fluctuate, and the fluctuations may be material from day to day. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we received total proceeds of $9,211,118 from the sale of digital currencies and incurred transactions fees totaling $233,580, which are deducted from the gain or loss realized. We realized a loss on sale of digital currencies, after deducting transaction costs, of $22,948 in the year ended June 30, 2021 and a gain on sale of digital currencies, after deducting transaction costs, of $5,884 in the year ended June 30, 2020.
During the year ended June 30, 2021, we recognized a loss on change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $76,687 and during the year ended June 30, 2020, we recognized a gain on change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $782,258. During the year ended June 30, 2021, all convertible notes payable and other equity instruments with provisions identified as derivatives were extinguished through conversion to common shares and all related derivative liabilities were settled. We estimate the fair value of the derivatives associated with our convertible debt, options, warrants and other contracts using, as applicable, either the Black-Scholes pricing model or multinomial lattice models that value the derivative liability based on a probability weighted discounted cash flow model using future projections of the various potential outcomes. We estimate the fair value of the derivative liabilities at the inception of the financial instruments, and, in the case of our convertible notes payable, at the date of conversions to equity and at each reporting date, recording a derivative liability, debt discount, additional paid-in capital and a gain or loss on change in derivative liabilities as applicable. These estimates are based on multiple inputs, including the market price of our stock, interest rates, our stock price volatility, variable conversion prices based on market prices as defined in the respective agreements and probabilities of certain outcomes based on management projections. Since these inputs are subject to significant changes from period to period and to management’s judgment, the estimated fair value of the derivative liabilities will fluctuate from period to period, and the fluctuation may be material.
During the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, we disposed of and wrote off non-serviceable, defective mining equipment with a net book value of $238,363 and $162,451, respectively. The equipment disposed of was replaced with new, more efficient mining equipment.
We reported a gain on extinguishment of debt of $9,125 in the year ended June 30, 2021 due to favorable settlement of certain liabilities. We had no gain or loss on extinguishment of debt in the year ended June 30, 2020.
We reported a loss on conversion of debt of $4,592 in the year ended June 30, 2020. Gains or losses on extinguishment of debt result from conversion of convertible notes to common stock where the conversion terms were outside the related agreements. We did not report any gain or loss on extinguishment of debt during the year ended June 30, 2021.
During the year ended June 30, 2020, we incurred a digital currency theft loss of $33,037 where a hacker obtained unauthorized access to our online digital currency processing service and transferred digital currencies out of our account.
Net Loss
As a result, primarily from the non-cash related party stock-based compensation, we reported a net loss of $22,433,081 in the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to a net loss of $1,081,775 in the year ended June 30, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
As of June 30, 2021, we had total current assets of $2,295,157, including cash of $2,097,537 and prepaid expenses and other current assets of $197,620 and total current liabilities of $274,083. During the year ended June 30, 2021, our lenders converted in full their convertible notes payable and the related derivative liabilities were settled. We had total stockholders’ equity of $8,964,882 as of June 30, 2021 compared to a stockholders’ deficit of $109,603 as of June 30, 2020.
Most recently, in April 2021, we funded our operations and the acquisition of cryptocurrency mining equipment from the sale of 30,000,000 shares of our common stock to two institutional investors for total net proceeds of $8,135,000. Previously, in January and February 2021, we received proceeds totaling $4,125,000 from the issuance of Series C and D preferred stock, which are recorded at face value as mezzanine equity due to certain mandatory redemption features of the stock.
During the year ended June 30, 2021, we received net proceeds from convertible notes payable of $563,000, which debt was converted in full into shares of our common stock. We also funded the purchase of cryptocurrency mining equipment through short-term installment debt totaling $57,822.
On March 30, 2021, the Company entered into securities purchase agreements (the “Purchase Agreements”) with two institutional investors (the “Purchasers”), for the offering (the “Offering”) of (i) 30,000,000 shares of common stock (“Shares”), par value $0.001 per share, of the Company (“Common Stock”) and (ii) common stock purchase warrants (“Warrants”) to purchase up to an aggregate of 30,000,000 shares of Common Stock, which are exercisable for a period of five years after issuance at an initial exercise price of $0.30 per share, subject to certain adjustments, as provided in the Warrants. Each of the Purchasers received Warrants in the amount equal to 100% of the number of Shares purchased by such Purchaser. Each Share and accompanying Warrant were offered at a combined offering price of $0.30. Pursuant to the Purchase Agreements, the Purchasers purchased the Shares and accompanying Warrants for an aggregate purchase price of $9,000,000. The transaction closed on April 1, 2021, with the Company receiving proceeds of $8,135,000 after payment of expenses.
On January 14, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Series C Agreement”) with BHP Capital NY, Inc. (“BHP”), providing for the issuance and sale by the Company and the purchase by BHP of newly designated shares of Series C Convertible preferred stock issued by the Company at a purchase price per share of $1,000. The first closing under the Series C Agreement was held on January 22, 2021, at which the Company sold, and BHP purchased 750 shares of Series C preferred stock for $750,000. The Company received net proceeds of $740,000 after payment of legal fees. The Company also on that date issued 2,000,000 shares of its common stock to BHP as equity incentive shares.
Effective February 5, 2021, BHP purchased a second tranche consisting of 375,000 shares of Series C preferred stock for $375,000. As an equity incentive to this purchase of Series C preferred stock, the Company issued 1,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock to BHP.
On February 18, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement, dated as of February 18, 2021 (the “Series D Agreement”) with BHP providing for the issuance and sale by the Company and the purchase by BHP of shares of Series D preferred stock. At a closing held February 19, 2021, BHP initially purchased 3,000 shares of Series D preferred stock at a price of $1,000 per share for a total purchase price of $3,000,000. Included in the purchase price was a five-year warrant granting BHP the right to purchase 5,000,000 warrants, exercisable into shares of the Company’s common stock at a per share $0.60 per share.
Sources and Uses of Cash
We used net cash in operations of $1,567,715 in the year ended June 30, 2021 as a result of our net loss of $22,433,081, non-cash gain of $9,125, increases in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $194,370, digital currencies of $1,792,451 and decreases in accounts payable of $281,639 and due to related party of $93,550, partially offset by non-cash expenses totaling $23,217,836 and increase accrued expenses of $18,665.
We used net cash in operations of $671,101 in the year ended June 30, 2020 as a result of our net loss of $1,081,775, non-cash gains totaling $788,142, increase in digital currencies of $451,546, partially offset by non-cash expenses totaling $1,500,381 and increases in accounts payable of $45,415, accrued expenses of $51,513 and due to related party of $53,053.
During the year ended June 30, 2021, we used net cash in investing activities of $9,118,171, comprised of the increase in equipment deposits of $7,663,265, purchase of digital currencies of $7,374,678, and the purchase of property and equipment of $3,291,346, partially offset by net proceeds from the sale of digital currencies of $9,211,118.
During the year ended June 30, 2020, we had net cash provided by investing activities of $218,191 comprised of net proceeds from the sale of digital currencies of $714,126, partially offset by the purchase of property and equipment of $123,349 and purchase of digital currencies of $372,586.
During the year ended June 30, 2021, we had net cash provided by financing activities of $12,776,748 comprised of proceeds from convertible notes payable of $563,000, proceeds from the issuance of Series C preferred stock of $1,125,000, proceeds from the issuance of Series D preferred stock of $3,000,000, and proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $8,135,000, partially offset by repayment of notes payable of $46,252.
During the year ended June 30, 2020, we had net cash provided by financing activities of $411,275 comprised of proceeds from convertible notes payable of $534,000, proceeds from notes payable of $7,583, partially offset by repayment of convertible notes payable of $130,308.
We will have to raise funds to successfully operate our digital currency mining operations, purchase equipment and expand our operations to multiple facilities. We will have to borrow money from shareholders or issue debt or equity or enter a strategic arrangement with a third party. There can be no assurance that additional capital will be available to us.
Going Concern
The Company has reported recurring net losses since its inception and used net cash in operating activities of $1,567,715 in the year ended June 30, 2021. As of June 30, 2021, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $45,076,096. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP, which contemplate continuation of the Company as a going concern and the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The ability of the Company to reach a successful level of operations is dependent on the execution of management’s plans, which include the raising of capital through the debt and/or equity markets, until such time that funds provided by operations are sufficient to fund working capital requirements. If the Company were not to continue as a going concern, it would likely not be able to realize its assets at values comparable to the carrying value or the fair value estimates reflected in the balances set out in the preparation of the financial statements.
There can be no assurances that the Company will be successful in attaining a profitable level of operations or in generating additional cash from the equity/debt markets or other sources fund its operations. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability of assets and classification of assets and liabilities that might be necessary. Should the Company not be successful in its business plan or in obtaining the necessary financing to fund its operations, the Company would need to curtail certain or all operational activities and/or contemplate the sale of its assets, if necessary.
Current and Future Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a material negative impact on capital markets. While we continue to incur operating losses, we are currently dependent on debt or equity financing to fund our operations and execute our business plan. We believe that the impact on capital markets of COVID-19 may make it more costly and more difficult for us to access these sources of funding.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our significant accounting policies are disclosed in Note 2 to the accompanying financial statements. The following is a summary of those accounting policies that involve significant estimates and judgment of management.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Because of the use of estimates inherent in the financial reporting process, actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
Digital Currencies
Digital currencies consist of Bitcoin, Litecoin, ZCash and Ethereum, generally received for the Company’s own account as compensation for cryptocurrency mining services, and other digital currencies such as Chainlink and Quant purchased for short-term investment and trading purposes. Given that there is limited precedent regarding the classification and measurement of cryptocurrencies under current Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”), the Company has determined to account for these digital currencies as indefinite-lived intangible assets in accordance with Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, for the period covered by this report and in future reports unless and until further guidance is issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”). An intangible asset with an indefinite useful life is not amortized but assessed for impairment annually, or more frequently, when events or changes in circumstances occur indicating that it is more likely than not that the indefinite-lived asset is impaired. Impairment exists when the carrying amount exceeds its fair value. In testing for impairment, the Company has the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not than an impairment exists. If it is determined that it is more likely than not that an impairment exists, a quantitative impairment test is not necessary. If the Company concludes otherwise, it is required to perform a quantitative impairment test. To the extent an impairment loss is recognized, the loss establishes the new cost basis of the asset. Subsequent reversal of impairment losses is not permitted. Realized gains or losses on the sale of digital currencies, net of transaction costs, are included in other income (expense) in the statements of operations.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment, consisting primarily of computer and other cryptocurrency mining equipment (transaction verification servers), is stated at the lower of cost or estimated realizable value and is depreciated when placed into service using the straight-line method over estimated useful lives. The Company operates in an emerging industry for which limited data is available to make estimates of the useful economic lives of specialized equipment. Management has assessed the basis of depreciation of these assets and believes they should be depreciated over a three-year period due to technological obsolescence reflecting rapid development of hardware that has faster processing capacity and other factors. Maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred and improvements are capitalized. Gains or losses on the disposition of property and equipment are recorded upon disposal.
During the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company discontinued the use of damaged or non-serviceable mining equipment and wrote off its net book value of $238,363 and $162,451, respectively, to loss on disposition of property and equipment.
Management has determined that the three-year diminishing value best reflects the current expected useful life of transaction verification servers. This assessment takes into consideration the availability of historical data and management’s expectations regarding the direction of the industry including potential changes in technology. Management will review this estimate annually and will revise such estimates as and when data becomes available.
To the extent that any of the assumptions underlying management’s estimate of useful life of its transaction verification servers are subject to revision in a future reporting period, either as a result of changes in circumstances or through the availability of greater quantities of data, then the estimated useful life could change and have a prospective impact on depreciation expense and the carrying amounts of these assets.
Payments to equipment suppliers prior to shipment of the equipment are recorded as equipment deposits.
Derivatives
The Company evaluates its convertible debt, options, warrants or other contracts to determine if those contracts or embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives to be separately accounted for. The result of this accounting treatment is that under certain circumstances the fair value of the derivative is marked-to-market each balance sheet date and recorded as a liability. In the event that the fair value is recorded as a liability, the change in fair value is recorded in the statement of operations as other income or expense. Upon conversion or exercise of a derivative instrument, the instrument is marked to fair value at the conversion date and then that fair value is reclassified to equity. Equity instruments that are initially classified as equity that become subject to reclassification under this accounting standard are reclassified to liability at the fair value of the instrument on the reclassification date.
Where the number of warrants or common shares to be issued under these agreements is indeterminate, the Company has concluded that the equity environment is tainted, and all additional warrants and convertible debt are included in the value of the derivatives.
We estimate the fair value of the derivatives associated with our convertible notes payable, common stock issuable pursuant to a Series B preferred stock Exchange Agreement and a stock subscription payable using, as applicable, either the Black-Scholes pricing model or multinomial lattice models that value the derivative liability based on a probability weighted discounted cash flow model using future projections of the various potential outcomes. We estimate the fair value of the derivative liabilities at the inception of the financial instruments, and, in the case of our convertible notes payable, at the date of conversions to equity and at each reporting date, recording a derivative liability, debt discount, additional paid-in capital and a gain or loss on change in derivative liabilities as applicable. These estimates are based on multiple inputs, including the market price of our stock, interest rates, our stock price volatility, variable conversion prices based on market prices as defined in the respective agreements and probabilities of certain outcomes based on management projections. These inputs are subject to significant changes from period to period and to management’s judgment; therefore, the estimated fair value of the derivative liabilities will fluctuate from period to period, and the fluctuation may be material.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
All assets, including intangible assets subject to amortization, are reviewed for impairment when changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable in accordance with ASC 350 and ASC 360. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the expected undiscounted cash flows of the asset, an impairment charge is recognized equal to the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds fair value or net realizable value. The testing of these intangibles under established guidelines for impairment requires significant use of judgment and assumptions. Changes in forecasted operations and other assumptions could materially affect the estimated fair values. Changes in business conditions could potentially require adjustments to these asset valuations. We reported no impairment expense for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Disclosures about fair value of financial instruments require disclosure of the fair value information, whether or not recognized in the balance sheet, where it is practicable to estimate that value. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, the amounts reported for cash, prepaid expenses and other current assets, equipment deposits, accounts payable, accrued preferred stock dividends, accrued expenses, due to related party and notes payable approximate fair value because of their short maturities.
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. ASC Topic 820 established a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (level 1measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (level 3 measurements). These tiers include:
·
Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets;
·
Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and
·
Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
Our derivative liabilities are measured at fair value on a recurring basis and estimated as follows:
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for all equity-based payments in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. ASC Topic 718 requires companies to recognize in the statement of operations the grant-date fair value of stock awards, stock options, warrants and other equity-based compensation issued to employees. The value of the portion of an award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense over the requisite service periods using the straight-line attribution method. The fair value of a stock award is recorded at the fair market value of a share of the Company’s stock on the grant date. The Company estimates the fair value of stock options and warrants at the grant date by using an appropriate fair value model such as the Black-Scholes option pricing model or multinomial lattice models.
The Company accounts for non-employee share-based awards based upon ASC 505-50, Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees. ASC 505-50 requires the costs of goods and services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments to be recognized using the fair value of the goods and services or the fair value of the equity award, whichever is more reliably measurable. The fair value of the equity award is determined on the measurement date, which is the earlier of the date that a performance commitment is reached or the date that performance is complete. Generally, our awards do not entail performance commitments. When an award vests over time such that performance occurs over multiple reporting periods, we estimate the fair value of the award as of the end of each reporting period and recognize an appropriate portion of the cost based on the fair value on that date. When the award vests, we adjust the cost previously recognized so that the cost ultimately recognized is equivalent to the fair value on the date the performance is complete.
Revenue Recognition
Effective July 1, 2018, we adopted ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, as amended, using the modified retrospective method, which requires the cumulative effect of adoption to be recognized as an adjustment to opening retained earnings in the period of adoption. There was no cumulative effect of adopting the new standard and no impact on our financial statements. The new standard provides a single comprehensive model to be used in the accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes current revenue recognition guidance, including industry-specific guidance. The standard’s stated core principle is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this core principle, ASC 606 includes provisions within a five-step model that includes identifying the contract with a customer, identifying the performance obligations in the contract, determining the transaction price, allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations, and recognizing revenue when, or as, an entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Our revenues currently consist of cryptocurrency mining revenues and revenues from the sale of cryptocurrency mining equipment recognized in accordance with ASC 606 as discussed above. Amounts collected from customers prior to shipment of products are recorded as deferred revenue.
The Company earns its cryptocurrency mining revenues by providing transaction verification services within the digital currency networks of cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin, Litecoin, ZCash and Ethereum. The Company satisfies its performance obligation at the point in time that the Company is awarded a unit of digital currency through its participation in the applicable network and network participants benefit from the Company’s verification service. In consideration for these services, the Company receives digital currencies, net of applicable network fees, which are recorded as revenue using the closing U.S. dollar price of the related cryptocurrency on the date of receipt. Expenses associated with running the cryptocurrency mining operations, such as equipment depreciation, rent, operating supplies, rent, utilities and monitoring services are recorded as cost of revenues.
There is currently no specific definitive guidance in GAAP or alternative accounting frameworks for the accounting for the production and mining of digital currencies and management has exercised significant judgment in determining appropriate accounting treatment for the recognition of revenue for mining of digital currencies. Management has examined various factors surrounding the substance of the Company’s operations and the guidance in ASC 606, including identifying the transaction price, when performance obligations are satisfied, and collectability is reasonably assured being the completion and addition of a block to a blockchain and the award of a unit of digital currency to the Company. In the event authoritative guidance is enacted by the FASB, the Company may be required to change its policies which could result in a change in the Company’s financial statements.
OFF BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Operating Leases
As of June 30, 2021, the Company had no obligation for future lease payments under non-cancelable operating leases. However, the Company has entered into two agreements described below related to its crypto currency mining operations pursuant to which the Company’s sole obligation is to pay monthly a contractual rate per kilowatt hour of electricity consumed.
PetaWatt Agreements
Power Supply and Purchase Agreement
In May 2019, the Company consolidated its then cryptocurrency operations in one facility in Carthage, New York. The Carthage power supply and purchase agreement with PetaWatt Properties, LLC (“PetaWatt”) was entered into on May 10, 2019 for an initial term of 90 days, with an option to continue the agreement for a subsequent 36 months, which option the Company has exercised. The Company’s sole obligation under the agreement is to pay monthly a contractual rate per kilowatt hour of electricity consumed in the Company’s cryptocurrency mining operations. This agreement was superseded on May 7, 2021 with a new Lease, Hosting, and Energy Services Agreement with PetaWatt.
Lease, Hosting, and Energy Services Agreement
On May 7, 2021, the Company and PetaWatt entered into a Lease, Hosting and Energy Services Agreement for the Carthage, New York facility for a period of 36 months. The Company’s sole obligation under the agreement is to pay monthly a contractual rate per kilowatt hour of electricity consumed in the Company’s cryptocurrency mining operations. The Company made a prepayment of $300,000 upon signing the agreement, to be drawn down with monthly invoices submitted to the Company by PetaWatt. As of June 30, 2021, the remaining prepayment balance was $193,870, which amount was included in prepaid expenses and other current assets in the accompanying balance sheet.
Compute North Master Agreement
On March 8, 2021, the Company and Compute North LLC (“Compute North”) entered into a Master Agreement for the colocation and management of the Company’s cryptocurrency mining operations. The Company submits Order Forms to Compute North to determine the location of the hosted facilities, the number of cryptocurrency miners, the term of the services provided and the contractual rate per kilowatt hour of electricity consumed in the Company’s cryptocurrency mining operations. The agreement also provides the Company the option to purchase cryptocurrency mining equipment from Compute North. The initial Order form was for 425 miners in Kearney, Nebraska for a term of 3 years and 250 miners in Savoy, Texas for a term of 3 years. The parties subsequently consolidated the cryptocurrency mining operations in the Kearney, Nebraska facility. Through June 30, 2021, the Company paid set up fees of $37,931 with its ongoing obligation under the agreement to pay monthly a contractual rate per kilowatt hour of electricity consumed in the Company’s cryptocurrency mining operations. Our Nebraska operations commenced in September 2021. The Company has expanded its relationship with Compute North by securing additional capacity for 1,000 miners, starting in April 2022.
Equipment Purchase Agreement
On April 12, 2021, we entered into a Non-fixed Price Sales and Purchase Agreement with Bitmain Technologies Limited (“Bitmain”) (the “Bitmain Agreement”) to purchase from Bitmain cryptocurrency mining hardware and other equipment in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Bitmain Agreement. Bitmain is scheduled to manufacture and ship miners on monthly basis, in 12 equal batches of 400 units, starting in August 2021 and through July 2022. The Purchase Agreement remains in effect until the delivery of the last batch of products. The total purchase price was approximately $34,047,600, subject to price adjustments and related offsets. The total purchase price is payable as follows: (i) 25% of the total purchase price is due upon the execution of the Agreement or no later than April 19, 2021; (ii) 35% of the total purchase price, is due by May 30, 2021; and (iii) the remaining 40% of the total purchase price, is payable monthly starting in June 2021.
The Company entered into a separate agreement with Wattum Management, Inc. (“Wattum”), a non-related party, whereby Wattum agreed to share 50% of the purchase obligation under the Bitmain Agreement, including reimbursing the Company for 50% of the equipment deposits paid by the Company to Bitmain.
As of June 30, 2021, the Company had paid a total of $7,663,265 in equipment deposits, including $6,554,190 paid to Bitmain under the Bitmain Agreement (net of Wattum reimbursements).
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING POLICIES
There were no new accounting pronouncements issued or proposed by the FASB during the year ended June 30, 2021 and through the date of filing this report which the Company believes will have a material impact on its financial statements.