Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Our Business
We develop, sell and support products that protect any-sized company or government organization by fusing advanced threat intelligence with real-time artificial intelligence to neutralize cyberattacks as they occur - including Zero-Day attacks. We market and distribute our solutions through a direct sales force and value-added resellers. Our end-user customers include U.S. federal government entities, state and local government entities, and companies ranging in size from mid-market to large enterprises.
Our Solutions
INTRUSION Shield
INTRUSION Shield, our cornerstone cybersecurity solution is a comprehensive, real-time AI-based Security-as-a-Service that inspects and kills all dangerous network connections before they can do damage. What makes our approach unique is that it inspects every packet of inbound and outbound traffic and analyzes the reputation of the IP addresses (source and destination), the domain and ports it is communicating on, along with many other fields in the packet to neutralize malicious connections.
Most breaches today are caused by malware free compromises that trigger no alarms in a firewall or endpoint solution. The common denominator is network communications, which Shield monitors and analyses, allowing Shield to identify and stop all attacks, even malware-free attacks. Shield’s capabilities continuously evolve based on constant machine learning and neural networking technology. Unlike traditional industry approaches that rely heavily on human mitigation and defensive approaches, which malicious actors and nation states have learned to bypass, Shield’s proprietary architecture isolates and neutralizes malicious traffic and network flows that existing solutions cannot identify before they harm a corporation or government organization.
Shield is designed as a next generation Network Detection and Response solution. After 30 years of providing research, analysis, tools and services to the federal government and enterprise corporations, Intrusion possesses a comprehensive and proprietary data set of petabytes of Internet traffic, including information about the activities of malicious online actors. Shield integrates this rich TraceCop data set with artificial intelligence (AI) and Savant real-time process flow technology to provide our customers with a unique and affordable tool to detect, identify, and neutralize cyberattacks. In particular, the Shield AI has been specifically trained to identify and stop Zero-Day attacks and ransomware, the most prolific and crippling forms of malware today.
INTRUSION TraceCop
INTRUSION TraceCop is our big data tool with extensive IP intelligence canvassing the entire Internet. It contains largest repository of reputation information on known good and known bad active IP addresses (both IPv4 and IPv6). TraceCop contains an inventory of network selectors and enrichments useful to support forensic investigations. The data contains a history of IPv4 and IPv6 block allocations and transfers, historical mappings of IP addresses to Autonomous Systems (ASNs) as observed through BGP, and approximately one billion historically registered domain names and registration context. TraceCop contains tens of billions of historic DNS resolutions of Fully Qualified Domain Names (FQDNs or hostnames) on each of these domains. Together, this shows relationships, hosting, and attribution for Internet resources. TraceCop also contains web server content surveys of content, such as natural language and topic of the content on hundreds of millions of websites and servers and OS fingerprints of services showing applications running on an IP. This context allows Shield to assess the use and purpose of an Internet resource. TraceCop also contains a history of threat and reputation for each hostname and IP address over time. All this makes it a very effective network forensics and cybersecurity analysis tool to inform Shield.
INTRUSION Savant
INTRUSION Savant is a network monitoring solution that leverages the rich data available in TraceCop to identify suspicious traffic in real-time. Savant uses several original patents to uniquely characterize and record all network flows. Savant is a network reconnaissance and attack analysis tool used by forensic analysts in the DoD, Federal Government and corporations with in-house threat research teams. For example, Savant users can create various automated rules to inspect packets matching (or not) certain criteria such as creating a rule to ensure the Source MAC address field in the Ethernet header and Source IP address from the IP header are always the same, failing which could indicate MAC or IP Spoofing in progress. Similarly, threat investigators can create rules using regular expressions by combining multiple fields in the packet headers. Ultimately, the rich capabilities of Savant provides the real-time analysis that Shield uses to make decisions on whether or not a packet is malicious.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to product returns, bad debts, inventories, income taxes, warranty obligations, maintenance contracts and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We generally recognize product revenue upon shipment or after meeting certain performance obligations. These products can include hardware, perpetual software licenses and data sets. Data set updates are the majority of sales. We do not currently offer software on a subscription basis. Warranty costs and sales returns for our current products have not been material.
We recognize sales of our data sets in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 606 whereby revenue from contracts with customers is not recognized until all five of the following have been met:
· identify the contract with a customer;
· identify the performance obligations in the contract;
· determine the transaction price;
· allocate the transaction price to the separate performance obligations; and
· recognize revenue upon satisfaction of a performance obligation.
Data updates are typically done monthly, and revenue will be matched accordingly. Product sales may include maintenance and customer support allocated revenue in an arrangement using estimated selling prices of the delivered goods and services based on a selling price hierarchy using the relative selling price method. All of our solution offering and service offering market values are readily determined based on current and prior stand-alone sales. We may defer and recognize maintenance, updates and support revenue over the term of the contract period, which is generally one year.
Service revenue, primarily including maintenance, training and installation, are recognized upon delivery of the service and typically are unrelated to product sales. To date, maintenance, training and installation revenue has not been material. Our normal payment terms offered to customers, distributors and resellers are net 30 days domestically and net 45 days internationally. We do not offer payment terms that extend beyond one year and rarely do we extend payment terms beyond our normal terms. If certain customers do not meet our credit standards, we do require payment in advance to limit our credit exposure.
Shipping and handling costs are billed to the customer and included in product revenue. Shipping and handling expenses are included in cost of product revenue.
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. Our receivables are uncollateralized, and we expect to continue this policy in the future. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, increased allowances may be required. Historically, our estimates for sales returns and doubtful accounts have not differed materially from actual results.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
We calculate the fair value of our assets and liabilities which qualify as financial instruments and include additional information in the notes to consolidated financial statements when the fair value is different than the carrying value of these financial instruments. The estimated fair value of accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued expenses, and dividends payable approximate their carrying amounts due to the relatively short maturity of these instruments. Financing leases and PPP loan approximate fair value as they bear market rates of interest.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth, for the periods indicated, certain financial data as a percentage of net revenue.
2020 compared with 2019
Net Revenue
Total revenue decreased 51.5% to $6.6 million in 2020 from $13.6 million in 2019. We did not meet sales projections for our TraceCop product line. We expect our product revenues to increase in the future if we can increase sales to existing customers and add new customers.
There were no export sales in 2020 and 2019 primarily due to our focus on domestic revenue sales. Sales of our products internationally may be subject to currency exchange risk, which may cause our products to effectively increase in price, if the exchange rate moves significantly and the dollar gains value over the foreign currency.
Historically, due to the timing of our sales cycle, a significant portion of our monthly sales occurs in the second half of the month. Accordingly, our receivables increase at the end of each month, which causes a higher accounts receivable balance at month end. This monthly trend also causes an inflated comparative relationship between revenue and accounts receivable. We believe that this monthly trend will continue because monthly sales forecast and planning meetings are held in the first week of every month, the middle of the month is focused on sales calls to customers and the latter half of the month on closing sales.
Gross Profit
Gross profit decreased 52.9% to $3.9 million in 2020 from $8.3 million in 2019. As a percentage of net revenue, gross profit decreased from 60.8% in 2019 to 59.1% in 2020. Gross profit as a percentage of revenue, decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 because of higher labor costs related to certain projects.
Gross profit as a percentage of net revenue is impacted by several factors, including shifts in product mix, changes in channels of distribution, sales volume, fluctuations in manufacturing costs, labor costs, pricing strategies, and fluctuations in sales of integrated third-party products.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased to $3.8 million or 57.7% of net revenue in 2020, compared to $1.3 million or 9.5% of net revenue in 2019. The increase in sales and marketing expense was primarily two activities: building, training, and preparing a sales department to sell our new commercial product in 2021; and applying a dedicated $1.2 million marketing and promotion budget. Sales and marketing expenses may vary in the future. We expect sales and marketing expenses to increase if net revenue levels increase in 2021.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased to $3.8 million or 57.4% of net revenue in 2020 compared to $1.3 million or 9.6% of net revenue in 2019. The increase in research and development expense was due to less labor expense shifted to direct labor costs. Our research and development costs are expensed in the period in which they are incurred. We expect research and development expenses to increase if we are able to increase net revenue levels in 2021. Research and development expense levels may fluctuate due to labor expense shifting to direct labor.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased to $2.8 million, or 42.5% of net revenue in 2020 compared to $1.2 million or 8.7% of net revenue in 2019. This was primarily a result of a non-cash write off for a $1.1 million abandoned operating lease asset. Other contributing expenses were related to increases in administrative and Human Resources. Excluding the $1.1 million non-cash write off for the abandonment of prior office lease, we expect general and administration expenses to remain constant but increase if net revenue levels increase in 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased to $6 thousand in 2020, compared to $46 thousand in 2019. Interest expense decreased due to a combination of a zero balance under an unsecured revolving promissory note to borrow up to $3,700,000 from G. Ward Paxton, the Company’s former Chief Executive Officer (the “CEO Note”) and declining balances in financial leases and remained steady for operating leases. Interest expense will vary in the future based on our cash flow and borrowing needs.
Interest Income
Interest income earned on bank deposits was $11 thousand in 2020 compared to $4 thousand in 2019.
Income Taxes
Our effective income tax rate was 0% in 2020 and 2019 as valuation allowances have been recorded for the entire amount of the net deferred tax assets due to uncertainty of realization. On December 22, 2017, the U.S. enacted the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“the Tax Act”) which significantly changed U.S. tax law. The Tax Act lowered the Company’s statutory federal income tax rate from a maximum of 39% to a rate of 21% effective January 1, 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal source of liquidity at December 31, 2020 was $16.7 million of cash and cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2020, we did not hold investments with a stated maturity beyond one year. Working capital at December 31, 2020 was $16.2 million, while at December 31, 2019, it was $3.1 million.
Net cash used in operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, was $5.2 million due primarily to a net loss of $6.5 million and the following uses of cash: a $339 thousand decrease in deferred revenue, a $258 thousand increase in prepaid expenses and other assets, and a $334 thousand decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses. This was partially offset by these sources of cash and non-cash items: a $1.1 million non-cash write-off for an abandoned operating lease asset, a $333 thousand decrease in accounts receivable, $322 thousand in stock-based compensation, $231 thousand in depreciation expense and amortization expense, and $294 thousand in noncash lease costs.
Net cash provided by operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, was $4.3 million due primarily to a net income of $4.5 million and the following sources of cash and non-cash items: $232 thousand in noncash lease costs, a $401 thousand decrease in accounts receivable, $184 thousand in depreciation expense and amortization expense, $47 thousand in stock-based compensation, and $6 thousand in waived penalties on dividends. This was partially offset by a $496 thousand decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses, a $488 thousand decrease in deferred revenue, and a $61 thousand increase in prepaid expenses and other assets. Future fluctuations in accounts receivable, inventory balances and accounts payable will be dependent upon several factors, including quarterly sales, timely collection of accounts receivable, and the accuracy of our forecasts of product demand and component requirements.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 was $320 thousand for purchases of property and equipment. Net cash used in investing activities in 2019 was $260 thousand for purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $18.9 million with proceeds of $18.2 million from a stock offering, $629 thousand from a PPP loan, and proceeds from exercise of stock options of $209 thousand. This was directly offset by the following uses of cash: payments for preferred stock dividends of $99 thousand and payment on principal of finance right-of-use leases of $43 thousand. Net cash used in financing activities in 2019 was $2.3 million primarily due to payments on the loan by an officer of $1.8 million, $714 thousand payment of dividends on preferred stock, and $58 thousand payments on principal on financing leases. This was directly offset by a provision of cash of $239 thousand from the exercise of stock options.
At December 31, 2020, we had a commitment of $21 thousand for future finance lease liabilities. Operating lease commitments of $2.6 million are detailed in the Contractual Obligations section below. At December 31, 2019, we had a commitment of $66 thousand for future finance lease liabilities, while operating lease commitments were $1.8 million. During 2020, we funded our operations through the use of available cash and cash equivalents.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $16.7 million, up from approximately $3.3 million as of December 31, 2019. We generated a net loss of $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a net income of $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We expect to fund our operations through anticipated Company profits together with the approximately $18 million in net proceeds we received from our Secondary Public Offering, which we believe will be sufficient to finance our operations, the additional expenses of marketing, promoting, and selling our new Shield solution and the development of its follow-on solutions, as well as other expected capital expenditures for the next twelve months.
We may explore the possible acquisitions of businesses, products and technologies that are complementary to our existing business. We are continuing to identify and prioritize additional security technologies, which we may wish to develop, either internally or through the licensing, or acquisition of products from third parties. While we may engage from time to time in discussions with respect to potential acquisitions, there can be no assurances that any such acquisitions will be made or that we will be able to successfully integrate any acquired business. In order to finance such acquisitions and working capital it may be necessary for us to raise additional funds through public or private financings. Any equity or debt financings, if available at all, may be on terms, which are not favorable to us and, in the case of equity financings, may result in dilution to our stockholders.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth certain information concerning the future contractual obligations under our leases at December 31, 2020. We had no other significant contractual obligations at December 31, 2020.
Future minimum lease obligations consisted of the following at December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
*Interest is imputed for operating ROU leases and classified as lease expense and is included in operating expenses in the accompanying condensed consolidated statement of operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any significant off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 Consolidated Financial Statements