ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) is intended to facilitate an understanding of our business and results of operations. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, our operating expenses, and future payments under our collaboration agreements, includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Such statements are based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part I above for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. See the section entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements” above for more information.
Management Overview
Innoviva, Inc. (“Innoviva”, the “Company”, the “Registrant” or “we” and other similar pronouns) is a company with a portfolio of royalties and other healthcare assets. Our royalty portfolio contains respiratory assets partnered with Glaxo Group Limited (“GSK”), including RELVAR ®/BREO ® ELLIPTA ® (fluticasone furoate/ vilanterol, “FF/VI”), ANORO ® ELLIPTA ® (umeclidinium bromide/ vilanterol, “UMEC/VI”) and TRELEGY ® ELLIPTA ® (the combination FF/UMEC/VI). Under the Long-Acting Beta2 Agonist (“LABA”) Collaboration Agreement, Innoviva is entitled to receive royalties from GSK on sales of RELVAR®/BREO ® ELLIPTA ® as follows: 15% on the first $3.0 billion of annual global net sales and 5% for all annual global net sales above $3.0 billion; and royalties from the sales of ANORO ® ELLIPTA ® which tier upward at a range from 6.5% to 10%. Innoviva is also entitled to 15% of royalty payments made by GSK under its agreements originally entered into with us, and since assigned to Theravance Respiratory Company, LLC (“TRC”), including TRELEGY ® ELLIPTA ® and any other product or combination of products that may be discovered or developed in the future under the LABA Collaboration Agreement and the Strategic Alliance Agreement with GSK (referred to herein as the “GSK Agreements”), which have been assigned to TRC other than RELVAR ®/BREO ® ELLIPTA ® and ANORO ® ELLIPTA ®.
Our company structure and organization are tailored to our focused activities of managing our respiratory assets partnered with GSK, including the commercial and developmental obligations associated with the GSK Agreements, optimizing capital allocation, and providing for certain essential reporting and management functions of a public company. As of December 31, 2020, we had five employees. Our revenues consist of royalties from our respiratory partnership agreements with GSK.
Financial Highlights
In the year ended December 31, 2020, the net income attributable to Innoviva stockholders was $224.4 million, an increase of $67.1 million from net income of $157.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the $50.3 million of change in fair values of equity and other long-term investments recognized in the year ended December 31, 2020 as further described below. Cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities totaled $246.5 million, total value of our equity and other long-term investments was $438.3 million, and royalty receivable was $93.9 million as of December 31, 2020.
Collaborative Arrangements with GSK
LABA Collaboration
In November 2002, we entered into LABA collaboration with GSK to develop and commercialize once-daily LABA products for the treatment of COPD and asthma (the “LABA Collaboration Agreement”). For the treatment of COPD, the collaboration has developed three combination products:
● RELVAR®/BREO® ELLIPTA® (“FF/VI”) (BREO® ELLIPTA® is the proprietary name in the U.S. and Canada and RELVAR® ELLIPTA® is the proprietary name outside the U.S. and Canada), a once-daily combination medicine consisting of a LABA, vilanterol (VI), and an inhaled corticosteroid (“ICS”), fluticasone furoate (“FF”),
● ANORO® ELLIPTA® (“UMEC/VI”), a once-daily medicine combining a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (“LAMA”), umeclidinium bromide (“UMEC”), with a LABA, vilanterol (VI), and
● TRELEGY® ELLIPTA® (the combination FF/UMEC/VI), a once-daily combination medicine consisting of an ICS, LAMA and LABA.
As a result of the launch and approval of RELVAR®/BREO® ELLIPTA® and ANORO® ELLIPTA® in the U.S., Japan and Europe, in accordance with the LABA Collaboration Agreement, we paid milestone fees to GSK totaling $220.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2014. Although we have no further milestone payment obligations to GSK pursuant to the LABA Collaboration Agreement, we continue to have ongoing commercialization activities under the LABA Collaboration Agreement, including participation in the joint steering committee and joint project committee that are expected to continue over the life of the agreement. The milestone fees paid to GSK were recognized as capitalized fees paid to a related party, which are being amortized over their estimated useful lives commencing upon the commercial launch of the products.
We are entitled to receive royalties from GSK on sales of RELVAR®/BREO® ELLIPTA® as follows: 15% on the first $3.0 billion of annual global net sales and 5% for all annual global net sales above $3.0 billion. For other products combined with a LABA from the LABA collaboration, such as ANORO® ELLIPTA®, royalties are upward tiering and range from 6.5% to 10%.
We are also entitled to 15% of royalty payments made by GSK under its agreements originally entered into with us, and since assigned to TRC in connection with the Spin-off including TRELEGY® ELLIPTA®, which royalties are upward tiering and range from 6.5% to 10%.
2004 Strategic Alliance
In March 2004, we entered into the Strategic Alliance Agreement with GSK where GSK received an option to license exclusive development and commercialization rights to product candidates from certain of our discovery programs on pre-determined terms and on an exclusive, worldwide basis. In 2005, GSK licensed our MABA program for the treatment of COPD, and in October 2011, we and GSK expanded the MABA program by adding six additional Innoviva-discovered preclinical MABA compounds (the “Additional MABAs”). The development program was funded in full by GSK. In June of 2020, GSK terminated the program and agreed to pay a $10.0 million termination fee to TRC. This fee was recognized as revenue from collaborative arrangements with a related party on our consolidated statements of income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Strategic Partnership with Sarissa Capital
Strategic Advisory Agreement
On December 11, 2020, we entered into a Strategic Advisory Agreement (the “Services Agreement”) with Sarissa Capital Management LP (“Sarissa Capital”), pursuant to which Sarissa Capital provides a variety of strategic services to us in order to assist us in the development and execution of our acquisition strategy. The services shall be provided free of charge to us. Sarissa Capital is considered to be a related party due to its investment in Innoviva and its representation on our Board of Directors.
Partnership Agreement
On December 11, 2020, Innoviva Strategic Partners LLC, our wholly owned subsidiary (“Strategic Partners”), entered into a subscription agreement (the “Subscription Agreement”) and an Amended and Restated Limited Partnership Agreement (the “Partnership Agreement”) pursuant to which Strategic Partners became a limited partner of ISP Fund LP (the “Partnership”). The general partner of the Partnership (the “General Partner”) is an affiliate of Sarissa Capital and, pursuant to an investment management agreement, Sarissa Capital acts as the investment adviser to the Partnership. Strategic Partners made a $300 million initial contribution into the Partnership. The Partnership was formed for the purposes of investing in “long-only” securities in the healthcare, pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries. The Partnership Agreement provides for Sarissa Capital to receive a customary one percent management fee from the Partnership, payable quarterly in advance, measured based on the Net Asset Value of Strategic Partners’ capital account in the Partnership. In addition, the General Partner is entitled to a customary 10% annual performance allocation based on the Net Profits of the Partnership during the annual measurement period. The Partnership Agreement includes a lock-up period of thirty-six months after which Strategic Partners is entitled to make withdrawals from the Partnership as of such lock-up expiration date and each anniversary thereafter, subject to certain limitations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. Revenue is recognized through a five-step process: (i) identify the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price for the contract; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) a performance obligation is satisfied. We recognize our royalty revenue on net sales of products with respect to which we have contractual royalty rights in the period in which the royalties are earned and reported to us. Royalties are recognized net of amortization of capitalized fees associated with any approval and launch milestone payments made to GSK.
Under the GSK Agreements, we recognized net revenue of $326.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $261.0 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. We also recognized a $10.0 million termination fee related to the MABA program with GSK as revenue from collaborative arrangements with a related party on our consolidated statements of income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Capitalized Fees paid to a Related Party
We capitalize fees paid to licensors related to agreements for certain approved products or commercialized products (“Capitalized Fees”). Our gross Capitalized Fees of $220.0 million as of December 31, 2020 consist of registrational and launch-related milestone fees paid to GSK. We capitalized these fees as capitalized fees paid to a related party and amortize these Capitalized Fees on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives upon the commercial launch of the products. The estimated useful lives of these Capitalized Fees are based on a country-by-country and product-by-product basis, as the later of the expiration or termination of the last patent right covering the compound in such product in such country and 15 years from first commercial sale of such product in such country, unless the Collaboration Agreement is terminated earlier. Consistent with our policy for classification of costs under the research and development collaborative arrangements, the amortization of these Capitalized Fees is recognized as a reduction of royalty revenue. Amortization expense for each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 was $13.8 million. The remaining estimated amortization expense is $13.8 million for each of the years from 2021 to 2025 and $56.3 million thereafter.
We review our Capitalized Fees for impairment on a product-by-product basis for each major geographic area when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. The recoverability of Capitalized Fees is measured by comparing the asset’s carrying amount to the expected undiscounted future cash flows that the asset is expected to generate. The determination of recoverability typically requires various estimates and assumptions, including estimating the useful life over which cash flows will occur, their amount, and the asset’s residual value, if any. We derive the required cash flow estimates from near-term forecasted product sales and long-term projected sales in the corresponding market. Based upon our analyses, no impairment charges have been recorded on the Capitalized Fees as of December 31, 2020.
Variable Interest Entities
We evaluate our ownership, contractual and other interest in the entities that we invest in to determine if they are variable interest entities (“VIEs”), whether we have a variable interest in those entities and the nature and extent of those interests. Such evaluation is performed continually throughout the entire period when we stay involved with these entities. Based on our evaluation, if we determine we are the primary beneficiary of a VIE, we consolidate the entity’s financial results into our financial statements.
We consolidate the financial results of TRC and Pulmoquine Therapeutics, Inc. (“Pulmoquine”), which we have determined to be VIEs, because we have the power to direct the economically significant activities of these entities and the obligation to absorb losses of, or the right to receive benefits from them, and we are the primary beneficiary of the entities. We also consolidate the financial results of ISP Fund LP that we partner with Sarissa Capital because we have determined that the Partnership is a VIE and Strategic Partners is the primary beneficiary of this VIE.
Equity and Other Long-Term Investments
As part of our capital allocation strategies, we invest from time to time in equity securities of private or public companies. We also enter into strategic partnerships in order to accelerate the execution of our strategy and enhance returns on our capital. If we determine that we have control over these companies or partnerships, we consolidate the financial statements of the company or partnership. If we determine that we do not have control over these companies or partnerships under either voting or VIE models, we then determine if we have an ability to exercise significant influence via voting interests, board representation or other business relationships.
We may account for the equity investments where we exercise significant influence using either an equity method of accounting or at fair value by electing the fair value option under Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 825, Financial Instruments. If the fair value option is applied to an investment that would otherwise be accounted for under the equity method, we apply it to all our financial interests in the same entity (equity and debt, including guarantees) that are eligible items. All gains and losses from fair value changes, unrealized and realized, are presented as changes in fair values of equity investments, net on the consolidated statements of income.
If we conclude that we do not have an ability to exercise significant influence over an investee, we may elect to account for an equity security without a readily determinable fair value using the measurement alternative as prescribed by ASC Topic 825. This measurement alternative allows us to measure the equity investment at its cost minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer.
Equity investments in common stock and warrants of Armata Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (NYSE American: ARMP) (“Armata") and Entasis Therapeutics Holdings Inc. (NASDAQ: ETTX) ("Entasis”) are accounted for at fair value. The equity investments are included in equity and other long-term investments on the consolidated balance sheets.
In October of 2020, TRC acquired 20,469,432 shares of Series C preferred stock and warrants to purchase 5,117,358 shares of InCarda Therapeutics Inc. (“InCarda”) in the total amount of $15.0 million. The Series C preferred stock is accounted for using the measurement alternative and the warrants are recorded at fair value using the Black-Scholes-Merton pricing model. The InCarda Series C preferred stock and warrants are included in equity and other long-term investments on the consolidated balance sheets.
Investments held in the ISP Fund LP by Strategic Partners pursuant to the Partnership Agreement are accounted for at fair value and included in equity and other long-term investments on our consolidated balance sheets.
Fair Value of Stock-Based Compensation Awards
We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to estimate the fair value of options as of the date of grant. The Black-Scholes-Merton option valuation model requires the use of assumptions, including the expected term of the award and the expected stock price volatility. We use the “simplified” method as described in Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, “Share Based Payment” for the expected option term. We use our historical volatility to estimate expected stock price volatility. The estimated fair value of the option is expensed on a ratable basis over the expected term of the grant.
We determine the fair value of RSUs and RSAs based on the fair market values of the underlying stock on the dates of grant. The fair value of service based RSUs and RSAs is expensed on a ratable or straight-line basis over the expected term of the vesting. The fair value of performance-contingent RSUs and RSAs is expensed using an accelerated method over the requisite service period based on management’s best estimate as to whether it is probable that the shares awarded are expected to vest. We assess the probability of the performance indicators being met on a continuous basis. The grant date fair value of the RSUs and RSAs with a market condition is determined using a Monte Carlo valuation model and the compensation expense is recognized over the implied service period.
Stock-based compensation expense was calculated based on awards ultimately expected to vest and was reduced for estimated forfeitures as of the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differed from those estimates. The estimated annual forfeiture rates for stock options, RSUs and RSAs are based on our historical forfeiture experience.
For more information, refer to Note 7, “Stock-Based Compensation,” to the consolidated financial statements appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income Taxes
We utilize the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities and are measured using enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
Accounting for Convertible Senior Notes Due 2025
On August 7, 2017, we completed a private placement of $192.5 million aggregate principal amount of our 2025 Notes. Due to our ability to settle the conversion obligation of the 2025 Notes in cash, common stock or a combination of cash and common stock, at our option, we separately account for the liability and equity components of the 2025 Notes by allocating the proceeds between the liability component and the embedded conversion option (“equity component”). The carrying amount of the liability component was calculated by measuring the fair value of a similar liability that does not have an associated convertible feature using the income approach. The allocation was performed in a manner that reflected our non-convertible debt borrowing rate for similar debt. The equity component of the 2025 Notes of $67.3 million was recognized as a debt discount and represents the difference between the proceeds from the issuance of the 2025 Notes and the fair value of the liability of the 2025 Notes on the date of issuance. The excess of the principal amount of the liability component over its carrying amount (“debt discount”) is amortized to interest expense using the effective interest method. The equity component is not remeasured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification.
Results of Operations
Net Revenue
Total net revenue, as compared to the prior years, was as follows:
* Not Meaningful
Total net revenue increased to $336.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Royalties for RELVAR®/BREO® ELLIPTA® increased due to favorable adjustments from better than expected pricing and continued volume growth in both the U.S. and non-U.S. markets. ANORO® ELLIPTA® maintained its steady volume growth, offset by the increasing pricing pressure in the U.S. Royalties for TRELEGY®ELLIPTA® were higher due to the continued growth in prescriptions and market share.
Total net revenue increased slightly for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Royalties for RELVAR®/BREO® ELLIPTA® decreased primarily due to increased pricing pressure in the U.S., offset by volume growth in both the U.S. and non-U.S. markets. The decrease was offset by continued growth in prescriptions and market share for TRELEGY® ELLIPTA®. Royalties for ANORO® ELLIPTA® increased slightly year over year.
Research & Development
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses of $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 were attributable to Pulmoquine’s product development efforts.
We did not incur R&D expenses during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
General & Administrative
General and administrative expenses, as compared to the prior years, were as follows:
* Not Meaningful
General and administrative expenses decreased by $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, mainly attributable to lower operating expenses incurred. The amount for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $2.1 million fees related to due diligence efforts associated with various investments and $1.7 million legal and related fees for the arbitration initiated by Theravance Biopharma against the Company and TRC.
General and administrative expenses decreased by $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, mainly attributable to lower personnel-related expenses as a result of lower headcount. The amount for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $3.1 million legal and related fees for the arbitration initiated by Theravance Biopharma against the Company and TRC, of which $3.0 million was accounted for as TRC’s expenses and consolidated in the Company’s consolidated statements of income.
The amount for the year ended December 31, 2018 included $5.7 million cash severance costs in connection with certain members of senior management’s separation from the Company and payment of $2.7 million to Sarissa pursuant to a settlement agreement in February 2018.
Other Expense, net, and Interest Income
Other expense, net, and interest income, as compared to the prior years, were as follows:
* Not Meaningful
Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2018, mainly consists of the loss on the extinguishment of debt of $5.7 million in relation to the prepayments of our Term B Loan.
Interest income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, primarily due to lower interest rates resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest Expense
Interest expense, as compared to the prior years, was as follows:
Interest expense decreased slightly for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior years primarily due to the lower average outstanding debt balance. See “Liquidity” section below for further information.
Changes in Fair Values of Equity and Long-Term Investments
The changes in fair values of equity and long-term investments of $50.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflect the net unrealized gain in the stock and warrants of our investments in Armata, Entasis, and InCarda, and those equity investments managed by ISP Fund LP.
Income Taxes
Income tax benefit (expense), net, as compared to the prior years, was as follows:
* Not Meaningful
As of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we had net operating loss carryforwards for federal income taxes of $0.4 billion, $0.6 billion, and $0.8 billion, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we had federal research and development tax credit carryforwards of $43.6 million, $44.4 million, and $44.8 million, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $60.4 million and $41.9 million of income tax expense, respectively, based on the taxable income generated during those years.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, we released our valuation allowance on deferred tax assets and recognized $196.1 million of income tax benefit. We had total unrecognized tax benefits of $15.2 million as of December 31, 2020. Total unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect our effective tax rate were $8.0 million as of December 31, 2020. Our total unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2019 and 2018 were $15.3 million and $15.4 million, respectively.
Utilization of net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards is subject to rules, provided by the Internal Revenue Code and similar state provisions, governing annual limitations tied to ownership changes. We conducted an analysis through September 30, 2020 to determine whether an ownership change had occurred since inception. The study concluded that it is more likely than not that the Company did not experience an ownership change during the testing period. However, notwithstanding the applicable annual limitations, we estimate that no portion of the net operating loss or credit carryforwards will expire before becoming available to reduce federal and state income tax liabilities. Annual limitations may result in expiration of net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards before some or all of such amounts have been utilized.
Net Income Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest, as compared to the prior years, was as follows:
* Not Meaningful
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest represents the 85% share of net income in Theravance Respiratory Company, LLC for Theravance Biopharma. The year over year increases were primarily due to the growth in prescriptions and market share for TRELEGY® ELLIPTA®.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through private placements and public offerings of equity and debt securities and payments received under collaborative arrangements. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated gross royalty revenues from GSK of $340.6 million. Net cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and marketable securities totaled $246.5 million, and royalties receivable from GSK totaled $93.9 million, as of December 31, 2020.
In January 2013, we completed an underwritten public offering of $287.5 million aggregate principal amount of unsecured convertible subordinated notes, which will mature on January 15, 2023. In connection with the offering of the 2023 Notes, we entered into two privately negotiated capped call option transactions with a single counterparty. The capped call option transaction is an integrated instrument consisting of a call option on our common stock purchased by us with a strike price equal to the initial conversion price of $27.79 per share for the underlying number of shares and a cap price of $38.00 per share, both of which are subject to adjustments consistent with the 2023 Notes. As a result of the partial conversion by certain holders of the 2023 Notes in July 2014, and dividends declared and paid in 2014 and 2015, the conversion rate was adjusted in total to 50.5818 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the 2023 Notes, which represents a conversion price of approximately $19.77 per share. As a result of the conversion rate adjustments, the capped call strike price and cap price were also adjusted to $19.77 and $27.04, respectively. For the year ending December 31, 2016, we retired a portion of our 2023 Notes with a face value of $14.1 million and carrying value of $13.9 million by way of purchase in the open market.
On August 7, 2017, we completed a private placement of $192.5 million aggregate principal amount of our 2025 Notes. The proceeds include the 2025 Notes sold pursuant to the $17.5 million over-allotment option granted by us to the initial purchasers, which option was exercised in full. The 2025 Notes were sold in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). The 2025 Notes will mature on August 15, 2025, unless repurchased or converted in accordance with their terms prior to such date. Concurrently with the pricing of the offering, we repurchased and retired 1,317,771 shares of our common stock for approximately $17.5 million of the net proceeds from the offering, in privately negotiated transactions effected through one of the initial purchasers or its affiliate, as our agent. The remaining net proceeds from the sale of the 2025 Notes in the offering were used to redeem a portion of the principal outstanding under the 2029 Notes on August 15, 2017.
On August 18, 2017, we entered into a Credit Agreement and completed a financing of the $250.0 million Term B Loan, the proceeds of which were used to repay the remaining balance of the 2029 Notes. The Term B Loan was fully paid off in December 2019, almost three years ahead of its maturity in 2022.
Adequacy of Cash Resources to Meet Future Needs
We believe that cash from projected future royalty revenues and our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to meet our anticipated debt service and operating needs for at least the next 12 months based upon current operating plans and financial forecasts. If our current operating plans and financial forecasts change, we may require additional funding sooner in the form of public or private equity offerings or debt financings. Furthermore, if in our view favorable financing opportunities arise, we may seek additional funding at any time. However, future financing may not be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. This could leave us without adequate financial resources to fund our operations as currently planned. In addition, from time to time we may restructure or reduce our debt, including through tender offers, redemptions, amendments, repurchases or otherwise, all allowable with the terms of our debt agreements.
Cash Flows
Cash flows, as compared to the prior years, were as follows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $313.1 million, consisting primarily of our net income of $293.8 million, adjusted for non-cash items such as $60.4 million of deferred income taxes, $13.8 million of depreciation and amortization, $8.4 million amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, $1.7 million of stock-based compensation expense, partially offset by a $50.3 million increase in the fair values of our equity investments and an increase in receivables from collaborative arrangements of $14.5 million.
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $257.5 million, consisting primarily of our net income of $191.0 million, adjusted for non-cash items such as $41.9 million of deferred income taxes, $13.9 million of depreciation and amortization, $7.8 million amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, $2.1 million of stock-based compensation expense, partially offset by $2.2 million of amortization of discount on short-term investments and a decrease in receivables from collaborative arrangements of $3.9 million.
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 was $223.5 million, consisting primarily of our net income of $406.3 million, adjusted for non-cash items such as $196.1 million of deferred income taxes, $13.9 million of depreciation and amortization, $7.7 million amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, $5.7 million of loss on debt extinguishment and $3.2 million of stock-based compensation expense, partially offset by an increase in receivables from collaborative arrangements of $12.7 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $314.9 million was primarily due to $400.9 million in purchases of common stock, warrants, money market funds and other marketable securities, partially offset by $86.0 million of proceeds received from maturities of marketable securities.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $18.0 million was primarily due to $231.9 million in purchases of marketable securities, partially offset by $213.9 million of proceeds received from maturities of marketable securities.
Net cash flows from investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 of $3.5 million was primarily due to $75.4 million of proceeds received from maturities of marketable securities, partially offset by $71.9 million in purchases of marketable securities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $29.8 million was primarily due to $30.5 million distributions to noncontrolling interest.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $23.8 million was primarily due to $13.8 million payment for paying off the remaining principal balance of our Term B Loan and $10.6 million distributions to noncontrolling interest.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 of $238.0 million was primarily due to $230.0 million in prepayments on our Term B Loan, $6.0 million distributions to noncontrolling interest and $3.1 million payments for the repurchase of shares to satisfy tax withholding.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In June 2014, our facility leases in South San Francisco, California were assigned to Theravance Biopharma. However, if Theravance Biopharma had defaulted on its lease obligations, we would have been held liable by the landlord and thus, we had in substance guaranteed the lease payments for these facilities, as well as lease-related payments including utilities, property taxes, and common area maintenance. This lease concluded in May 2020, and we have no further obligations for the lease.
Commitments and Contingencies
We indemnify our officers and directors for certain events or occurrences, subject to certain limits. We may be subject to contingencies that may arise from matters such as product liability claims, legal proceedings, shareholder suits and tax matters. As such, we are unable to estimate the potential exposure related to these indemnification agreements. We have not recognized any liabilities relating to these agreements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
In the table below, we set forth our significant enforceable and legally binding obligations and future commitments as of December 31, 2020.