ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Overview
Identiv is a global provider of secure identification and physical security.
We are leveraging our RFID-based physical device-management expertise as well as our physical access, video and analytics solutions to provide leading solutions as our customers, and our customers’ customers, embracing the IoT. Customers in the technology and mobility, consumer, government, healthcare, education and other sectors rely on Identiv’s identification and access solutions. Identiv’s platform encompasses RFID and NFC, cybersecurity, and the full spectrum of physical access, video, and audio security. We are bringing the benefits of the IoT to a wide range of physical, connected items.
Identiv’s mission is to digitally enable every physical thing and every physical place on the planet. Our full continuum of security solutions is delivered through our platform of RFID enabled devices, mobile, client/server, cloud, web, dedicated hardware and software defined architectures. In doing so, we believe that we will create smart physical security and a smarter physical world.
Segments
We have organized our operations into two reportable business segments, principally by solution families: Identity and Premises. Our Identity segment includes products and solutions enabling secure access to information serving the logical access and cyber security market, and protecting connected objects and information using RFID embedded security. Our Premises segment includes our solutions to address the premises security market for government and enterprise, including access control, video surveillance, analytics, audio, access readers and identities.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Market Adoption
Our financial performance depends on the pace, scope and depth of end-user adoption of our RFID products in multiple industries. That pace, scope and depth has accelerated during 2020 causing large fluctuations in our operating results. For example, in 2019 our Identity segment experienced a reduction from 2018 overall with modest gains in our RFID business offset by lower access card revenue. During 2020, we saw several events that we believe are opening up the third wave of RFID deployments which is occurring at a much faster pace of growth than historically. We believe significant improvement in chip capabilities at lower costs, combined with the incorporation of the full NDEF protocol by Apple in its iPhone 12 and iOS 14 has accelerated the opportunities for product engineers to integrate RFID into their products to create new and more engaging customer experiences, product reliability and performance. As the market hit this pivot point, we expanded both our capacity and technical leadership. As a result, our Identity segment experienced an increase in revenue of 25% year over year, driven by our performance in the RFID products growing 80% year over year in total, and growing over 100% for the second half of 2020 over the comparable period in 2019. We track growth indicators including design wins, customer launches and technology launches. We have made investments in our technology, world class quality and automation, and we believe that our competitive advantages will continue to drive growth.
We believe the underlying, long-term trend is continued RFID adoption by multiple verticals. We also believe that expanding use cases fosters adoption across verticals and into other markets. In addition, we do not have any significant concentration of customers so we believe that our demand will continue to be resilient to any individual customer or application.
If RFID market adoption, and adoption of our products specifically, does not meet our expectations then our growth prospects and operating results will be adversely affected. If we are unable to meet end-user or customer volume or performance expectations, then our business prospects may be adversely affected. In contrast, if our RFID sales exceed expectations, then our revenue and profitability may be positively affected.
Given the uncertainties of the specific timing of our new customer deployments, we cannot assure you that we have appropriate inventory and capacity levels or that we will not experience inventory shortfalls or overages in the future. We mitigate those risks by being deeply embedded in our customers design cycle, working with our chip partners on long lead time components, managing our limited capital equipment needs within a short cycle and future proofing our facilities with the most recent expansion to accommodate several scenarios for growth potential.
If end users with sizable projects change or delay them, we may experience significant fluctuation in revenue on a quarterly or annual basis, and we anticipate that uncertainty to continue to characterize our business for the foreseeable future.
Seasonality and Other Factors
In our business overall, we may experience variations in demand for our offerings from quarter to quarter, and typically experience a stronger demand cycle in the second half of our fiscal year. Sales of our physical access control solutions and related products to U.S. Government agencies are subject to annual government budget cycles and generally are highest in the third quarter of each year. Sales of our identity readers, many of which are sold to government agencies worldwide, are impacted by project schedules of government agencies, as well as roll-out schedules for application deployments. Further, this business is typically subject to seasonality based on differing commercial and global government budget cycles. Lower sales are expected in the U.S. in the first half, and in particular, the first quarter of the year, with higher sales typically in the second half of each year. In Asia-Pacific, with fiscal year-ends in March and June, order demand can be higher in the first quarter as customers attempt to complete projects before the end of the fiscal year. Accordingly, our net revenue levels in the first quarter each year often depend on the relative strength of project completions and sales mix between our U.S. customer base and our international customer base.
Purchasing of our Products and Services for U.S. Federal Government Security Programs
In addition to the general seasonality of demand, overall U.S. Federal Government expenditure patterns have a significant effect on demand for our products due to the significant portion of revenue that are typically sourced from U.S. Federal Government agencies. During 2020, we experienced an increase in our U.S. Federal Government revenue of 30% over the preceding full year. Drivers of growth included our technology strength and proven security solutions, work from home mandates, and continued strength in investments for security across a number of different agencies. We believe that the success and growth of our business will continue through the U.S. Federal Government focus on security and our successful procurement of government business. If there are changes in government purchasing policies or budgetary constraints there could be implications for our growth prospects and operating results. If we are unable to meet end-user or customer volume or performance expectations, then our business prospects may be adversely affected.
Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on our Business.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) a pandemic, and the President of the United States declared the COVID-19 outbreak a national emergency. The rapid spread of the pandemic and the continuously evolving responses to combat it have had an increasingly negative impact on the global economy. In view of the rapidly changing business environment created by the uncertainty related to the depth and or duration of the impact resulting from COVID-19, we have experienced delays in our sales in select vertical markets and are currently unable to determine if there will be any continued disruption and the extent to which this may have future impact on our business. We continue to monitor the progression of the pandemic and its effect on our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
Results of Operations
The following table includes net revenue and net profit information by business segment and reconciles gross profit to loss before income taxes (in thousands).
The following table sets forth our statements of comprehensive loss as a percentage of net revenue:
Geographic net revenue, based on each customer’s ship-to location, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows (in thousands):
Fiscal 2020 Compared with Fiscal 2019
Net Revenue
Net revenue in 2020 was $86.9 million, an increase of 4% compared with $83.8 million in 2019. Net revenue in the Americas was $58.3 million in 2020, a decrease of 5% compared with $61.4 million in 2019. Net revenue from our Premises solution for security programs within various U.S. government agencies and commercial customers for access control and video solutions, as well as reader, controller and appliance products, represented approximately 54% of our net revenue in the Americas. Net revenue in Europe, the Middle East, and Asia-Pacific was approximately $28.6 million in 2020, an increase of 28% compared with 2019. Sales of RFID and NFC products and smart card readers comprise a significant proportion of our net revenue in these regions.
Net revenue in our Identity segment, which represented 61% of our net revenue, was $52.7 million in 2020, an increase of 25% compared with $42.2 million in 2019. Net revenue in this segment in the Americas in 2020 increased 11% compared with 2019 primarily due to higher sales of RFID transponder products and smart card readers, partially offset by lower sales of access card products primarily attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the hospitality and education markets. The primary driver of higher sales of our RFID transponder products was the broad adoption of NFC, and the continued demand for smart card reader products with shelter in place actions driving the need for more work from home technologies. Net revenue in this segment in Europe, the Middle East, and the Asia-Pacific increased approximately 44% in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to higher sales of RFID transponder products, partially offset by lower sales of smart card readers and access cards. RFID transponder products comprised approximately 65% of net revenue in these regions in 2020, and 36% of net revenue in 2019, while smart card reader sales in 2020 and 2019 comprised approximately 24% and 36% of the net revenue.
Net revenue in our Premises segment, which represented 39% of our net revenue, was $34.2 million in 2020, a decrease of 18% compared with $41.6 million in 2019. Net revenue in this segment in the Americas in 2020 decreased 15% compared with 2019 primarily due to delays associated with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our partners’ ability to access customer site locations, as well as the impact of business closures in the retail, hospitality and education markets. These delays were partially offset by higher Hirsch Velocity software product sales and related support services, particularly in the federal government. Net revenue in this segment across Europe, the Middle East, and Asia-Pacific decreased 38% in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to lower sales of Hirsch related physical access control solutions associated with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our partners’ ability to access customer site locations as discussed above.
As a general trend, U.S. Federal agencies continue to be subject to security improvement mandates under programs such as Homeland Security Presidential Directive-12 (“HSPD-12”) and reiterated in memoranda from the Office of Management and Budget (“OMB M-11-11”). We believe that our solutions for trusted physical access is an attractive offering to help federal agency customers move towards compliance with federal directives and mandates. To address sales opportunities in the United States in general and with our U.S. Government customers in particular, we focus on a strong U.S. sales organization and our sales presence in Washington D.C.
More recently, in response to the new needs for health and safety in the physical security market overall, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have released products to address these trends. During the first half of 2020, we launched our contact tracing downloadable extension for our Velocity access system, our occupancy tracking system based on our 3VR platform, our MobilisID touchless reader and our temperature tracking tag. In addition, with the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic creating more uncertainty for our customers, we have released several products which are subscription based which allow payments over time for our physical access and video solutions as a service.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit for 2020 was $33.7 million, or 39% of net revenue, compared to $36.7 million or 44% of net revenue in 2019. Gross profit represents net revenue less direct cost of product sales, manufacturing overhead, other costs directly related to preparing the product for sale including freight, scrap, inventory adjustments and amortization, where applicable.
In our Identity segment, gross profit was $14.8 million in 2020 compared with $14.6 million in 2019. Gross profit margins in the Identity segment in 2020 decreased to 28% compared to 35% in 2019 primarily due to the change in product mix, with a higher proportion of lower margin RFID transponder product sales, and a large higher margin bulk order of readers to the U.S. Navy Reserve in the first quarter of 2019.
In our Premises segment, gross profit was $18.9 million in 2020 compared with $22.1 million in 2019. Gross profit margins in the Premises segment increased to 55% in 2020 from 53% in 2019 primarily due to adjustments to our inventory reserves in the first quarter of 2019 as a result of management’s assessment of on-hand inventory levels and demand forecasts.
We expect there will be variation in our total gross profit from period to period, as our gross profit has been and will continue to be affected primarily by varying mix among our products. Within each product category, gross margins have tended to be consistent, but over time may be affected by a variety of factors, including, without limitation, competition, product pricing, the volume of sales in any given quarter, manufacturing volumes, product configuration and mix, the availability of new products, product enhancements, software and services, risk of inventory write-downs and the cost and availability of components.
Operating Expenses
Information about our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is set forth below.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee compensation and fees for the development of hardware, software and firmware products. We focus the bulk of our research and development activities on the continued development of existing products and the development of new offerings for emerging market opportunities.
Research and development expenses in 2020 increased compared with 2019 primarily due to higher salaries and related costs associated with the re-alignment of certain individuals in the first quarter of 2020 from sales and marketing to research and development, as well as continued investments in engineering, including additional headcount and higher external contractor costs.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee compensation as well as amortization expense of certain intangible assets, customer lead generation activities, tradeshow participation, advertising and other marketing and selling costs.
Selling and marketing expenses in 2020 decreased compared with 2019 primarily due to the re-alignment of certain individuals in the first quarter of 2020 from sales and marketing to research and development, lower travel related costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, and lower trade show and advertising costs, partially offset by an increase in employment recruiting fees.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation expenses for employees performing administrative functions, and professional fees incurred for legal, auditing and other consulting services.
General and administrative expenses decreased compared with the prior year period primarily due to reductions in headcount and related costs associated with our continued integration efforts across general and administrative functions as well as lower external services costs and professional fees.
Increase (Decrease) in Fair Value of Earnout Liability
Earnout consideration expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 was attributable to the increase in fair value of the earnout liability associated with the Viscount acquisition from $200,000 to $750,000. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the reduction in the earnout expense of $261,000 was attributable to the decrease in the fair value of the earnout liability from $750,000 to $489,000, representing settlement date fair value of the earnout shares issued to the selling shareholders. See Note 4, Business Combinations, in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Restructuring and Severance
Restructuring expenses incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 consists of severance related costs of $375,000 and facility rental related costs associated with office space of an acquired business of approximately $1,341,000. The latter included a charge of $1,199,000 associated with the impairment of the right-of-use operating lease asset, which was subleased, but subsequently went into default due to non-payment of rent beginning April 1, 2020. Sublease income of $198,000 was received in the first quarter of 2020, however, since the first quarter of 2020, no rental payments were received. In addition, we recorded a charge of $97,000 related to the impairment of a right-of-use operating lease asset for office space we vacated in Oakland, California in the fourth quarter of 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred restructuring and severance related costs of $105,000. These costs were partially offset by the reversal of a restructuring accrual of $91,000 for future rental payment obligations associated with vacated office space at our Fremont, California facility, which was sublet in the third quarter of 2019.
See Note 15, Restructuring and Severance, in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Non-operating Income (Expense)
Information about our non-operating income (expense) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is set forth below.
Interest expense, net consists of interest on financial liabilities, amortization of debt issuance costs, and interest accretion expense for a liability on a contractual payment obligation arising from our acquisition of Hirsch Electronics Corporation. The increase in interest expense in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to both the amortization of warrants and amortization of debt issuance costs associated with our loan and security agreement with our lender. See Note 8, Contractual Payment Obligation and Note 9, Financial Liabilities, in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Gain on the sale of investment of $142,000 was related to the sale of our investment in a private company in the fourth quarter of 2019, which had no carrying value.
Changes in currency valuation in the periods mainly were the result of exchange rate movements between the U.S. dollar, the Indian Rupee, the Canadian dollar, and the euro. Our foreign currency gains and losses primarily result from the valuation of current assets and liabilities denominated in a currency other than the functional currency of the respective entity in the local financial statements.
Income Tax Provision
As of December 31, 2020, our deferred tax assets are fully offset by a valuation allowance. Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740, Income Taxes, provides for the recognition of deferred tax assets if realization of such assets is more likely than not. Based upon the weight of available evidence, which includes historical operating performance, reported cumulative net losses since inception and difficulty in accurately forecasting our future results, we provided a full valuation allowance against all of our net U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets. We reassess the need for our valuation allowance on a quarterly basis. If it is later determined that a portion or all of the valuation allowance is not required, it generally will be a benefit to the income tax provision in the period such determination is made.
We recorded an income tax provision during the year ended December 31, 2020. The effective tax rates for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 differ from the federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to a change in valuation allowance, and the provision or benefit in certain foreign jurisdictions, which are subject to higher tax rates.
Quarterly Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss)
The following tables set forth our unaudited quarterly statements of comprehensive income (loss) for the last eight quarters. In the opinion of management, these data have been prepared on the same basis as the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report and reflect all adjustments, including normal recurring adjustments, necessary for a fair presentation of the data. The results of historical periods are not indicative of expectations for any future period. You should read these data together with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, our working capital, defined as current assets less current liabilities, was $11.9 million, an increase of $0.2 million compared to $11.7 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, our cash balance was $11.4 million.
East West Bank
On February 8, 2017, we entered into a loan and security agreement with East West Bank (“EWB”). Following subsequent amendments, on February 8, 2021 we amended and restated the Loan and Security Agreement in its entirety (the “Loan and Security Agreement”). The Loan and Security Agreement provides for a $20.0 million revolving loan facility subject to a borrowing base and a $4.0 million non-formula revolving loan facility that is not subject to a borrowing base. Our obligations under the Loan and Security Agreement are collateralized by substantially all of our assets.
The maturity date of the main revolving loan facility is February 8, 2023. The non-formula revolving loan facility will terminate on February 7, 2022, however we may, at our option if certain conditions are met, convert prior to their maturity any loans under the non-formula revolving loan facility to a term loan that will fully amortize and mature on February 1, 2025. Advances under the revolving loan facilities and the term loan (if converted) will initially bear interest at a per annum rate equal to the prime rate as determined under the Loan and Security Agreement plus 0.25%.
We may voluntarily prepay amounts outstanding under the revolving loan facilities and the term loan without prepayment charges. In the event the Loan and Security Agreement is terminated prior to February 8, 2023, we would be required to pay an early termination fee in the amount of 2.0% of the main revolving loan line if terminated prior to February 8, 2022 and 1% of the main revolving loan line thereafter. Additional borrowing requests under the revolving loan facilities are subject to various customary conditions precedent, including a borrowing base for the main revolving loan facility.
The Loan and Security Agreement contains customary representations and warranties and customary affirmative and negative covenants, including, limits or restrictions on our ability to incur liens, incur indebtedness, make certain restricted payments (including dividends), merge or consolidate and dispose of assets. In addition, the Loan and Security Agreement contains financial covenants requiring that we (i) hold $5 million in unrestricted cash in accounts with EWB, (ii) maintain a monthly minimum trailing six-month EBITDA of $0.6 million for the first two quarters of 2021 and $1.2 million thereafter and (iii) maintain, if we convert into the term loan and starting with the quarter ending March 31, 2022, a quarterly fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 1.35 : 1.00.
The Loan and Security Agreement contains customary events of default that entitle EWB to cause any or all of our indebtedness under it to become immediately due and payable. The events of default (some of which are subject to applicable grace or cure periods), include, among other things, non-payment defaults, covenant defaults, cross-defaults to other material indebtedness, bankruptcy and insolvency defaults and material judgment defaults. Upon the occurrence and during the continuance of an event of default, EWB may terminate its lending commitment and/or declare all or any part of the unpaid principal of all loans, all interest accrued and unpaid thereon and all other amounts payable under the Loan and Security Agreement to be immediately due and payable.
See Note 9, Financial Liabilities and Note 11, Stockholders’ Equity in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all financial covenants under the revolving loan facility.
April 21 Funds
On May 5, 2020, we issued secured subordinated promissory notes in an aggregate principal amount of $4.0 million (the “Notes”) to 21 April Fund, LP and 21 April Fund, Ltd. (collectively referred to as the “April 21 Funds”) pursuant to a Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement entered into with the April 21 Funds (the “Note Purchase Agreement”). The Notes are collateralized by our assets, but subordinate to our obligations to EWB under the Loan and Security Agreement. Proceeds from the sale of the Notes were only to be used for expenses incurred by us in connection with our provisions of goods and services under a statement of work with a third party. The Notes have an initial term of nine months and do not bear interest during this period. However, if the Notes are not repaid on or before the nine-month anniversary of issuance, (a) the Notes will thereafter bear interest of 8% per annum, payable quarterly, and (b) additional warrants to purchase common stock would be issuable to the April 21 Funds for each month all or a portion of the Notes remain unpaid, as further detailed in the Note Purchase Agreement. In the event the Notes are not paid in full by the first anniversary of their issuance, May 5, 2021, they shall thereafter bear interest of 12% per annum, payable quarterly, and additional warrants would be issuable to the April 21 Funds. On December 31, 2020, the principal amount outstanding under the Notes was $2.8 million.
On February 5, 2021, we entered into an amendment to our secured subordinated promissory note with April 21 Funds, which extended the initial term of the Notes to March 31, 2021. As a result of the amendment, if the Notes are repaid on or before March 31, 2021, we will incur no further interest on the Notes, or be obligated to issue additional warrants.
Paycheck Protection Program
On April 9, 2020, we entered into a promissory note (the “Note”) under the Paycheck Protection Program established under Section 1102 of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act. The Note is dated April 8, 2020 with EWB. We borrowed a principal amount of approximately $2.9 million. The interest on the Note is 1.0% per annum. The Note is payable two years from the date of the Note, and there is no prepayment penalty. All interest which accrues during the initial six months of the loan period is deferred and payable on the maturity date of the Note. Notes issued under the CARES Act may be eligible for forgiveness in whole or in part in accordance with Small Business Administration rules established for the Paycheck Protection Program. The principal amount outstanding, including accrued interest, is included in current portion - financial liabilities and other accrued
expenses and liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets, as we expect all amounts outstanding will be forgiven in the first six months of 2021.
As our previously unremitted earnings have been subjected to U.S. federal income tax, we expect any repatriation of these earnings to the U.S. would not incur significant additional taxes related to such amounts. However, our estimates are provisional and subject to further analysis. Generally, most of our foreign subsidiaries have accumulated deficits and cash and cash equivalents that are held outside the United States are typically not cash generated from earnings that would be subject to tax upon repatriation if transferred to the United States. We have access to the cash held outside the United States to fund domestic operations and obligations without any material income tax consequences. As of December 31, 2020, the amount of cash included at such subsidiaries was $2.0 million. We have not, nor do we anticipate the need to, repatriate funds to the United States to satisfy domestic liquidity needs arising in the ordinary course of business, including liquidity needs associated with our domestic debt service requirements.
We have historically incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from operating activities, and we may continue to incur losses in the future. As of December 31, 2020, we had a total accumulated deficit of $410.6 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $5.1 million.
We believe our existing cash balance, together with cash generated from operations and available credit under our Loan and Security Agreement will be sufficient to satisfy our working capital needs to fund operations for the next twelve months. We may also use cash to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, technologies, services or products that would change our cash requirements. We may also choose to finance our business through public or private equity offerings, debt financings or other arrangements. However, there can be no assurance that additional capital will be available to us or that such capital will be available to us on acceptable terms. If we raise funds by issuing equity securities, dilution to stockholders could result. Debt or any equity securities issued also may provide for rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of holders of our common stock. The terms of debt securities issued or borrowings could impose significant restrictions on our operations. The incurrence of additional indebtedness or the issuance of certain debt or equity securities could result in increased fixed payment obligations and could also result in restrictive covenants, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt or issue additional equity, limitations on our ability to acquire or license intellectual property rights and other operating restrictions that could adversely affect our ability to conduct our business. Our Loan and Security Agreement imposes restrictions on our operations, increases our fixed payment obligations and has restrictive covenants. In addition, the issuance of additional equity securities by us, or the possibility of such issuance, may cause the market price of our common stock to decline. If we are not able to secure additional funding when needed, we may have to curtail or reduce the scope of our business or forgo potential business opportunities.
The following summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash used in operating activities for 2020 was primarily due to a net loss of $5.1 million and a decrease in cash from net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $4.7 million, partially offset by adjustments for certain non-cash items of $8.0 million, consisting primarily of impairment of right-of-use operating lease assets, decrease in fair value of earnout liability, depreciation, amortization, amortization of debt issuance costs, and stock-based compensation. Cash provided by operating activities for 2019 was primarily due to a net loss of $1.2 million and a decrease in cash from net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $5.3 million, partially offset by adjustments for certain non-cash items of $6.9 million, consisting primarily of depreciation, amortization, amortization of debt issuance costs, and stock-based compensation.
Cash flows from investing activities
Cash used in investing activities for 2020 was $1.6 million related to capital expenditures. Cash used in investing activities during 2019 was $1.5 million, of which $1.3 million related to the acquisitions of Viscount, net of cash acquired, and $0.3 million related to capital expenditures, partially offset by $0.1 million related to the proceeds received from the sale of an investment.
Cash flows from financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities during 2020 was primarily due to the issuance of secured subordinated promissory notes to April 21 Funds of $4.0 million, less repayments of $1.2 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, and proceeds received under the Payment Protection Program of $2.9 million, partially offset by taxes paid related to net share settlement of restricted stock units of $0.9 million. Cash used in financing activities during 2019 related primarily to the repayment of notes payable of $2.0 million associated with a previous acquisition, and taxes paid related to net share settlement of restricted stock units of $0.9 million, partially offset by net borrowings under our revolving loan facility of $2.7 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into off-balance sheet arrangements, or issued guarantees to third parties, except as disclosed in Note 8, Contractual Payment Obligation.
Contractual Obligations
The following summarizes expected cash requirements for contractual obligations, excluding amounts outstanding under the Paycheck Protection Program promissory note of $2.9 million, which we expect to be forgiven in the first six months of 2021, as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
We lease facilities, certain equipment, and automobiles under non-cancelable operating lease agreements. We currently sublease office space in San Francisco, California associated with a prior acquisition. Beginning April 1, 2020, the sublessee went into default due to non-payment of rent. Sublease income of $198,000 was received in the first quarter of 2020, however, since the first quarter of 2020, no rental payments have been received.
Our contractual payment obligation was assumed upon our acquisition of Hirsch. See Note 8, Contractual Payment Obligation, in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements.
The revolving loan facility and April 21 Funds promissory note obligations include payments to be made for principal and interest in accordance with the terms at December 31, 2020 of the revolving loan facility under our Loan and Security Agreement and the Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement. See Note 9, Financial Liabilities, in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Purchases for inventories are highly dependent upon forecasts of customer demand. Due to the uncertainty in demand from our customers, we may have to change, reschedule, or cancel purchases or purchase orders from our suppliers. These changes may lead to vendor cancellation charges on these orders or contractual commitments. See Note 18, Commitments and Contingencies, in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Our other long-term liabilities include gross unrecognized tax benefits, and related interest and penalties. At this time, we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years in connection with these tax liabilities. Accordingly, such amounts are not included in the table above.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors, which we believe are reasonable based upon the information available to us at the time these estimates, judgments and assumptions are made. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when we transfer control of the promised products or services to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. We enter into contracts that can include various combinations of our products, software licenses, and services, which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price of the contract to each performance obligation, generally on a relative basis using its standalone selling price. The stated contract value is generally the transaction price to be allocated to the separate performance obligations. Revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected from our customers that are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
Nature of Products and Services
We derive our revenues from sales of hardware products, software licenses, subscriptions, professional services, software maintenance and support, and extended hardware warranties.
Hardware Product Revenues - We generally have two performance obligations in arrangements involving the sale of hardware products. The first performance obligation is to transfer the hardware product (which includes software integral to the functionality of the hardware product). The second performance obligation is to provide assurance that the product complies with its agreed-upon specifications and is free from defects in material and workmanship for a period of one to three years (i.e. assurance warranty). The entire transaction price is allocated to the hardware product and is generally recognized as revenue at the time of delivery because the customer obtains control of the product at that point in time. We have concluded that control generally transfers at that point in time because the customer has title to the hardware, physical possession, and a present obligation to pay for the hardware. None of the transaction price is allocated to the assurance warranty component, as we account for these product warranty costs in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 460, Guarantees.
Software License Revenues - Our license arrangements grant customers the perpetual right to access and use the licensed software products at the outset of an arrangement. Technical support and software updates are generally made available throughout the term of the support agreement, which is generally one to three years. We account for these arrangements as two performance obligations: (1) the software licenses, and (2) the related updates and technical support. The software license revenue is recognized upon delivery of the license to the customer, while the software updates and technical support revenue is recognized over the term of the support contract.
Subscription Revenues - Subscription revenues consist of fees received in consideration for providing customers access to one or more of our software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) based solutions. These SaaS arrangements include access to our licensed software and, in certain arrangements, use of various hardware devices over the contract term. These SaaS arrangements do not provide the customer the right to take possession of the software supporting the subscription service, or if applicable, any hardware devices at any time during the contract period, and as such are not considered separate performance obligations. Revenue is recognized ratably on a straight-line basis over the term of the contract beginning when the service is made available to the customer. Subscription contract terms range from month-to-month to six years in length and billed monthly or annually.
Professional Services Revenues - Professional services revenues consist primarily of programming customization services performed relating to the integration of our software products with our customers other systems, such as HR systems. Professional services contracts are generally billed on a time and materials basis and revenue is recognized as the services are performed.
Software Maintenance and Support Revenues - Support and maintenance contract revenues consist of the services provided to support the specialized programming applications performed by our professional services group. Support and maintenance contracts are typically billed at inception of the contract and recognized as revenue over the contract period, typically over a one or three year period.
Extended Hardware Warranties Revenues - Sales of our hardware products may also include optional extended hardware warranties, which typically provide assurance that the product will continue function as initially intended. Extended hardware warranty contracts are typically billed at inception of the contract and recognized as revenue over the respective contract period, typically over one to two year periods after the expiration of the original assurance warranty.
Significant Judgments
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. For such arrangements, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on relative standalone selling price (“SSP”).
Judgment is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation in a contract. For the majority of items, we estimate SSP using historical transaction data. We use a range of amounts to estimate SSP when we sell each of our products and services separately and need to determine whether there is a discount to be allocated based on the relative SSP of the various products and services. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, such as when the product or service is not sold separately, we determine the SSPs using information that may include market conditions and other observable inputs. The determination of SSP is an ongoing process and information is reviewed regularly in order to ensure SSPs reflect the most current information or trends.
Contract Balances
Amounts invoiced in advance of services being provided are accounted for as deferred revenue. The deferred revenue balance is primarily related software maintenance contracts. Payment terms and conditions vary by contract type, although payment is typically due within 30 to 90 days of contract inception. In instances where the timing of revenue recognition differs from the timing of invoicing, we have determined our contracts do not include a significant financing component. The primary purpose of our invoicing terms is to provide customers with simplified and predictable ways of purchasing our products and services, not to receive financing from our customers.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Our allowance for doubtful accounts is based on our assessment of the collectibility of customer accounts. We regularly review our receivables that remain outstanding past their applicable payment terms and establish an allowance and potential write-offs by considering factors such as historical experience, credit quality, age of the accounts receivable balances, and current economic conditions that may affect a customer’s ability to pay. Although we expect to collect net amounts due as stated on the consolidated balance sheets, actual collections may differ from these estimated amounts.
Inventory Valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (using average cost or standard cost, as applicable) or net realizable value (market). We typically plan our production and inventory levels based on internal forecasts of customer demand, which can be highly unpredictable and can fluctuate significantly. We regularly review inventory quantities on hand and record an estimated provision for excess inventory based on judgment and assumptions involving an evaluation of technical obsolescence and our ability to sell based primarily on historical sales patterns and expectations for future demand. Actual demand and market conditions may differ from the projections utilized by management in establishing our inventory reserves. If we were to use different assumptions or utilize different estimates, the amount and timing of our inventory write-downs could be materially different. Adverse changes in our inventory valuations could have a material effect on our operating results and financial position.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s assessment of estimated current and future income taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in the United States and in numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the consolidated income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements, which are expected to result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, for all material jurisdictions, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax balances, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies and results of recent operations. In projecting future taxable income, we begin with historical results and incorporate assumptions about the amount of future state, federal and foreign pretax operating income adjusted for items that do not have tax consequences. The assumptions about future taxable income require significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we use to manage the underlying businesses. In evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide, we consider three years of cumulative operating results.
As of December 31, 2020, we have federal and state income tax net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards of $185.8 million and $70.6 million, respectively, which will expire at various dates.
We believe that it is more likely than not that the benefit from these NOL carryforwards will not be realized. Accordingly, we have provided a full valuation allowance on any potential deferred tax assets relating to these state NOL carryforwards. If our assumptions change and we determine we will be able to realize these NOLs, the tax benefits relating to any reversal of the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020, will be accounted for as a reduction of income tax expense.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves evaluating uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions across our global operations. ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”) states that a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes, on the basis of the technical merits.
We record unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities in accordance with ASC 740 and adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a tax payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the unrecognized tax benefit liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which new information is made available.
We believe that none of the unrecognized tax benefits, excluding the associated interest and penalties, which are insignificant, may be recognized by the end of 2021.
We consider the earnings of all our non-U.S. subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the United States on the basis of estimates that future domestic cash generation will be sufficient to meet future domestic cash needs and our specific plans for reinvestment of those subsidiary earnings. Should we decide to repatriate foreign earnings, we would need to adjust our income tax provision in the period we determined that the earnings will no longer be indefinitely invested outside the United States.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the aggregate of the fair value of consideration transferred in a business combination, over the fair value of assets acquired, net of liabilities assumed. In accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment on an annual basis, in the fourth quarter, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets may not be recoverable. We perform an initial assessment of qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events and circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. In performing the qualitative assessment, we identify and consider the significance of relevant key factors, events, and circumstances that affect the fair value of its reporting units. These factors include external factors such as macroeconomic, industry, and market conditions, as well as entity-specific factors, such as actual and planned financial performance. If, after assessing the totality of relevant events and circumstances, we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value and there is no indication of impairment, no further testing is performed; however, if we conclude otherwise, then we will perform the quantitative impairment test which compares the estimated fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit is in excess of its fair value, an impairment loss would be recorded in the consolidated statement of comprehensive loss. The loss recognized cannot exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Intangible Assets and Long-lived Assets
We evaluate our identifiable amortizable intangible assets and long-lived assets for impairment in accordance with ASC 360, Property, Plant and Equipment, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets or intangibles may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by an asset group. If such asset groups are considered to be impaired (i.e., if the sum of its estimated future undiscounted cash flows used to test for recoverability is less than its carrying value), the impairment loss to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds the fair value of the asset group. Intangible assets with definite lives are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the related assets.
Critical estimates in valuing intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from customer relationships, developed technology, and trademarks; and discount rates. Management estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Operating leases are included in operating lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets, operating lease liabilities, and long-term operating lease liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. Operating lease ROU assets and operating lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term at commencement date. As most of our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the lease commencement date in determining the present value of future payments. The operating lease ROU assets also include any lease payments made and exclude lease incentives and initial direct costs incurred. Our lease terms may include options to extend the lease when it is reasonably certain that they we will exercise that option. Lease expense for minimum lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. We have lease agreements with lease and non-lease components, which is accounted for as a single lease component.
Stock-based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation expense for all share-based payment awards in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. Stock-based compensation expense for expected-to-vest awards is valued under the single-option approach and amortized on a straight-line basis, net of estimated forfeitures. We utilize the Black Scholes pricing model in order to determine the fair value of stock-based option awards. The Black Scholes pricing model requires various highly subjective assumptions including volatility, expected option life, and risk-free interest rate. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those expected-to-vest shares. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, our recorded stock-based compensation expense and operating results could be different.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements, in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report for a description of recent accounting pronouncements, which is incorporated herein by reference.