Item 7. Management s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
This discussion includes certain forward-looking statements about our business and our expectations, including statements relating to revenues, international revenues, revenue growth rates, gross margin, operating expenses, amortization expense, earnings per share, available cash and operating cash flow. Any such statements are subject to risk that could cause the actual results to vary materially from expectations. For a further discussion of the various risks that may affect our business and expectations, see the section titled “Risk Factors” contained in Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The risks and uncertainties discussed therein do not reflect the potential future impact of any mergers, acquisitions or dispositions. In addition, any forward-looking statements represent our estimates only as of the day this Annual Report was filed with the SEC and should not be relied upon as representing our estimates as of any subsequent date. While we may elect to update forward-looking statements at some point in the future, we specifically disclaim any obligation to do so, even if our estimates change.
Background
We were formed on January 5, 2007 under the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts under the name Bio X Cell, Inc. to acquire the assets of Medelle Corporation (“Medelle”). Dr. Claude Ranoux purchased all of the assets of Medelle, and then he contributed those assets, including four patents relating to the INVOcell technology, to Bio X Cell, Inc. upon its formation in January 2007.
On December 5, 2008, Bio X Cell, Inc., doing business as INVO Bioscience, and each of the shareholders of INVO Bioscience entered into a share exchange agreement and consummated a share exchange with Emy’s Salsa AJI Distribution Company, Inc., a Nevada corporation (“Emy’s”). Upon the closing of the share exchange on December 5, 2008, the INVO Bioscience shareholders transferred all of their shares of common stock in INVO Bioscience to Emy’s. In connection with the share exchange, Emy’s changed its name to INVO Bioscience, Inc. and Bio X Cell, Inc. became a wholly owned subsidiary of Emy’s (re-named INVO Bioscience, Inc.).
The share exchange described immediately above was accounted for as a “reverse merger” because the former Bio X Cell shareholders owned a majority of the outstanding shares of common stock of Emy’s immediately following the share exchange. Bio X Cell was deemed the acquirer in the reverse merger. The financial results included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are based on our audited balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and related audited statements of operations and stockholders’ deficiency and statements of cash flows for the periods ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Overview
We are a medical device company focused in the Assisted Reproductive Technology (“ART”) marketplace. Our mission is to increase access to care and expand fertility treatment and patient care across the globe. Our patented device, the INVOcell, is the first Intravaginal Culture (“IVC”) system in the world used for the natural in vivo incubation of eggs and sperm during fertilization and early embryo development. INVOcell was granted clearance in the United States by the U.S. Food & Drug Administration (“FDA”) in November 2015, received the CE mark in October 2019, and is now positioned to help provide millions of infertile couples across the globe access to a new infertility treatment option. We believe this novel device and procedure provides a more natural, safe, effective, efficient and economical fertility treatment compared to current infertility treatments, including in-vitro fertilization (“IVF”) and intrauterine insemination (“IUI”). Unlike conventional infertility treatments such as IVF where the eggs and sperm develop into embryos in a laboratory incubator, the INVOcell utilizes the women’s vaginal cavity as an incubator to support a more natural fertilization and embryo development environment. As such, this novel device promotes in vivo conception and early embryo development.
In both commercial utilization of the INVOcell and in clinical studies, the INVO Procedure has proven to have equivalent pregnancy success and live birth rates as IVF. Additionally, we believe there are emotional benefits with the mother’s participation in fertilization and early embryo development by vaginal incubation compared to that of conventional IVF treatment by offering patients a more connected and personalized method to achieve pregnancy.
For many couples struggling with infertility, access to treatment is often not available. Financial challenges (cost of treatment) and limited availability (or capacity) of fertility medical care are two of the main challenges in the ART marketplace that contribute to the large percentage of untreated patients. Religious, social and cultural roadblocks can also prevent hopeful couples from realizing their dream to have a baby with conventional IVF. We believe INVOcell can address many of the key challenges in the ART market, particularly patient cost and infrastructure capacity constraints. The many benefits to the INVO solution include:
●
Cost: Many current clinics offering INVOcell are doing so at approximately half the cost of IVF treatment, due to: less drugs often being prescribed for INVOcell, fewer office visits needed, and less laboratory time needed as incubation is occurring inside the body rather than in the lab incubator.
●
Enhances patient capacity: The INVOcell device eliminates the need for a lab incubator as well as helps reduce the overall need for lab-support resources during the incubation period. We believe this generally supports the ability to lower costs and enables a clinic to handle a higher volume of patients on average.
●
Reduces the risk of errors of wrong embryo transfers since the embryos are never separated from the woman.
●
Promotes greater involvement by couples in the treatment and conception.
●
Creates a more natural and environmentally stable incubation than conventional IVF incubation in a laboratory.
In the second quarter of 2016, the first U.S. baby from the INVOcell and INVO Procedure following FDA clearance was born in Texas.
Sales and Marketing
Our product commercialization efforts are focused on identifying distributors and partners within targeted geographic regions that we believe can best promote, market and sale the INVOcell device and process to assist infertile couples in having a baby. We believe that our proven INVOcell procedure is an effective low-cost treatment option which can also be offered without the need for a more expensive IVF lab facility. We have been authorized to sell the INVOcell device in the United States since November 2015 after receiving de novo class II clearance from the US Food & Drug Administration (“FDA”). As a result of our January 2019 exclusive sales, marketing and distribution agreement with Ferring for the U.S., our primary focus will be on supporting Ferring and establishing INVO-clinics within the U.S. as well as developing key international markets around the world.
We anticipate that we will experience quarterly fluctuations in our revenues as a result of our efforts to expand the sales of the INVO technology to new markets. We expect international sales will increase moving forward as we continue to expand our efforts to expand INVOcell globally. We will continue to seek out partners that will contractually commit to meeting agreeable performance objectives that are consistent with our goals and objectives.
On November 12, 2018, we entered into a U.S. Distribution Agreement (the “Distribution Agreement”) with Ferring International Center S.A. (“Ferring”), which closed on January 14, 2019. Pursuant to the Distribution Agreement, among other things, we granted Ferring an exclusive license in the United States (the “Territory”) with rights to sublicense under patents related to our proprietary INVOcell™ intravaginal culture device together with the retention device and any other applicable accessories (collectively, the “Licensed Product”) to market, promote, distribute and sell the Licensed Product with respect to all therapeutic, prophylactic and diagnostic uses of medical devices or pharmaceutical products involving reproductive technology (including infertility treatment) in humans (the “Field”). Ferring is responsible, at its own cost, for all commercialization activities for the Licensed Product in the United States. We retained a limited exception to the exclusive license granted to Ferring allowing us, subject to certain restrictions, to establish up to establish up to five clinics that will commercialize INVO cycles in the U.S. This agreement was amended on March 2, 2021 to provide for added flexibility by increasing the number of INVO company-owned clinics initially allowable under the agreement and removing certain geographical requirements. We retained all commercialization rights for the Licensed Product outside of the United States. We believe the strategic partnership with a strong reproductive organization such as Ferring has provided us with the necessary sales and marketing resources and overall market credibility to help execute our goal to expand the INVOcell device around the world.
The Ferring license was deemed to be a functional license that provides the counterparty with a “right to access” to our intellectual property during the subscription period and accordingly, revenue is recognized over a period of time, which is generally the subscription period. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $714,286, related to the Ferring license agreement.
As of December 31, 2020, we had deferred revenues of $3,571,429 relating to the Distribution Agreement with Ferring.
On March 2, 2021, we entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Distribution Agreement (the “Amendment”) with Ferring. Pursuant to the Amendment, Ferring agreed to purchase a 2,004 count of product for $501,000 pursuant to the Distribution Agreement in March 2021, at which point the minimum annual target for 2020 set forth in Section 2.4 of the Distribution Agreement will be deemed to be satisfied in full as a result of such purchase. The Amendment provides for added flexibility by increasing the number of INVO company-owned clinics initially allowable under the agreement and removing certain geographical requirements.
Operations
We operate with a core internal team and outsource certain operational functions in order to help accelerate our efforts as well as reduce fixed internal overhead needs and in-house capital equipment requirements. Our most critical management and leadership functions are carried out by our core management team. We have contracted out the manufacturing, assembly, packaging, labeling and sterilization of the device to a medical manufacturing company and to a sterilization specialist to perform the gamma sterilization process.
Historically, our most significant challenge in growing our business has been our limited resources. Beginning in 2019, as a result of the Ferring agreement and upfront payment, we expanded our sales and marketing efforts and regulatory and clinical development activities. Our cash needs are primarily attributable to funding our sales and marketing efforts, strengthening our training capabilities, satisfying existing obligations, funding our planned clinical trial for additional indications for use, building an administrative infrastructure, and costs and professional fees associated with being a public company. We currently expect our existing distribution and partnership agreements, such as that with Ferring and the other more recent agreements with non-U.S. companies to provide increased revenue in the future, which we expect will help offset the higher level of spending.
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $6,062,874 and $3,123,875 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $2,938,999 increase in selling, general and administrative expenses in 2020 was primarily the result of an increase in wages as we expanded our internal team, professional fees, legal fees, and increased our spending on expanded label efforts. However, $1,756,991 of this increase is related to non-cash stock compensation and stock option expense.
Throughout the period 2019 to 2020 we incurred annual net losses as we continued to market our product and proprietary process as we endeavored to increase our revenue base. We expect to continue incurring losses during 2021 as we continue to invest in INVO clinics in the U.S. and the global expansion of our business and INVOcell technology.
We cannot accurately predict the level of success our key partners will enjoy over the next 12-24 months. However, we anticipate that we will continue to launch the INVOcell device and INVO Procedure within the U.S. through our agreement with Ferring, and in other parts of the world with new distributor partnerships and joint venture agreements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of INVO Bioscience’s financial condition presented in this section are based upon the audited consolidated financial statements of INVO Bioscience, which have been prepared in accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. During the preparation of the financial statements, INVO Bioscience is required to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, INVO Bioscience evaluates based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. A summary of significant accounting policies is included below. Management believes that the application of these policies on a consistent basis enables us to provide useful and reliable financial information about our operating results and financial condition.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation under the provisions of ASC 718-10 Share-Based Payment (formerly SFAS 123R). This statement requires the Company to measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award. That cost is recognized over the period in which the employee is required to provide service or performance goals in exchange for the award, which is usually immediate but sometimes over a vesting period. Warrants granted to non-employees are recorded as an expense over the requisite service period based on the grant date estimated fair value of the grant, determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue on arrangements in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). The core principle of ASC 606 is to recognize revenues when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled for those goods or services ASC 606 requires companies to assess their contracts to determine the timing and amount of revenue to recognize under the new revenue standard. The model has a five-step approach:
1.
Identify the contract with the customer.
2.
Identify the performance obligations in the contract.
3.
Determine the total transaction price.
4.
Allocate the total transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract.
5.
Recognize as revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In July 2017, FASB issued ASU 2017-11 (Part I) Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Down Round Features, (Part II) Replacement of the Indefinite Deferral for Mandatorily Redeemable Financial Instruments of Certain Nonpublic Entities and Certain Mandatorily Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests with a Scope Exception (“ASU 2017-11”). The new standard simplifies the accounting for certain financial instruments with down round features. Part I of ASU 2017-11 changes the classification analysis of certain equity-linked financial instruments, such as warrants and embedded conversion features, such that a down round feature is disregarded when assessing whether the instrument is indexed to an entity’s own stock under Subtopic 815-40, Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity. As a result, a down round feature, by itself, no longer requires an instrument to be re-measured at fair value through earnings each period, although all other aspects of the indexation guidance under Subtopic 815-40 continue to apply. Part II of ASU 2017-11 re-characterizes the indefinite deferral of certain provisions of Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, (currently presented as pending content in the Codification) as a scope exception. No change in practice is expected as a result of these amendments. The new standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, early adoption is permitted. The amendments in Part II have no accounting impact and therefore do not have an associated effective date. The Company decided to early adopt this ASU 2017-11 and applied it to the convertible notes it issued during the year which are reflected in this Form 10K.Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Scope of Modification Accounting. In May 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-09 which was issued to clarify and reduce both (i) diversity in practice and (ii) cost and complexity when applying the guidance in Topic 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation” to changes in the terms and conditions of a share-based payment award. This update is effective for the Company in the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2018. The adoption of this standard is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
Leases (Topic 842). In February 2016, FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (“ASU 2016-02”). The new standard establishes a right-of-use (“ROU”) model that requires a lessee to record a ROU asset and a lease liability on the balance sheet for all leases with terms longer than 12 months. Leases will be classified as either finance or operating, with classification affecting the pattern of expense recognition in the income statement. The new standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within those fiscal years. A modified retrospective transition approach is required for lessees for capital and operating leases existing at, or entered into after, the beginning of the earliest comparative period presented in the financial statements, with certain practical expedients available.
The Company adopted the standard effective January 1, 2019. The standard allows a number of optional practical expedients to use for transition. The Company choose the certain practical expedients allowed under the transition guidance which permitted us to not to reassess any existing or expired contracts to determine if they contain embedded leases, to not to reassess our lease classification on existing leases, to account for lease and non-lease components as a single lease component for equipment leases, and whether initial direct costs previously capitalized would qualify for capitalization under FASB ASC 842. The new standard also provides practical expedients and recognition exemptions for an entity's ongoing accounting policy elections. The Company has elected the short-term lease recognition for all leases that qualify, which means that we do not recognize a ROU asset and lease liability for any lease with a term of twelve months or less.
The most significant impact of adopting the standard was the recognition of ROU assets and lease liabilities for operating leases on the Company's consolidated balance sheet but it did not have an impact on the Company's consolidated statements of operations or consolidated statements of cash flows. The Company did not have a cumulative effect on adoption prior to January 1, 2019.
Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-04 which simplifies the test for goodwill impairment by eliminating Step 2 from the Goodwill impairment test. This new guidance is effective for the Company beginning in fiscal year 2021. The adoption of this standard is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued but not yet effective accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying condensed consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations
Fiscal year 2020 was impacted by the COVID-19 global pandemic, which affected the overall fertility industry as well as impacted some of our key partners and their efforts. However, we also believe important progress was made during the year that will help drive overall awareness and future expansion of INVOcell within key markets. This includes: 1) the availability of additional, real world (retrospective) data demonstrating quality patient outcomes with INVOcell, which further builds confidence and credibility around the technology, 2) the signing of additional distribution and joint venture agreements, 3) the addition of key personnel, and 4) the completion of a major public financing which provides the necessary working capital to execute on our growth and global market expansion efforts. While the ongoing pandemic may continue to impact 2021 and impede certain progress in some markets, the fertility industry has and continues to work toward a return to normal levels and we believe our expanded number of partners and active markets affords us a strong forward looking outlook.
The Assisted Reproductive Technology (“ART”) market also continues to benefit from a number of industry tailwinds, including 1) the large under-served potential patient population, 2) increasing infertility rates around the world 3) growing awareness and education of fertility treatment options, 4) a growing acceptance toward fertility treatment, 5) improvements in procedure techniques and hence improvements in pregnancy success rates and 6) generally improving insurance (private and public) reimbursement trends; all of which should help contribute to strong industry growth and patient demand for treatment. As a result of these dynamics, we feel INVO Bioscience and its novel technology solution are well positioned.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Revenue for year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,037,286, compared to $1,480,213 for the ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was the result of a decline in product sales to Ferring.
However, pursuant to an amendment we entered into subsequent to the year end, Ferring placed a $501,000 order in March 2021, which we agreed would satisfy Ferring’s minimum purchase requirements for 2020.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $948,526 compared to $1,340,543 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Gross margins were 91% and 91% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $6,065,066, compared to $3,128,635 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $2,936,431 or 94% was primarily the result of an increase in personnel, stock-based compensation, marketing and other corporate expenses. Approximately $1,756,991 of this increase is related to non-cash stock compensation and stock option expense.
Research and Development Expenses
We began to fund additional research and development (“R&D”) efforts in 2020 as part of our 5-day label expansion efforts, and also submitted additional trademark and patent filings. Excluding the investment in inventory in anticipation of clinical trials and patents, R&D expenses were $398,426 for the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2019 we did not fund any R&D.
Interest Expense, Financing Fees
Interest expense and financing fees were $2,836,504 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $387,646 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $2,448,858, or approximately 632%, was primarily due to an increase in amortization of discount, debt issuance cost and interest on the 2020 Convertible Notes and was a non-cash related expense.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2020, we had unused federal net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) of $21,819,421. These losses expire in various amounts at varying times beginning in 2027 with a portion carrying on indefinitely. Unless expiration occurs, these NOLs may be used to offset future taxable income and thereby reduce our income taxes otherwise payable.
We recorded a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets at December 31, 2020 and 2019 totaling $6,408,401 and $4,401,714, respectively. The valuation allowance has been established for certain deferred tax assets for which we believe it is more likely than not that the tax benefits will not be realized, which are primarily federal and state net operating loss carryforwards. If our expectations for future operating results on a consolidated basis or at the state jurisdiction level vary from actual results due to changes in healthcare regulations, general economic conditions, or other factors, we may need to adjust the valuation allowance, for all or a portion of our deferred tax assets. Our income tax expense in future periods will be reduced or increased to the extent of offsetting decreases or increases, respectively, in our valuation allowance in the period when the change in circumstances occurs. These changes could have a significant impact on our future earnings.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had net losses of $8,347,316 and $2,167,544, respectively. The increase in net loss was due to increased operating expenses and interest expense. Approximately $2,626,220 of this increase was related to non-cash equity and debt amortization expenses as well as $1,756,991 of equity compensation. As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $8,254,540, compared to $42,330 as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, our stockholders’ equity was $5,743,106, compared to a stockholders’ deficit of $3,713,595 as of December 31, 2019. Cash used in operations was $4,775,148 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cash provided by operations of $1,370,513 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
During 2020, we raised $13.8 million in debt and equity financings. Based on our current plan, we believe we have sufficient liquidity for at least the next 12 months. To the extent additional funds are necessary to meet our longer-term liquidity needs to execute our business strategy, we may need to raise additional funding by way of debt or equity financings or a combination of these potential sources of funds, although we can provide no assurance that these sources of funding will be available on reasonable terms.
Historically, our primary sources of liquidity have been from equity or debt offerings and up-front distribution licensing fees. Until we can generate a sufficient amount of cash from operations, we may need to finance future cash needs through public or private equity or debt offerings. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may have to significantly scale back our operations or delay, scale back or discontinue the continuing development of our products. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of additional debt or equity securities, it could result in dilution to our existing stockholders and increased fixed payment obligations, and these securities may have rights senior to those of our common stock. If we incur indebtedness, we could become subject to covenants that would restrict our operations, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, limitations on our ability to acquire, sell or license intellectual property rights and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. Any of these events could significantly harm our business, financial condition and prospects.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, we had $10,097,760 in cash compared to $1,238,585 on December 31, 2019. Net cash used in operating activities in 2020 was $4,775,148, as compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $1,370,513 for 2019. The increase in net cash used in operations was primarily due to the increase in net loss and a decrease in deferred revenue as a result of the initial exclusive license and distribution agreement fee we received in January 2019.
In 2020, cash used in investing activities of $187,254 related to new molds, additional trademarks and investment to establish joint ventures. In 2019, cash used in investing activities of $114,706 related to new molds and trademarks.
During 2020, cash provided by financing activities of $13,821,577 primarily related to the public offerings of equity and convertible notes. In 2019, cash used by financing activities of $229,465 primarily related to principal payments on notes payable.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Under SEC regulations, we are required to disclose our off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, such as changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. An off-balance sheet arrangement means a transaction, agreement or contractual arrangement to which any entity that is not consolidated with us is a party, under which we have:
-
Any obligation under certain guarantee contracts;
-
Any retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support to that entity for such assets;
-
Any obligation under a contract that would be accounted for as a derivative instrument, except that it is both indexed to our stock and classified in stockholder’s equity in our statement of financial position; and
-
Any obligation arising out of a material variable interest held by us in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to us, or engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us.
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that we are required to disclose pursuant to these regulations. In the ordinary course of business, we enter into operating lease commitments, purchase commitments and other contractual obligations. These transactions are recognized in our financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States.
Inflation
We believe that inflation has not had a material effect on our operations to date.