Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. When the words “believe,” “expect,” “plan,” “project,” “estimate,” and similar expressions are used, they identify forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are based on management’s current beliefs and assumptions and information currently available to management, and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors that may cause the actual results, performance, or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance, or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. Information concerning factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from these forward-looking statements can be found in our periodic reports filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. The forward-looking statements included are made only as of the date of this report. We disclaim any obligation to update any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise.
Plan of Operations
During the period from April 1, 2020, to March 31, 2021, our management team began its global FINTECH plan when COVID-19 caused the shutdown of global marketing and caused significant delays in the establishment of our mining operations. We adjusted for each of the setbacks while continuing to execute its corporate plan for growth which included the strategic partnership with DBR Capital LLC for necessary funding, the establishment of a new Board of Directors, and the acquisition and pending closing of a Broker-Dealer, Registered Investment Advisor and trading tools platform.
Our subsidiaries and their operations, if any, include the following:
● iGenius LLC, Kuvera France, S.A.S. (through June of 2021 when it was closed), and iGenius Global, LTD distribute our financial education platform and services, as well as cryptocurrency packages, that are dedicated to the individual consumer. The entities utilize an affiliate or direct marketing model for distribution. In late 2019, early 2020, as COVID 19 was beginning to spread worldwide, the Kuvera companies completed a product and bonus plan rebuild and was able to launch these services and create stabilized monthly revenue. We found that COVID-19 negatively impacted our distribution channel as all of our distributors were unable to conduct in person meetings, trainings, or events, however, the distributors pivoted to on-line events, virtual meetings and ultimately stabilized and grew our subscription sales. The compensation plan that was introduced in January of 2020 further drove our operating margins by rewarding growth and retention. This aligns our distributors with our company objectives, and we are attracting seasoned leadership from around the world.
● ApexTek, LLC and SAFETek, LLC, our subsidiaries that sold the APEX package saw rapid growth during fiscal 2020. Under the program we sold high powered data processing equipment to our customers and they leased the equipment back to us. We began to experience difficulties in sourcing equipment for the program which later revealed itself to be early supply chain issues related to COVID 19. The supply chain, delivery, customs, and lack of human resources caused by global and U.S. lockdowns further caused issues in deploying the equipment. On June 30, 2020, we temporarily discontinued the APEX program to assess the delays, audit the transaction and determine our ability to meet the lease commitments. The assessment took place in July and August and indicated we would not be able to meet the APEX lease obligations and would be in default to the lease holders. In September, our board of directors voted to approve a buyback program wherein all APEX purchasers were offered a 48-month promissory note to ensure a 125% return of their purchase price in exchange for cancellation of the lease and our purchase of all rights and obligations under the lease. The buyback program also ensured all APEX purchasers were able to purchase a protection plan from a third-party provider, wherein each purchaser could protect their initial purchase price and obtain 50% of their APEX purchase price at five years or 100% of the APEX purchase price at ten years. The lease buyback program closed on November 30, 2020, with approximately 99% of the APEX purchasers accepting the offer. Apex Tek, LLC has discontinued operations while SAFETek LLC continues to source, acquire and deploy mining equipment in order to operate and expand its high-speed processing and mining operations.
● SAFE Management, LLC, a Registered Investment Advisor and Commodity Trading Advisor, did not receive the necessary marketing and management required for growth during the year ended March 31, 2021, however, will become a part of Investview Financial Group Holdings, LLC which will include the newly acquired companies once closing is complete.
● United Games, United League, and Investment Tools & Training, LLC have had no operations and will be restructured or eliminated completely as we continue to streamline operations.
The Board of Directors, working with senior management, was able to simultaneously begin to implement is strategic FINTECH plan while addressing the effects of the worldwide pandemic on operations. These actions successfully limited the negative impact while establishing the proper foundation for growth.
iGenius worldwide subscription sales and SAFETek mining operations were able to reach historical revenue growth during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, paving the way for us to execute on our financial group holding plans for fiscal 2022.
Accomplishments during the period of April 1, 2020 through March 31, 2021 include:
● April 2020 - Company established the Perpetual Preferred Unit Offering for Series B Preferred Shares with an annual 13% dividend and 5 warrants for common stock exercisable at $0.10. The Offering closed on June 22, 2021. The Company sold 252,192 Perpetual Preferred Units.
● April 2020 - Company established a multi-part funding arrangement with strategic FINTECH partner - DBR Capital LLC.
● May 2020 - The Board of Directors is restructured to include Joseph Cammarata, Annette Raynor, Mario Romano, James R. Bell and David B. Rothrock
● August 2020 - Investview pays first quarterly dividend to Preferred shareholders.
● August 2020 - Ryan Smith former CEO and Officer of SAFETek retires and Jeremy Roma was removed as President of APEX Tek LLC coinciding with the cancellation of the APEX program.
● November 2020 - Investview completes three rounds of funding through the DBR Capital agreement
● December 2020 through March 2021- Investview reports record high monthly mining revenue and increased Bitcoin holdings month over month.
● January 2021 - Investview unveils iGenius LLC - a full rebrand of Kuvera
● January 2021 - Investview enters Definitive Marketing and Distribution agreement with Oneiro, N.A. - Developer of the World’s First Adaptive Digital Currency.
● March 2021 - Investview purchases $1M worth of ndau.
Achievements subsequent to March 31, 2021 are:
● April 1, 2021 - SAFETek completes migration to new mining operations center achieving reduced operating and energy expenses.
● May 5, 2021 - Key Shareholders sign voluntary lock-up extensions to April of 2024.
● May 7, 2021 - Investview enters Acquisition agreement (subject to closing) to acquire SSA Technologies LLC which includes LevelX Capital LLC (broker-dealer), LevelX Advisors LLC (RIA) and Mpower and its powerful Prodigio trading platform.
● May 18, 2021 - Investview adds an addition $1M of ndau to its holdings.
Results of Operations
Year Ended March 31, 2021, Compared to Year Ended March 31, 2020
Revenues
Revenue, net, increased $14,088,571, or 58%, from $24,183,590 for the year ended March 31, 2020, to $38,272,161 for the year ended March 31, 2021. The increase can be fully explained by a $14.4m increase in our mining revenue from 2020 to 2021, which was due to the growth in our cryptocurrency mining operations. Our gross billings also increased by 55%, or $14,473,802, to $40,703,751 in the year ended March 31, 2021, versus $26,229,949 in the year ended March 31, 2020, which was also due to the growth in our mining operations.
Operating Costs
Operating costs decreased $9,978, or 0%, from $37,507,750 for the year ended March 31, 2020, to $37,497,772 for the year ended March 31, 2021. We saw an increase in our cost of sales and services of $5,083,948, or 203%, from $2,507,071 for the year ended March 31, 2020, to $7,591,019 for the year ended March 31, 2021. This increase was due to the increase in our mining operations and the costs associated with running our mining equipment, which include hosting, electrical, and power costs. We also recorded an increase in professional fees of $1,799,555, or 133%, from $1,356,574 for the year ended March 31, 2020, to $3,156,129 for the year ended March 31, 2021, which was due to our issuance of 82,000,000 shares of common stock for professional services valued at $1,640,000 based on the market value on the day of issuance. The increase was offset by a decrease in our impairment expense of $3,629,658, or 86%, from $4,230,741 for the year ended March 31, 2020 to $601,083 for the year ended March 31, 2021. The large expense in the prior year was due to a long-term license agreement being written off when we discontinued the use of the license, along with the write-off of fixed assets that were abandoned and the write-off of intangible assets we determined were not going to be recoverable. In addition, there was a decrease of $2,226,943 in salary and related costs and a decrease of $1,117,752 in general and administrative costs due to overall cost-cutting measures taken during the year ended March 31, 2021.
Other Income (Expense)
We recorded other expense of $(59,023) for the year ended March 31, 2021, which was a difference of $7,894,625, or 99%, from the prior period other expense of $(7,953,648). The change is due to a larger gain on debt extinguishment ($5,476,549 for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to $2,018,791 for the year ended March 31, 2020) and less interest expense ($6,647,217 for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to $10,677,768 for the year ended March 31, 2020) in the current year when compared to the prior year. These changes were due mostly to the restructuring of our debt arrangements and our ability to repay higher interest loans with new funding arrangements that had more favorable terms, along with the APEX lease buyback program which allowed us to cancel our APEX leases in exchange for notes with no interest.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During the year ended March 31, 2021, we recorded net income of $565,793 compared to a net loss of $21,285,191 recorded for the year ended March 31, 2020. We were able to show income from operations of $774,389 in the current year and generate cash of $6,887,284 through our operating activities. We used this cash from operations and cash generated from financing activities of $2,570,264 to fund the purchase of 2,933,899 worth of fixed assets. As a result, our cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash increased by $6,524,650 to $6,661,827 as compared to $137,177 at the beginning of the fiscal year.
During the year ended March 31, 2021, we raised $5,893,135 in cash proceeds from related parties, $1,405,300 in cash proceeds from new lending arrangements, and $1,960,325 in cash proceeds from the sale of preferred stock. As of March 31, 2021 we have cash of $5,389,654 and a working capital balance of $2,005,576. Further, subsequent to March 31, 2021 we received gross proceeds of $2,471,875 in connection with our Preferred Unit Offering and plan to continue to increase revenues and decrease expenses to generate income from operations. As of March 31, 2021 our unrestricted cryptocurrency balance was reported at a cost basis of $4,679,256. The fair market value of those holdings, based on the closing market price on March 31, 2021, was $5,978,597.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Future events, however, may differ markedly from our current expectations and assumptions. While there are several significant accounting policies affecting our consolidated financial statements; we believe the following critical accounting policies involves the most complex, difficult, and subjective estimates and judgments.
Basis of Accounting
Our policy is to prepare our financial statements on the accrual basis of accounting in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Investview, Inc., and our wholly owned subsidiaries: iGenius, LLC (formerly Kuvera, LLC), Kuvera France S.A.S., Apex Tek, LLC (formerly Razor Data, LLC), SAFETek, LLC (formerly WealthGen Global, LLC), S.A.F.E. Management, LLC, United Games, LLC, United League, LLC, Investment Tools & Training, LLC, iGenius Global LTD (formerly Kuvera (N.I.) LTD), Investview Financial Group Holdings, LLC and Investview MTS, LLC. Through March 31, 2019 we had determined that one affiliated entity, Kuvera LATAM S.A.S., which we previously conducted business with, was a variable interest entity and we were the primary beneficiary of the entity’s activities, which, at the time, were similar to those of Kuvera, LLC (now iGenius, LLC). As a result, through March 31, 2019 we had consolidated the accounts of this variable interest entity into the consolidated financial statements. Further, because the Company did not have any ownership interest in this variable interest entity, the Company had allocated the contributed capital in the variable interest entity as a component of noncontrolling interest. As of April 1, 2019, Kuvera LATAM S.A.S. had no operations and ceased to exist, therefore, as of that date, no consolidation of the entity was necessary and we recorded a gain on deconsolidation of $53,739 to eliminate the intercompany account with Kuvera LATAM S.A.S. All intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of these financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Subscription Revenue
The majority of our revenue is generated by subscription sales and payment is received at the time of purchase. We recognize subscription revenue in accordance with ASC 606-10 where revenue is measured based on a consideration specified in a contract with a customer and recognized when we satisfy the performance obligation specified in each contract. Our performance obligation is to provide services over a fixed subscription period; therefore, we recognize revenue ratably over the subscription period and deferred revenue is recorded for the portion of the subscription period subsequent to each reporting date. Additionally, we offer a 10-day trial period to first time subscription customers, during which a full refund can be requested if a customer does not wish to continue with the product. Revenues are deferred during the trial period as collection is not probable until that time has passed. Revenues are presented net of refunds, sales incentives, credits, and known and estimated credit card chargebacks.
Mining Revenue
Through our wholly owned subsidiary, SAFETek, LLC, we leased equipment under a sales-type lease through June of 2020. In June of 2020 we cancelled all leases and purchased all of the rights and obligations under the leases, which included obtaining ownership of all equipment. We use the equipment on blockchain networks to validate and add blocks of transactions to blockchain ledgers (commonly referred to as “mining”). As compensation for mining we are issued fees from processors and/or block rewards that are newly created cryptocurrency units granted to us. Our mining activities constitute our ongoing major and central operations of SAFETek, LLC. Because we do not have contracts, nor do we have customers associated with our mining revenue, we recognize revenue when fees and/or rewards are settled, or ultimately granted to us as a result of our mining activities.
Cryptocurrency Revenue
We generate revenue from the sale of cryptocurrency packages to our customers through an arrangement with third-party suppliers. The various packages include different amounts of coin with differing rates of returns and terms and, in some cases, include a product protection option that allows the purchaser to protect their initial purchase price. The protection allows the purchaser to obtain 50% of their purchase price at five years or 100% of their purchase price at ten years. Both the coin and the protection option are delivered by third-party suppliers.
We recognize cryptocurrency revenue in accordance with ASC 606-10 where revenue is measured based on a consideration specified in a contract with a customer and recognized when we satisfy the performance obligation specified in each contract. Our performance obligation is to arrange for the third-parties to provide coin and protection (if applicable) to our customers and payment is received from our customers at the time of order placement. All customers are given two weeks to request a refund, therefore we record a customer advance on our balance sheet upon receipt of payment. After the two weeks have passed from order placement, we request our third-party suppliers to deliver coin and protection (if applicable), at which time we recognize revenue and the amounts due to our suppliers on our books.
Fee Revenue
We generate fee revenue from our customers through SAFE Management, our subsidiary licensed as a Registered Investment Advisor and Commodities Trading Advisor. We recognize fee revenue in accordance with ASC 606-10 where revenue is measured based on a consideration specified in a contract with a customer and recognized when we satisfy the performance obligation specified in each contract. Our performance obligation is to deliver fully managed trading services to individuals who do not meet the requirements of Qualified Investors and who lack the time to trade for themselves. We recognize fee revenue as our performance obligation is met and we receive payment for such advisory fees in the month following recognition.
Revenue generated for the year ended March 31, 2021, was as follows:
Foreign revenues for the year ended March 31, 2021 were approximately $20.3 million while domestic revenue for the year ended March 31, 2021 was approximately $18.0 million.
Revenue generated for the year ended March 31, 2020 was as follows:
Foreign revenues for the year ended March 31, 2020 were approximately $21.2 million while domestic revenue for the year ended March 31, 2020 were approximately $3.0 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. ASU 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, which simplifies the accounting for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity, including convertible instruments and contracts on an entity’s own equity. Under current GAAP, there are five accounting models for convertible debt instruments. ASU 2020-06 removes from U.S. GAAP the separation models for (1) convertible debt with a cash conversion feature and (2) convertible instruments with a beneficial conversion feature. As a result, after adopting the ASU’s guidance, entities will not separately present in equity an embedded conversion feature in such debt. Instead, they will account for a convertible debt instrument wholly as debt, and for convertible preferred stock wholly as preferred stock (i.e., as a single unit of account), unless (1) a convertible instrument contains features that require bifurcation as a derivative under ASC 815 or (2) a convertible debt instrument was issued at a substantial premium. Additionally, for convertible debt instruments with substantial premiums accounted for as paid-in capital, the FASB decided to add disclosures about (1) the fair value amount and the level of fair value hierarchy of the entire instrument for public business entities and (2) the premium amount recorded as paid-in capital. ASU 2020-06 will be effective for public business entities that meet the definition of a Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filer, excluding entities eligible to be smaller reporting companies as defined by the SEC, for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. For all other entities, the amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently evaluating the potential impact of the adoption of this accounting pronouncement to its financial statements.
We have noted no other recently issued accounting pronouncements that we have not yet adopted that we believe are applicable or would have a material impact on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues, and results of operations, liquidity, or capital expenditures.
Trends, Risks, and Uncertainties
We have sought to identify what we believe to be the most significant risks to our business, but we cannot predict whether, or to what extent, any of such risks may be realized nor can we guarantee that we have identified all possible risks that might arise. Investors should carefully consider all such risk factors before making an investment decision with respect to our common stock.
Cautionary Factors That May Affect Future Results
We have sought to identify what we believe are significant risks to our business, but we cannot predict whether, or to what extent, any of such risks may be realized nor can we guarantee that we have identified all possible risks that might arise.
Potential Fluctuations in Annual Operating Results
Our annual operating results may fluctuate significantly in the future as a result of a variety of factors, most of which are outside our control, including: the demand for our products and services; seasonal trends in purchasing, the amount and timing of capital expenditures and other costs relating to the commercial and consumer financing; price competition or pricing changes in the market; technical difficulties or system downtime; general economic conditions; and economic conditions specific to the consumer financing sector.
Our annual results may also be significantly impacted by the accounting treatment of acquisitions, financing transactions, or other matters. Particularly at our early stage of development, such accounting treatment can have a material impact on the results for any quarter. Due to the foregoing factors, among others, it is likely that our operating results may fall below our expectations or those of investors in some future quarter.
Management of Growth
We may experience growth, which will place a strain on our managerial, operational, and financial systems resources. To accommodate our current size and manage growth if it occurs, we must devote management attention and resources to improve our financial strength and our operational systems. Further, we will need to expand, train, and manage our sales and distribution base. There is no guarantee that we will be able to effectively manage our existing operations or the growth of our operations, or that our facilities, systems, procedures, or controls will be adequate to support any future growth. Our ability to manage our operations and any future growth will have a material effect on our stockholders.
If we fail to remain current on our reporting requirements, we could be removed from the OTCQB tier of OTC Markets, which would limit the ability of broker-dealers to sell our securities and the ability of stockholders to sell their securities in the secondary market.
Companies trading on the OTCQB tier of OTC Markets, such as us, must be reporting issuers under Section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), and must be current in their reports under Section 13, in order to maintain price quotation privileges on the OTCQB tier. If we fail to remain current on our reporting requirements, we could be removed from the OTCQB tier. As a result, the market liquidity for our securities could be severely adversely affected by limiting the ability of broker-dealers to sell our securities and the ability of stockholders to sell their securities in the secondary market.