ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes included in Item 8 of this Annual Report. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis (this “MD&A”) has been prepared based on information known to management as of March 26, 2021. This MD&A is intended to help the reader understand the consolidated audited financial statements of the Company.
OVERVIEW
Assure is focused on providing physicians with a comprehensive suite of services for Intraoperative Neuromonitoring (“IONM”). IONM is a service that has been well established as a standard of care for over 20 years as a risk mitigation tool during invasive surgeries such as spine, ear, nose, and throat, cardiovascular, and other parts of the human body. The Company’s operations consist of a single reportable segment. Assure Neuromonitoring employs a technical staff that is on site in the operating room during each procedure and covers the case using industry standard, diagnostic machinery. The technical staff are certified by a third-party credentialing agency. Since 2015, Assure has addressed the Professional IONM component of its business via a series of investments in and management service agreements with Provider Network Entities (“PEs”). These PEs are contracted with offsite neurologists/readers to provide IONM coverage from a remote location as a level of redundancy and risk mitigation in addition to the onsite technical services of the technical company. Collectively, the technical and professional IONM services offered and rendered provide a turnkey platform to help make surgeries safer. The Company’s goal is to establish Assure as the premier provider of IONM services by offering a value-added platform that handles every component from scheduling to coverage, to billing and collections. The Company’s strategy focuses on utilizing best of breed staff and partners to deliver outcomes that are beneficial to all stakeholders including patients, physicians, and shareholders.
The Company has primarily been engaged in the neuromonitoring of spine and neurosurgeries. The expansion into additional surgical verticals is part of Assure’s growth strategy. By applying its neuromonitoring platform to additional surgical verticals such as vascular, ear nose and throat, and several others, the addressable market for Assure’s service is greatly expanded. The Company has operations in Louisiana, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Texas, Colorado, South Carolina, and Arizona. In October 2019, the Company acquired Neuro-Pro Monitoring (“Neuro-Pro”). Neuro-Pro has historically operated in Texas. The Company believes that continued geographic expansion initiatives coupled with the surgical vertical expansion efforts and selective acquisitions will combine to generate substantial growth opportunities going forward.
The Company has financed its cash requirements primarily from revenues generated from its services, by utilizing a bank promissory note and line of credit, from the issuances of convertible debentures, from government loan programs, and from the sale of common stock. The Company’s ability to maintain the carrying value of its assets is dependent on successfully marketing its services and maintaining future profitable operations, the outcome of which cannot be predicted at this time. The Company has also stated its intention to grow its operations by developing additional PE relationships and directly contracting with hospitals and surgery centers for services. In the future, it may be necessary for the Company to raise additional funds for the continuing development of its business plan. For further information about Assure, please visit www.assureneuromonitoring.com, www.sedar.com and www.otcmarkets.com.
OUTLOOK/BUSINESS TREND
COVID-19
In December 2019, there was a global outbreak of COVID-19 (Coronavirus) that has resulted in changes in global supply of certain products. The pandemic is having an unprecedented impact on the U.S. economy as federal, state, and local governments react to this public health crisis, which has created significant uncertainties. These uncertainties include, but are not limited to, the potential adverse effect of the pandemic on the economy, our healthcare partners, our employees and patients. As the pandemic continues to grow, consumer fear about becoming ill with the virus and recommendations and/or mandates from federal, state, and local authorities to avoid large gatherings of people or self-quarantine are continuing to increase, which has already affected, and may continue to affect, the number of procedures performed.
Although Assure saw over a 70% decline in the number of procedures performed in March 2020 and April 2020 due to a downturn in elective procedures driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, the volume of cases performed returned back to near normal levels in May 2020.
Health and safety measures taken at Assure include:
● Cancellation of all non-essential travel.
● Indefinite work from home policy for all employees not engaged in on-site medical facility activities.
● Mandatory self-quarantine for anyone who has experienced any flu-like symptoms or has had contact with anyone believed to have been exposed to COVID-19.
The Company took the following actions to increase its cash position and preserve financial flexibility:
● The Company implemented temporary salary reductions, salary deferments and a selective employee furlough program, designed to reduce corporate spending. Salaries returned to normal as of December 31, 2020.
● Assure amended the promissory note with the Sellers of Neuro-Pro Monitoring to postpone $700 thousand of its March 31, 2020, payment to May 15, 2020. This note was subsequently repaid during December 2020.
● The Company applied for and received a $1.2 million Paycheck Protection Plan loan. This loan was forgiven during December 2020.
● During December 2020, the Company completed a $9.5 million equity financing.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table provides selected financial information from the condensed consolidated financial statements of income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. All dollar amounts set forth in the table below are expressed thousands of dollars, except share and per share amounts.
Revenue
Total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $3.5 million and $17.7 million, respectively, net of the valuation allowance for the carrying value of accounts receivable. As at December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded a valuation allowance for the carrying value of accounts receivable of $27.3 million and $22.8 million, respectively.
We record out-of-network technical and professional revenue (included in Patient service fees, net) per case based upon our historical collection rates from private insurance carriers. Prior to June 30, 2020, the collection rates that we used to record our technical and professional revenue were based upon all cash receipts for cases that were between 2-3 years old at the time of the calculation. During the second quarter of 2020, we noticed that the average cash collection rates for technical and professional insurance cases between 1-2 years old had decreased in comparison to the average collection rates for cases that were between 2-3 years old. Part of this decline relates to the poor billing and collection practices by the legacy third-party billing company and part of the decline relates to lower average payments by the private insurance carriers. Based upon this information, we proactively elected to change our revenue estimation process for out-of-network revenue and to use the collection experience from insurance cases that are between 1-2 years old and management believes
the more recent collection experience is more indicative of future per case collection rates. This resulted in us recording approximately $15 million of additional reserves against our accounts receivable and patient service fee revenue during the three months ended June 30, 2020. In addition, the PEs saw a similar decline in their average cash collection rates. The PEs proactively recorded similar reserve adjustments and the impact to us was a reduction in management fee revenue of approximately $2.2 million and a reduction in earnings (loss) from equity method investments of approximately $900 thousand during the three months ended June 30, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, Assure managed 8,558 technical cases and 1,356 professional cases where it retained 100% of the professional revenue (from our wholly-owned subsidiaries) compared to 5,376 technical cases and 1,038 professional cases where it retained 100% of the professional revenue (from our wholly- owned subsidiaries) in the same period in the prior year, a 55% increase in case volume. On October 31, 2019, we acquired the neuromonitoring operations of Neuro-Pro Monitoring in Texas. For the remainder of 2019 and for the year ended December 31, 2020, Neuro-Pro performed 596 and 2,687 of the afore-mentioned technical cases, respectively.
Revenue from Hospital, management and other fees increased to $7.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary reason for this increase relates to the expanding number of PE entities that pay us a management fee, including Neuro-Pro’s PE entity, as opposed to us having an ownership interest and recording its share of the PE entity operating results. With the increased case counts during the year ended December 31, 2020, there were also more cases billed to hospitals. Additionally, we have recently commenced charging certain PEs billing, equipment and supply fees.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $7.9 million compared to $5.0 million for the same period in 2019. Cost of revenues consist primarily of third-party billing fees, the cost of our internal billing and collection department, technician wages, and medical supplies. Third- party billing fees are recorded as a percentage of revenue recorded and therefore, also vary materially when we changed our allowance against accounts receivable. Technical wages and medical supplies vary with the number of neuromonitoring cases. The cost of our internal billing and collection department has been increasing during 2020 as we have ramped up this department and as the number of cases that they are responsible for billing increases. During 2020, the number of neuromonitoring cases increased 62% compared to 2019. The cost of revenues decreased by over $1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the reversal of the third-party billing fees that had previously been accrued on the $15 million of revenue that was reserved during the three months ended June 30, 2020.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses were $9.6 million and $8.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase period-to-period was primarily related to higher legal fees, which vary based on corporate activities and increased head count as we continued to build an inhouse billing and collections function and transition from our outsourced third-party vendor. During this time some of these costs were duplicative.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses remained constant at $1.2 million and $1.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense was $1.0 million and $0.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase is primarily related to the increase in property, plant and equipment and ROU asset balances compared to the prior year.
Earnings (loss) from equity method investments
Assure recognizes its pro-rata share of the net income (loss) generated by the non-wholly-owned PEs. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized $1.2 million of losses from equity method investments compared to $1.3 million of earnings from equity method investments for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily associated with the previously mentioned reserves that were recorded in 2020.
Gain on Paycheck Protection Program loan
During April 2020, the Company received an unsecured loan under the United States Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) pursuant to the recently adopted Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “PPP Loan”) in the amount of $1.2 million. During November 2020, the Company filed an application for forgiveness of the PPP Loan. During December 2020, the Company was granted forgiveness of the PPP Loan. As of December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a gain on forgiveness of the PPP Loan of $1.2 million. There were no similar transactions during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gain on extinguishment of acquisition debt
During 2019, the Company acquired Neuro-Pro Monitoring for $7 million and was funded via promissory notes with the sellers of Neuro-Pro Monitoring. The Company repaid the promissory notes during December 2020 which is resulted in a gain on extinguishment of acquisition debt of $188 thousand. There were no similar transactions during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Accretion expense
The Company recorded accretion expense of $782 thousand and $74 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company accretes the difference between the fair value of the convertible notes and the face value of the convertible debt over the term of the convertible note.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net was $530 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $252 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase year-over-year is primarily due to the issuance of $3.5 million of convertible debt in late 2019 and early 2020.
Income tax benefit (expense)
For the year ended December 31, 2020 income tax benefit was $2.2 million compared to income tax expense of $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company had an effective tax rate of 12.6% and 22.9% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company’s estimated annual tax rate is impacted primarily by the amount of taxable income earned in each jurisdiction the Company operates in and permanent differences between financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis and to a valuation allowance that the Company recorded against certain deferred tax assets.
FINANCIAL POSITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our cash position as at December 31, 2020 was $4.4 million compared to the December 31, 2019 cash balance of $59 thousand. Working capital was $17.4 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $22.1 million at December 31, 2019, largely on the basis of a decrease of approximately of $15.9 million in net accounts receivables, partially offset by a decrease in current liabilities of $4.0 million. We rely on payments from multiple private insurers and hospital systems that have payment policies and payment cycles that vary widely. Because we are primarily an out-of-network biller to private insurance companies, the collection times for our claims can last in excess of 24 months.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we collected approximately $13.8 million of cash from operations compared to collecting approximately $8.0 million in the same prior year period despite the carrying amount of accounts receivable decreasing. We had $558 thousand of cash distributions from its PE entities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $979 thousand for the same prior year period.
We financed our operations primarily from revenues generated from services rendered and through equity and debt financings. We expects to meet our short-term obligations, through cash earned through operating activities, debt financings, issuances of convertible debentures and stock sales.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.5 million compared to cash used in operating activities of $4.2 million for the same period in the preceding year. Cash was used to fund working capital increases primarily in accounts receivable related to our growth.
Cash used in investing activities of $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to payoff of the Neuro-Pro acquisition debt. Cash provided by investing activities $465 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to distributions received from the PEs partially offset by the payments against the Neuro-Pro acquisition debt.
Cash provided by financing activities of $14.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to $9.6 million received from equity financings, $7.8 million of proceeds from our bank promissory note, line of credit, the term loan and issuance of convertible debentures, offset by $2.4 million of payments to the bank promissory note and line of credit. Cash provided by financing activities of $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was related to net proceeds from a bank line of credit and payments associated with lease liabilities.
Our near-term cash requirements relate primarily to payroll expenses, trade payables, debt payments, capital lease payments, and general corporate obligations. Approximately 52% and 56% of the trade and other payables at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, consist of accrued billing fees. These fees will not be due and payable until the underlying accounts receivable is collected.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no material undisclosed off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our results of operations or financial condition.
We have receivables from related parties and equity investments in PEs that are due and payable upon those entities collecting on their own accounts receivable. To the extent that these entities are unable to collect on their accounts receivable or there is an impairment in the valuation of those accounts receivable, the Company will need to reduce its related party receivables and/or its equity investments in the PEs.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP. Application of GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes and within this MD&A. We consider our most important accounting policies that require significant estimates and management judgment to be those policies with respect to revenue, accounts receivable and income taxes, which are discussed below. Our other significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2, “Basis of Presentation” and Note 3, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
We continually evaluate the accounting policies and estimates used to prepare the consolidated financial statements. In general, our estimates are based on historical experience, evaluation of current trends, information from third-party professionals and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the known facts and circumstances. Estimates can require a significant amount of judgment and a different set of assumptions could result in material changes to our reported results.
Revenue Recognition
The Company derives its revenue primarily from fees for IONM services provided. Revenue is recognized upon performance of promised service to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for those services.
Patient service fee revenue and receivables
Patient service fee revenue is recognized in the period in which IONM services are rendered, at net realizable amounts from third party payors when collections are reasonably assured and can be estimated. The majority of our services are rendered on an out-of-network basis and billed to third party insurers. Since allowable charges for services rendered out-of-network are not contractually based, the Company estimates the net realizable value from the gross charges submitted to third party payors and recognizes the net patient service fee revenue. The estimates for out-of-network revenue are based on evaluating the payor mix, historical settlements and payment data for payor types, and current economic conditions to calculate an appropriate net realizable value for revenue and accounts receivables. These estimates are subject to ongoing monitoring and adjustment based on actual experience with final settlements and collections and management revises its revenue estimates as necessary in subsequent periods. Patient service fee revenue is also adjusted in the period when an accounts receivable balance for IONM service is written-off once collection is doubtful and the total collection amount is below the accounts receivable balance for IONM services. The timing of adjustments to patient service fee revenue for collections exceeding the originally estimated amounts may not occur in the same reporting period as the write-off of collected amounts below the originally estimated amounts, which may result in material adjustments to patient service revenue in a given reporting period.
For services rendered to patients that have insurance coverage and that the Company has an in-network contract with, the Company records patient service fee revenue pursuant to the contract rate.
Hospital, management and other revenue
The Company recognizes revenue from hospital and surgery center customers and certain PEs, for which the Company does not have an ownership interest in, on a contractual basis. Revenue from services rendered is recorded after services are rendered. The fees billed to hospital and surgery center customers are on net 30-day terms. The fees billed to the PEs for which the Company does not have an ownership interest in are not collected until the PEs collect sufficient cash for the services that they have performed.
Accounts receivable collection cycle
The cash collection cycles of the Company are protracted due to the out-of-network billing to private insurance payers. The collection cycle for IONM to out-of-network payers may require an extended period to maximize reimbursement on claims. The collection cycle impacts the technical fees that are billed by Neuromonitoring and the professional fees that are billed by Networks. The collection cycle may consist of multiple payments from out-of-network private insurance payers, as the collection process entails multiple rounds of denials, underpayments, appeals and negotiations as part of the process to maximize the reimbursement yield on claims. Due to the extended collection cycle, the Company has a policy to reserve claims that have aged to 24 months. The Company continues collection efforts following 24 months despite the reserves on these claims but will not write-off such claims until they age to 36 months. Collections on claims which have been reserved will result in the reversal of prior reserves.
The Company performs a collection analysis for out-of-network billings to private insurance companies and adjusts its revenue and accounts receivable if the collection rate is different from the amount recorded in previous periods. Historically, this analysis is performed quarterly.
Income Taxes
The Company must make certain estimates and judgments in determining income tax expense for financial statement purposes. These estimates and judgments are used in the calculation of tax credits, tax benefits, tax deductions, and in the
calculation of certain deferred taxes and tax liabilities. Significant changes to these estimates may result in an increase or decrease to the Company’s tax provision in a subsequent period.
The provision for income taxes was determined using the asset and liability method prescribed by GAAP. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes. If and when it is determined that a deferred tax asset will not be realized for its full amount, we will recognize and record a valuation allowance with a corresponding charge to earnings. The calculation of the current tax liability involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations and in determining the liability for tax positions, if any, taken on the Company’s tax returns in accordance with authoritative guidance on accounting for uncertainty in income taxes.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding new accounting pronouncements that were issued or became effective during the year ended December 31, 2020 that had, or are expected to have, a material impact on our financial position, results of operations or financial statement disclosures, see the “Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements” and “Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted” sections of Note 3, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
Registration Statement
On December 30, 2020, we filed a resale registration statement on Form S-1 with the Securities Exchange Commission to register securities issued or issuable in the December Private Placement, as required under the Registration Rights Agreement. On February 12, 2021, the registration statement was declared effective by the Securities Exchange Commission. We are required to maintain the effectiveness of the registration statement and intend to file a post-effective amendment to the registration statement to incorporate our audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Paycheck Protection Program
During March 2021, the Company received an unsecured loan under the United States Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) in the amount of $1.7 million. Assure executed a PPP promissory note, which matures on February 25, 2026. The PPP Loan carries an interest rate of 1.0% per annum, with principal and interest payments due on the first day of each month, with payments commencing on the earlier of: (i) the day the amount of loan forgiveness granted to Assure is remitted by the Small Business Administration to the Bank of Oklahoma; or (ii) 10 months after the end of the 24 week period following the grant of the Loan. All or a portion of the Loan may be forgiven if the Company maintains its employment and compensation within certain parameters during the 24 week period following the loan origination date and the proceeds of the Loan are spent on payroll costs, rent or lease agreements dated before February 15, 2020 and utility payments arising under service agreements dated before February 15, 2020.
Acquisition
On February 25, 2021, the Company announced it signed a term sheet related to the proposed acquisition of Sentry Neuromonitoring, LLC, a intraoperative neuromonitoring services provider based in Texas with operations in Texas, Kansas and Missouri (“Sentry”). The transaction is subject to a number of conditions, including negotiation of a definitive agreement, satisfactory due diligence, audited financial statements of Sentry and regulatory approvals. There can be no assurance that the transaction with Sentry will be closed.
Stock option grant
On January 29, 2021, the Company granted 1,625,000 stock options to acquire shares of common stock to officers, directors and employees at $1.06 per share, vesting 20% on the grant date and one-sixth every six months until fully vested.