Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This financial review presents our operating results for each of the two years in the period ended December 31, 2020, and our financial condition at December 31, 2020. Refer to our 2019 Form 10-K for our results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018. Except for the historical information contained herein, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. We discuss such risks, uncertainties and other factors throughout this report and specifically under Item 1A of Part I of this report, “Risk Factors.” In addition, the following review should be read in conjunction with the information presented in our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to our consolidated financial statements as indexed on page.
Overview
As noted in our Business Overview in Part I of this report, for more than 30 years, we have been a leader in RNA-targeted therapy and believe our medicines are pioneering new markets, changing standards of care and transforming the lives of people with devastating diseases. We currently have three marketed medicines and a late-stage pipeline primarily focused on two core franchises: neurology and cardiometabolic. Our scientific innovation began and continues with the knowledge that sick people depend on us, which fuels our vision of becoming one of the most successful biotechnology companies. For further details on our business refer to the Business section of Part I of this report.
Financial Highlights
The following is a summary of our financial results (in millions):
Commercial revenue increased in 2020 compared to 2019 due to an increase in product sales from TEGSEDI and WAYLIVRA, primarily from major market launches in 2020. Our R&D revenue in 2019 was higher compared to 2020 primarily because of license fees we recognized in 2019. In 2019, we earned approximately $400 million of revenue from licensing vupanorsen to Pfizer and pelacarsen to Novartis.
Our operating expenses for 2020 increased compared to 2019 principally due to our investments in the Phase 3 program for IONIS-TTR-LRx and our wholly owned pipeline. Additionally, we incurred approximately $90 million in costs related to the Akcea Acquisition and restructured European operations. The costs primarily consisted of severance and retention costs of $29 million and stock-based compensation expense for the acceleration of Akcea equity awards of $59 million.
Our net loss for 2020 included income tax expense of $317 million compared to $44 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to a non-cash tax expense of $313 million related to an increase in the valuation allowance we recorded against our federal net deferred tax assets. As a result of the Akcea Acquisition, Ionis and Akcea will file their federal taxes on a consolidated basis beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020. We recorded a valuation allowance against all of Ionis’ federal net deferred tax assets in the fourth quarter of 2020, due largely to Akcea’s history of losses, and the expected impact of this on Ionis’ consolidated federal taxable income. We now maintain a valuation allowance against all our consolidated federal and state net deferred tax assets. See Note 5, Income Taxes, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion on our valuation allowance assessment.
With $1.9 billion in cash and short-term investments at December 31, 2020, we believe we have the financial resources to execute on our strategic priorities for 2021 and beyond.
Business Segments
Through 2020, we had two operating segments, our Ionis Core segment and Akcea Therapeutics. Akcea was focused on developing and commercializing medicines to treat patients with serious and rare diseases. We have provided segment financial information and results for our Ionis Core segment and our Akcea Therapeutics segment based on the segregation of revenues and expenses that our chief decision maker reviewed to assess operating performance and to make operating decisions through 2020. We allocated a portion of Ionis’ development, R&D support and general and administrative expenses to Akcea for work Ionis performed on behalf of Akcea and we billed Akcea for these expenses. As a result of acquiring Akcea in the fourth quarter of 2020 we integrated Akcea operations within Ionis. Beginning in 2021, our chief decision maker began assessing operating performance and making operating decisions on a single segment basis, which we refer to as Ionis Pharmaceuticals.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. As such, we make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions that we believe are reasonable, based upon the information available to us. These judgments involve making estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may significantly impact our quarterly or annual results of operations and financial condition. Each quarter, our senior management reviews the development, selection and disclosure of such estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors. In the following paragraphs, we describe the specific risks associated with these critical accounting estimates and we caution that future events rarely develop exactly as one may expect, and that best estimates may require adjustment. Our significant accounting policies are outlined in Note 1, Organization and Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following are our significant accounting estimates, which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results:
● Assessing the propriety of revenue recognition and associated deferred revenue;
● Determining the appropriate cost estimates for unbilled preclinical studies and clinical development activities; and
● Estimating our income taxes.
The following are descriptions of our critical accounting estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We earn revenue from several sources. The judgements and estimates we make vary between each source of our revenue. The following is a summary of the critical accounting estimates we make with respect to each of our significant revenue sources.
Commercial Revenue: SPINRAZA royalties and Licensing and other royalty revenue
We estimate our commercial revenue from SPINRAZA royalties based on reporting we receive from Biogen each quarter. We use this reporting to calculate our royalty revenue based on our tiered contractual royalty rate for the given period based on annual cumulative net sales. We record our royalty revenue in the same period in which Biogen sells SPINRAZA. We also estimate commercial revenue from licensing and other royalty revenue.
Commercial Revenue: Product sales, net
We added product sales from TEGSEDI to our commercial revenue in the fourth quarter of 2018 and we added product sales from WAYLIVRA to our commercial revenue in the third quarter of 2019. We recognize product sales in the period when our customer obtains control of our products. We record product sales at our net sales price, which includes estimated reserves for discounts, returns, chargebacks, rebates, co-pay assistance and other allowances that we offer under contracts between us and our customers, wholesalers, health care providers and other indirect customers. Actual amounts may vary from our estimates. Our historical reserve estimates have not been materially different from our actual amounts. The total reserves we estimated during 2020 and 2019 were not material to our financial results.
Research and development revenue under collaborative agreements
We recognize R&D revenue from numerous collaboration agreements. Our collaboration agreements typically contain multiple elements, or performance obligations, including technology licenses or options to obtain technology licenses, R&D services, and manufacturing services. Upon entering into a collaboration agreement, we are required to make the following judgements:
● Identifying the performance obligations contained in the agreement
Our assessment of what constitutes a separate performance obligation requires us to apply judgement. Specifically, we have to identify which goods and services we are required to provide under the contract are distinct.
● Determining the transaction price, including any variable consideration
To determine the transaction price, we review the amount of consideration we are eligible to earn under the agreement. We do not typically include any payments we may receive in the future in our initial transaction price since the payments are typically not probable because they are contingent upon certain future events.
We are required to reassess the total transaction price at each reporting period to determine if we should include additional payments in the transaction price that have become probable. For example, in the fourth quarter of 2020, we achieved a milestone payment for $7.5 million under our 2018 strategic neurology collaboration with Biogen. Prior to achieving this milestone payment, we did not consider this payment probable. Upon achieving the milestone payment, we reassessed the total transaction price of our 2018 strategic neurology collaboration. We added this milestone payment to our total transaction price under our collaboration.
● Allocating the transaction price to each of our performance obligations
When we allocate the transaction price to more than one performance obligation, we make estimates of the relative stand-alone selling price of each performance obligation because we do not typically sell our goods or services on a stand-alone basis. The estimate of the relative stand-alone selling price requires us in some cases to make significant judgements. For example, when we deliver a license at the start of an agreement, we use valuation methodologies, such as the relief from royalty method, to value the license. Under this method we are required to make estimates including: future sales, royalties on future product sales, contractual milestones, expenses, income taxes and discount rates. Additionally, when we estimate the selling price for R&D services, we make estimates, including: the number of internal hours we will spend on the services, the cost of work we and third parties will perform and the cost of clinical trial material we will use.
The R&D revenue we recognize each period is comprised of several types of revenue, including amortization from upfront payments, milestone payments, license fees and other services. Each of these types of revenue require us to make various judgements and estimates.
Amortization from Upfront Payments
We recognize revenue from the amortization of upfront payments as we perform R&D services. We use an input method to estimate the amount of revenue to recognize each period. This method requires us to make estimates of the total costs we expect to incur to complete our R&D services performance obligation or the total length of time it will take us to complete our R&D services performance obligation. If we change our estimates, we may have to adjust our revenue. Refer to Note 6, Collaborative Arrangements and Licensing Agreements, for further discussion of the cumulative catch up adjustment we made.
Milestone Payments
When recognizing revenue related to milestone payments we typically make the following judgements and estimates:
● Whether the milestone payment is probable (discussed in detail above under “Determining the transaction price, including any variable consideration”); and
● Whether the milestone payment relates to services we are performing or if our partner is performing the services:
● If we are performing services, we recognize revenue over our estimated period of performance in a similar manner to the amortization of upfront payments (discussed above under “Amortization of Upfront payments”).
● Conversely, we recognize in full those milestone payments that we earn based on our partners’ activities when our partner achieves the milestone event and we do not have a performance obligation.
License Fees
When we grant a license for a medicine in clinical development, we generally recognize as R&D revenue the total amount we determine to be the relative stand-alone selling price of a license when we deliver the license to our partner. We discuss the estimates we make related to the relative stand-alone selling price of a license in detail above under “Allocating the transaction price to each of our performance obligations”.
Estimated Liability for Clinical Development Costs
We have numerous medicines in preclinical studies and/or clinical trials at clinical sites throughout the world. On at least a quarterly basis, we estimate our liability for preclinical and clinical development costs we have incurred and services that we have received but for which we have not yet been billed and maintain an accrual to cover these costs. These costs primarily relate to third-party clinical management costs, laboratory and analysis costs, toxicology studies and investigator grants. We estimate our liability using assumptions about study and patient activities and the related expected expenses for those activities determined based on the contracted fees with our service providers. The assumptions we use represent our best estimates of the activity and expenses at the time of our accrual and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of our judgment. Upon settlement, these costs may differ materially from the amounts accrued in our consolidated financial statements. Our historical accrual estimates have not been materially different from our actual amounts.
Income Taxes
Ionis and Akcea have filed separate U.S. federal income tax returns since Akcea’s IPO in 2017. Accordingly, we were required to assess Ionis’ stand-alone and Akcea’s valuation allowances separately even though we consolidate Akcea’s financial results in our consolidated financial statements. However, as a result of the Akcea Acquisition, Ionis and Akcea will file a consolidated U.S. federal income tax return beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, and we therefore assessed our U.S. federal valuation allowance requirements on a consolidated basis as of that period. We continue to assess the state portion of our valuation allowance on a consolidated basis.
We assessed our valuation allowance requirements and recorded a valuation allowance of $313 million against all of Ionis’ U.S. federal net deferred tax assets in the fourth quarter of 2020, due to uncertainties related to our ability to realize the tax benefits associated with these assets. This determination is based largely on Akcea rejoining the Ionis consolidated U.S. federal tax group in the fourth quarter of 2020. Due to Akcea’s historical and projected financial statement losses, and the expected negative impact this will have on Ionis’ consolidated taxable income, there is uncertainty of generating sufficient consolidated pre-tax income in future periods to realize the Ionis deferred tax benefits. It is also expected that Ionis’ pre-tax income in future periods may be lower due to significant investments in research and development associated with our pipeline of wholly owned medicines. We now maintain a valuation allowance against all our consolidated U.S. federal and state net deferred tax assets.
We evaluate our deferred tax assets quarterly to determine whether adjustments to the valuation allowance are appropriate due to changes in facts or circumstances, such as changes in expected future pre-tax earnings, tax law, interactions with taxing authorities and developments in case law. In making this evaluation, we rely on our recent history of pre-tax earnings. Our material assumptions are our forecasts of future pre-tax earnings and the nature and timing of future deductions and income represented by the deferred tax assets and liabilities, all of which involve the exercise of significant judgment. Although we believe our estimates are reasonable, we are required to use significant judgment in determining the appropriate amount of valuation allowance recorded against our deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
Below we have included our results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019. Refer to our 2019 Form 10-K for our results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Revenue
Total revenue for 2020 was $729.3 million compared to $1.1 billion in 2019 and was comprised of the following (amounts in millions):
In 2020, our commercial revenue increased compared to 2019 primarily due to increases in TEGSEDI and WAYLIVRA product sales, primarily from major market launches in 2020.
We earn our R&D revenue from multiple sources. Our R&D revenue can fluctuate depending on the timing of events. Our R&D revenue in 2020 included more than $165 million from our cardiometabolic disease franchise, including a $75 million milestone payment we earned from Pfizer in the fourth quarter of 2020. We also earned more than $125 million from our neurological disease franchise, primarily driven by several Biogen-partnered programs. Additionally, in November 2020, we completed an arbitration process with Alnylam. The arbitration panel awarded us $41 million for payments owed to us by Alnylam related to Alnylam’s agreement with Sanofi Genzyme. We recognized the $41 million payment from Alnylam as R&D revenue in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Our R&D revenue in 2019 included significant revenue from license fees, including $246 million for Pfizer’s license of vupanorsen and $150 million for Novartis’ license of pelacarsen. Additionally, our amortization from upfront payments for 2019 was higher compared to 2020 because it included amortization from collaborations for which we have completed our R&D services performance obligations in 2019.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for 2020 were $901.3 million, and increased compared to $756.7 million for 2019. The increase was principally due to $89.6 million of operating expenses related to the Akcea Acquisition and restructured European operations, including non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $59.3 million related to the acceleration of all of Akcea’s equity award stock-based compensation expense and severance, retention and other expenses of $30.3 million. Excluding expenses related to the Akcea Acquisition and restructured European operations, our operating expenses increased primarily due to our investments in the Phase 3 program for IONIS-TTR-LRx and our wholly-owned pipeline.
Our operating expenses by segment were as follows (in millions):
In order to analyze and compare our results of operations to other similar companies, we believe it is important to exclude non-cash compensation expense related to equity awards from our operating expenses. We believe non-cash compensation expense related to equity awards is not indicative of our operating results or cash flows from our operations. Further, we internally evaluate the performance of our operations excluding it.
Cost of Products Sold
Our cost of products sold consisted of manufacturing costs, including certain fixed costs, transportation and freight, indirect overhead costs associated with the manufacturing and distribution of TEGSEDI and WAYLIVRA and certain associated period costs. Prior to the regulatory approval of TEGSEDI and WAYLIVRA, we expensed as R&D expense a significant portion of the cost of producing TEGSEDI and WAYLIVRA that we are using in the commercial launches. We expect cost of products sold to increase as we deplete these inventories.
Our cost of products sold by segment were as follows (in millions):
Our cost of products sold increased in 2020 compared to 2019 because of the increase in associated product sales in the same periods. In its cost of products sold, Akcea includes the amortization for milestone payments it made to us related to the U.S. and European approvals of TEGSEDI. We eliminate this amortization in our consolidated results. All amounts exclude non-cash compensation expense related to equity awards.
We began recognizing cost of products sold for TEGSEDI in the third quarter of 2018 when TEGSEDI was approved and for WAYLIVRA in the second quarter of 2019 when WAYLIVRA was approved. Our cost of products sold increased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the increase in product sales of TEGSEDI and WAYLIVRA. All amounts exclude non-cash compensation expense related to equity awards.
Research, Development and Patent Expenses
Our research, development and patent expenses consist of expenses for antisense drug discovery, antisense drug development, manufacturing and development chemistry and R&D support expenses.
The following table sets forth information on research, development and patent expenses (in millions):
Our research, development and patent expenses by segment were as follows (in millions):
Antisense Drug Discovery
We use our proprietary antisense technology to generate information about the function of genes and to determine the value of genes as drug discovery targets. We use this information to direct our own antisense drug discovery research, and that of our partners. Antisense drug discovery is also the function that is responsible for advancing our antisense core technology. This function is also responsible for making investments in complementary technologies to expand the reach of antisense technology.
As we continue to advance our antisense technology, we are investing in our drug discovery programs to expand our pipeline.
Our antisense drug discovery expenses are part of our Ionis Core business segment and were as follows (in millions):
Antisense drug discovery expenses were slightly higher in 2020 compared to 2019 due to expenses we incurred related to advancing our research programs and investments we made in complementary technologies to expand the reach of our antisense technology. All amounts exclude non-cash compensation expense related to equity awards.
Antisense Drug Development
The following table sets forth drug development expenses, including expenses for our marketed medicines and those in Phase 3 development for which we have incurred significant costs (in millions):
Our development expenses increased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to our broad Phase 3 program for IONIS-TTR-LRx, which we initiated in late 2019 and other medicines in our wholly-owned pipeline. These increases were slightly offset by decreases in expenses for TEGSEDI, WAYLIVRA, IONIS-FXI-LRx, IONIS-APOCIII-LRx and vupanorsen. We completed a Phase 2 study for IONIS-FXI-LRx in 2019 and we completed Phase 2 studies for IONIS-APOCIII-LRx and vupanorsen in early 2020. All amounts exclude non-cash compensation expense related to equity awards.
Our antisense drug development expenses by segment were as follows (in millions):
We may conduct multiple clinical trials on a drug candidate, including multiple clinical trials for the various indications we may be studying. Furthermore, as we obtain results from trials, we may elect to discontinue clinical trials for certain drug candidates in certain indications in order to focus our resources on more promising drug candidates or indications. Our Phase 1 and Phase 2 programs are clinical research programs that fuel our Phase 3 pipeline. When our medicines are in Phase 1 or Phase 2 clinical trials, they are in a dynamic state in which we may adjust the development strategy for each medicine. Although we may characterize a medicine as “in Phase 1” or “in Phase 2,” it does not mean that we are conducting a single, well-defined study with dedicated resources. Instead, we allocate our internal resources on a shared basis across numerous medicines based on each medicine’s particular needs at that time. This means we are constantly shifting resources among medicines. Therefore, what we spend on each medicine during a particular period is usually a function of what is required to keep the medicines progressing in clinical development, not what medicines we think are most important. For example, the number of people required to start a new study is large, the number of people required to keep a study going is modest and the number of people required to finish a study is large. However, such fluctuations are not indicative of a shift in our emphasis from one medicine to another and cannot be used to accurately predict future costs for each medicine. And, because we always have numerous medicines in preclinical and early stage clinical research, the fluctuations in expenses from medicine to medicine, in large part, offset one another. If we partner a medicine, it may affect the size of a trial, its timing, its total cost and the timing of the related costs.
Manufacturing and Development Chemistry
Expenditures in our manufacturing and development chemistry function consist primarily of personnel costs, specialized chemicals for oligonucleotide manufacturing, laboratory supplies and outside services. Our manufacturing and development chemistry function is responsible for providing drug supplies to antisense drug development and our collaboration partners. Our manufacturing procedures include testing to satisfy good laboratory and good manufacturing practice requirements.
Our manufacturing and development chemistry expenses were as follows (in millions):
Manufacturing and development chemistry expenses increased in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in manufacturing and development chemistry expenses was primarily related to manufacturing API for IONIS-TTR-LRx and IONIS-APOCIII-LRx for our Phase 3 studies. All amounts exclude non-cash compensation expense related to equity awards.
Our manufacturing and development chemistry expenses by segment were as follows (in millions):
R&D Support
In our research, development and patent expenses, we include support costs such as rent, repair and maintenance for buildings and equipment, utilities, depreciation of laboratory equipment and facilities, amortization of our intellectual property, informatics costs, procurement costs and waste disposal costs. We call these costs R&D support expenses.
The following table sets forth information on R&D support expenses (in millions):
R&D support expenses for 2020 increased compared to 2019 primarily due to costs from growth in our operations. All amounts exclude non-cash compensation expense related to equity awards.
Our R&D support expenses by segment were as follows (in millions):
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses include personnel and outside costs associated with the pre-commercialization and commercialization activities for our medicines and costs to support our company, our employees and our stockholders including, legal, human resources, investor relations, and finance. Additionally, we include in selling, general and administrative expenses such costs as rent, repair and maintenance of buildings and equipment, depreciation and utilities costs that we need to support the corporate functions listed above. We also include fees we owe under our in-licensing agreements related to SPINRAZA.
The following table sets forth information on SG&A expenses (in millions):
SG&A expenses were slightly higher for 2020 compared to 2019 principally due to costs related to the Akcea Acquisition, including severance and retention costs and legal costs related to the Alnylam arbitration. These increases were mostly offset by reductions in travel and marketing events as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. All amounts exclude non-cash compensation expense related to equity awards.
Our SG&A expenses by segment were as follows (in millions):
Akcea Therapeutics, Inc.
The following table sets forth information on operating expenses (in millions) for our Akcea Therapeutics business segment:
See discussion of fluctuations of Akcea operating expenses in the operating expense sections above. All amounts exclude non-cash compensation expense related to equity awards.
Investment Income
Investment income for 2020 was $30.6 million compared to $52.0 million for 2019. The decrease in investment income was primarily due to a decrease in interest rates during 2020 compared to 2019.
Interest Expense
The following table sets forth information on interest expense (in millions):
Our interest expense payable in cash decreased in 2020 compared 2019 because we exchanged a significant portion of our 1% Notes for 0.125% Notes in December 2019.
Gain on Investments
Gain on investments for 2020 was $16.5 million compared to $0.2 million for 2019. During the second and fourth quarters of 2020, we revalued our investments in three privately held companies, Dynacure, Suzhou-Ribo and Aro Biotherapeutics because the companies sold additional equity securities that were similar to the equity we own. Because of these observable price changes we recognized a $6.3 million gain on our investment in Dynacure, a $3.0 million gain on our investment in Suzhou-Ribo and a $5.5 million gain on our investment in Aro Biotherapeutics in our consolidated statement of operations during 2020 because the sales were at higher prices compared to our recorded value.
Early Retirement of Debt
As a result of the debt exchange we completed in December 2019, we recorded a $21.9 million non-cash loss on early retirement of debt, reflecting the early retirement of a portion of our 1% Notes. The non-cash loss on the early retirement of our debt is the difference between the amount paid to exchange our 1% Notes that we attributed to the liability component and the net carrying balance of the liability component at the time that we completed the debt exchange.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
We had income tax expense of $316.7 million for 2020 compared to an income tax expense of $43.5 million for 2019. Our 2020 income tax expense primarily relates to a non-cash tax expense of $313 million related to an increase in the valuation allowance recorded against Ionis’ U.S. federal net deferred tax assets in the fourth quarter of 2020. We now maintain a valuation allowance against all our consolidated U.S. federal and state net deferred tax assets. See discussion of our valuation allowance under the section titled, Income Taxes, above in our discussion of our critical accounting estimates.
Net Income (Loss)
We generated a net loss of $486.8 million for 2020 compared to net income of $303.3 million for 2019. Our net loss for 2020 was primarily due to the valuation allowance we recorded as a result of the Akcea Acquisition, as discussed above in the income tax expense section. Also contributing to our net loss in 2020 was decreased revenue year-over-year, as discussed above in the revenue section and an increase in operating expenses year-over-year, as discussed above in the operating expense section.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest in Akcea Therapeutics, Inc.
Our noncontrolling interest in Akcea on our statement of operations for 2020 was a net loss of $35.5 million compared to net income of $9.1 million for 2019. The net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest in Akcea for the year ended December 31, 2020, represents the portion of Akcea’s net loss that third parties owned for the period from January 1, 2020 until we acquired 100 percent of Akcea in October 2020. After our acquisition of Akcea in October 2020, we no longer recorded any adjustment related to noncontrolling interest for Akcea’s net loss. Akcea generated net income in 2019 primarily because it earned significant license fee revenue from Novartis and Pfizer.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Common Stockholders and Net Income (Loss) per Share
We had a net loss attributable to our common stockholders of $451.3 million for 2020 compared to net income of $294.1 million in 2019. Basic and diluted net loss per share for 2020 were each $3.23. Basic and diluted net income per share for 2019 was $2.12 and $2.08, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations primarily from research and development collaborative agreements. We also finance our operations from commercial revenue from SPINRAZA royalties and product sales. From our inception through December 31, 2020, we have earned approximately $5.0 billion in revenue. We have also financed our operations through the sale of our equity securities and the issuance of long-term debt. From the time we were founded through December 31, 2020, we have raised net proceeds of approximately $2.0 billion from the sale of our equity securities. Additionally, we borrowed approximately $1.5 billion under long-term debt arrangements to finance a portion of our operations over the same time period.
Our key liquidity metrics and capital resources include our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, working capital and debt obligations. During 2020 we used a portion of our cash to complete the Akcea Acquisition. At December 31, 2020, we had $1.9 billion of cash and short-term investments on hand. We believe our cash and short-term investment balance is sufficient to fund our operations both in the short-term (i.e., the next 12 months) and in the long-term (i.e., beyond the next 12 months). In 2020 our working capital decreased because our cash and investments decreased and our 1% Notes became a current liability.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020. The table provides a breakdown of when obligations become due. We provide a more detailed description of the major components of our debt in the paragraphs following the table:
Our contractual obligations consist primarily of our convertible debt. In addition, we also have facility mortgages, facility leases, equipment financing arrangements and other obligations. Due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of future cash outflows associated with our unrecognized tax benefits, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authorities. Therefore, we have excluded our gross unrecognized tax benefits from our contractual obligations table above. We have not entered into, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined under SEC rules).
0.125 Percent Convertible Senior Notes and Call Spread
In December 2019, we entered into privately negotiated exchange and/or subscription agreements with certain new investors and certain holders of our existing 1% Notes to exchange $375.6 million of our 1% Notes for $439.3 million of our 0.125% Notes, and to issue $109.5 million of our 0.125% Notes. We completed this exchange to reduce our cash interest payments, increase our conversion price and extend our maturity for a large portion of our debt. Additionally, in conjunction with the December 2019 exchange, we entered into a call spread transaction, which was comprised of purchasing note hedges and selling warrants, to minimize the impact of potential economic dilution upon conversion of our 0.125% Notes by increasing the conversion price on our 0.125% Notes even further. We accounted for our call spread transactions using the Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity accounting guidance contained in Topic 815. We determined that the call spread transactions meet the definition of a derivative, are indexed to our stock and meet the criteria to be classified in shareholders’ equity.
The call spread cost us $52.6 million of which $108.7 million was for the note hedge purchase offset by $56.1 million we received for selling the warrants. We increased our effective conversion price to $123.38 with the same number of underlying shares as our 0.125% Notes.
Similar to our 0.125% Notes, our note hedges are subject to adjustment. Additionally, our note hedges are exercisable upon conversion of the 0.125% Notes. The note hedges will expire upon maturity of the 0.125% Notes, or December 2024. The note hedges and warrants are separate transactions and are not part of the terms of our 0.125% Notes. The holders of the 0.125% Notes do not have any rights with respect to the note hedges and warrants.
We recorded the aggregate amount paid for the note hedges and the aggregate amount received for the warrants in additional paid-in capital in our consolidated balance sheet. See our Call Spread accounting policy in Note 1, Organization and Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We reassess our ability to continue to classify the note hedges and warrants in shareholders’ equity at each reporting period. We excluded shares under the note hedges from our calculation of diluted earnings per share as they were antidilutive. We will include the shares issuable under the warrants in our calculation of diluted earnings per share when the average market price per share of our common stock for the reporting period exceeds the strike price of the warrants.
At December 31, 2020, we had the following 0.125% Notes outstanding (amounts in millions except price per share data):
Interest is payable semi-annually for the 0.125% Notes. The 0.125% Notes are convertible under certain conditions, at the option of the note holders. We can settle conversions of the 0.125% Notes, at our election, in cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of both. We may not redeem the 0.125% Notes prior to maturity, and no sinking fund is provided for them. Holders of the 0.125% Notes may require us to purchase some or all of their notes upon the occurrence of certain fundamental changes, as set forth in the indenture governing the 0.125% Notes, at a purchase price equal to 100 percent of the principal amount of the notes to be purchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
1 Percent Convertible Senior Notes
In November 2014, we completed a $500 million offering of convertible senior notes, which mature in 2021 and bear interest at 1 percent. In December 2016, we issued an additional $185.5 million of 1% Notes in exchange for the redemption of a portion of our previously outstanding 2¾% Notes. In December 2019, we exchanged a portion of our 1% Notes for new 0.125% Notes.
At December 31, 2020, we had the following 1% Notes outstanding (amounts in millions except price per share data):
Interest is payable semi-annually for the 1% Notes. The 1% Notes are convertible under certain conditions, at the option of the note holders. We settle conversions of the 1% Notes, at our election, in cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of both. We may not redeem the 1% Notes prior to maturity, and no sinking fund is provided for them. Holders of the 1% Notes may require us to purchase some or all of their notes upon the occurrence of certain fundamental changes, as set forth in the indenture governing the 1% Notes, at a purchase price equal to 100 percent of the principal amount of the notes to be purchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
Research and Development and Manufacturing Facilities
In July 2017, we purchased the building that houses our primary R&D facility for $79.4 million and our manufacturing facility for $14.0 million. We financed the purchase of these two facilities with mortgage debt of $60.4 million in total. Our primary R&D facility mortgage has an interest rate of 3.88 percent. Our manufacturing facility mortgage has an interest rate of 4.20 percent. During the first five years of both mortgages, we are only required to make interest payments. Both mortgages mature in August 2027.
Other Obligations
In addition to contractual obligations, we had outstanding purchase orders as of December 31, 2020 for the purchase of services, capital equipment and materials as part of our normal course of business.
We may enter into additional collaborations with partners which could provide for additional revenue to us and we may incur additional cash expenditures related to our obligations under any of the new agreements we may enter into. We currently intend to use our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments to finance our activities. However, we may also pursue other financing alternatives, like issuing additional shares of our common stock, issuing debt instruments, refinancing our existing debt, or securing lines of credit. Whether we use our existing capital resources or choose to obtain financing will depend on various factors, including the future success of our business, the prevailing interest rate environment and the condition of financial markets generally.