ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs that involve significant risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to those differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements.”
The following generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussion of historical items in 2018, and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018, can be found in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 19, 2020, under Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Full-year 2020 net earnings attributable to shareholders were $482 million ($1.22 per diluted share) compared with $1.2 billion ($3.07 per diluted share) for full-year 2019.
International Paper navigated the impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 to deliver solid earnings and outstanding cash generation. Our 2020 performance demonstrates the strength and resilience of our employees, our diverse customer base and our world class manufacturing and supply chain capabilities. We ran our manufacturing system well and leveraged the flexibility of our mill and converting systems to overcome significant challenges due to the pandemic, while managing costs extremely well across our three businesses, with no material operational disruptions due to the pandemic. We continued to grow value for our shareholders with a return above our cost of capital, which marks the eleventh consecutive year with value-creating returns. We generated full-year cash from operations of $3.1 billion and free cash flow of $2.3 billion. Given the significant economic uncertainty, we took prudent and early actions to reinforce cash generation and enhance our financial strength. We continued to execute on our capital allocation framework. In 2020, we returned $820
million to shareowners and reduced debt by $1.7 billion. We also invested in our North American and EMEA corrugated packaging businesses to enhance our capabilities and grow earnings. Finally, in the fourth quarter, we announced plans to spin-off our Printing Papers business into a stand-alone, publicly traded company, which we expect to complete in the third quarter 2021.
Compared to 2019, the Company’s 2020 results reflect strong execution and effective cost management to mitigate the impact of market disruptions associated with the pandemic. Price and mix were negatively affected by the full-year impact of 2019 price index movements in our North America Packaging business, as well as lower average pricing in our Global Cellulose Fibers and Printing Papers businesses. Volume was also an earnings headwind due to the unprecedented decline in demand for Printing Papers related to the pandemic. These price and volume headwinds were partly offset by strong volume growth in our North American Packaging business, outstanding cost management and lower maintenance outage expenses. During 2020, we made choices around planned maintenance and other spending priorities in response to market disruptions resulting from the pandemic. Operating costs were higher in 2020, primarily due to higher costs in the latter part of the year, as we flexed our system to meet strong packaging demand. Overall, input costs were favorable in 2020, driven by lower wood, energy and distribution costs although we did see an increase in recovered fiber, energy and distribution in the fourth quarter. Equity earnings were lower in 2020 due to decreased Ilim earnings, driven by the challenging global pulp markets along with a foreign exchange loss on Ilim’s U.S. dollar denominated net debt.
Looking ahead to the first quarter 2021, as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019, in our Industrial Packaging business, we expect price and mix to improve on the realization of prior price index movement. Volume is expected to be flat sequentially with continued strong box demand in North America. Operations and costs are expected to improve sequentially, resulting from the non-repeat of isolated reliability issues and other unfavorable one-time items in the fourth quarter 2020. Maintenance outage expense is expected to be higher along with increased input costs, mainly due to higher recovered fiber and distribution costs. In our Global Cellulose Fibers business, we expect improved price and mix on the realization of prior price index movements. Volume is expected to be stable and operations and costs are expected to improve on the non-repeat of unfavorable fourth quarter items. Maintenance outage expenses are expected to decrease moderately and input costs are expected to increase on seasonally
higher wood and energy costs. In our Printing Papers business, price and mix is expected to be stable and volume is expected to decrease, mostly due to lower seasonal demand in Brazil and Russia. Operations and costs are expected to improve and maintenance outage expense is expected to be flat. Input costs are expected to be higher, primarily due to higher seasonal wood and energy costs. Lastly, for our Ilim joint venture, we expect lower earnings on the non-repeat of the foreign currency gain on US denominated debt recognized in the fourth quarter 2020.
As we enter 2021, we are mindful that we are still in the midst of a global pandemic and there is still uncertainty. Accordingly, we remain committed to our COVID-19 principles to focus on what we need to do as a company to remain strong and resilient for all our stakeholders - to keep our employees and contractors safe, to take care of our customers and to maintain our financial strength. Looking to 2021, we anticipate continued strong demand for corrugated packaging and pulp and are poised to grow earnings. We remain focused on cash generation and will continue to make choices consistent with our capital allocation framework to drive long-term value creation.
On March 11, 2020 the World Health Organization declared the novel strain of coronavirus ("COVID-19") a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. Since that time, most of our manufacturing and converting facilities have remained open and operational during the pandemic. The health and safety of our employees and contractors is our most important responsibility as we manage through the COVID-19 pandemic. We have implemented work-systems across the Company, including hygiene, social distancing, site cleaning, contact tracing, and other measures, as recommended by the CDC and WHO. Our COVID-19 measures are proving to be effective and we have not had any material disruptions to our operations.
We have seen a significant negative impact on demand for our printing papers products. Demand for our pulp, containerboard and corrugated box products has not been negatively impacted by COVID-19 to date, but our operations in Industrial Packaging experienced higher supply chain costs due to the impacts of COVID-19. The recent resurgence of the virus in many areas has led to additional governmental measures, such as stay-at-home orders or business and school closures, negatively impacting our supply chain, and therefore our production.
There continue to be significant uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, including
with respect to the various economic reopening plans
and the resurgence of the virus in many areas; additional actions that may be taken by governmental authorities and private businesses to attempt to contain the COVID-19 outbreak or to mitigate its impact; the extent and duration of social distancing and stay-at-home orders; the efficacy of various vaccines; and availability and the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on unemployment, economic activity and consumer confidence. Developments related to COVID-19 are significantly adversely affecting portions of our business, and could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows, particularly if negative global economic conditions persist for a significant period of time or deteriorate.
Adjusted Operating Earnings and Adjusted Operating Earnings Per Share are non-GAAP measures and are defined as net earnings (loss) attributable to International Paper (a GAAP measure) excluding net special items and non-operating pension expense (income). Net earnings (loss) and Diluted earnings (loss) per share attributable to common shareholders are the most directly comparable GAAP measures. The Company calculates Adjusted Operating Earnings by excluding the after-tax effect of non-operating pension expense (income) and items considered by management to be unusual (net special items) from the earnings reported under GAAP. Adjusted Operating Earnings Per Share is calculated by dividing Adjusted Operating Earnings by diluted average shares of common stock outstanding. Management uses this measure to focus on on-going operations, and believes that it is useful to investors because it enables them to perform meaningful comparisons of past and present consolidated operating results. The Company believes that using this information, along with the most direct comparable GAAP measure, provides for a more complete analysis of the results of operations.
The following are reconciliations of Earnings (loss) attributable to common shareholders to Adjusted operating earnings (loss) attributable to common shareholders. Additional detail is provided later in this Form 10-K regarding the net special items referenced in the charts below.
Cash provided by operations totaled $3.1 billion and $3.6 billion for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company generated free cash flow of approximately $2.3 billion in both 2020 and 2019. Free Cash Flow is a non-GAAP measure and the most directly comparable GAAP measure is cash provided by operations. Management utilizes this measure in connection with managing our business and believes that free cash flow is useful to investors as a liquidity measure because it measures the amount of cash generated that is available, after reinvesting in the
business, to maintain a strong balance sheet, pay dividends, repurchase stock, service debt and make investments for future growth. It should not be inferred that the entire free cash flow amount is available for discretionary expenditures. By adjusting for certain items that are not indicative of the Company's ongoing underlying operational performance, we believe that free cash flow also enables investors to perform meaningful comparisons between past and present periods.
The following are reconciliations of free cash flow to cash provided by operations:
The non-GAAP financial measures presented in this Form 10-K as referenced above have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for an analysis of our results calculated in accordance with GAAP. In addition, because not all companies utilize identical calculations, the Company’s presentation of non-GAAP measures in this Form 10-K may not be comparable to similarly titled measures disclosed by other companies, including companies in the same industry as the Company.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Business Segment Operating Profits are used by International Paper’s management to measure the earnings performance of its businesses. Management uses this measure to focus on on-going operations and believes that it is useful to investors because it enables them to perform meaningful comparisons of past and present operating results. International Paper believes that using this information, along with net earnings, provides a more complete analysis of the results of operations by year. Business Segment Operating Profits are defined as earnings (loss) before income taxes and equity earnings, but including the impact of noncontrolling interests, and
excluding interest expense, net, corporate expenses, net, corporate net special items, business net special items and non-operating pension expense. Business Segment Operating Profits is a measure reported to our management for purposes of making decisions about allocating resources to our business segments and assessing the performance of our business segments and is presented in our financial statement footnotes in accordance with ASC 280.
International Paper operates in three segments: Industrial Packaging, Global Cellulose Fibers and Printing Papers.
The following table presents a comparison of net earnings (loss) attributable to International Paper Company to its total Business Segment Operating Profit:
Business Segment Operating Profit in 2020 was $789 million lower than in 2019 as the benefits from lower input costs ($221 million) and lower maintenance outage costs ($64 million) were more than offset by lower average sales price realizations and mix ($907 million), lower sales volumes ($95 million) and higher operating costs ($72 million).
The principal changes in operating profit by business segment were as follows:
•Industrial Packaging’s operating profit of $1.8 billion was $257 million lower than in 2019 as the benefits of higher sales volumes, lower input costs and lower maintenance outage costs were more than offset by lower average sales price, unfavorable mix and higher operating costs.
•Global Cellulose Fibers' operating loss of $237 million was $231 million higher than the operating loss in 2019 as the benefits of higher sales volumes, lower operating costs, lower maintenance outage costs and lower input costs were more than offset by lower average sales price, net of mix.
•Printing Papers’ operating profit of $228 million was $301 million lower than in 2019 as the benefits of lower input costs and lower maintenance outage costs were more than offset by lower average sales price, unfavorable mix, lower sales volumes and higher operating costs.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
For the year ended December 31, 2020, International Paper generated $3.1 billion of cash flow from operations compared with $3.6 billion in 2019. Capital spending for 2020 totaled $751 million, or 58% of depreciation and amortization expense. Our liquidity position remains strong, supported by approximately $2.8 billion of credit facilities.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
While the operating results for International Paper’s various business segments are driven by a number of business-specific factors, changes in International Paper’s operating results are closely tied to changes in general economic conditions in North America, Europe, Russia, Latin America, North Africa and the Middle East.
Factors that impact the demand for our products include industrial non-durable goods production, consumer preferences, consumer spending, commercial printing and advertising activity, white-collar employment levels and location, and movements in currency exchange rates.
Product prices are affected by a variety of factors including general economic trends, inventory levels, currency exchange rate movements and worldwide capacity utilization. In addition to these revenue-related factors, net earnings are impacted by various cost drivers, the more significant of which include changes in raw material costs, principally wood, recovered fiber and chemical costs; energy costs; freight costs; mill outage costs; salary and benefits costs, including pensions; and manufacturing conversion costs.
The following is a discussion of International Paper’s consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, and the major factors affecting these results compared to 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, International Paper reported net sales of $20.6 billion, compared with $22.4 billion in 2019. International net sales (based on the location of the seller and including U.S. exports) totaled $6.9 billion or 34% of total sales in 2020. This compares with international net sales of $8.1 billion in 2019.
Full year 2020 net earnings attributable to International Paper Company totaled $0.5 billion ($1.22 per diluted share), compared with net earnings of $1.2 billion ($3.07 per diluted share) in 2019.
Earnings from continuing operations attributable to International Paper Company after taxes in 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
(a)Includes $656 million of net special items charges and $31 million of non-operating pension income.
(b)Includes $515 million of net special items charges which included tax expense of $203 million related to a foreign
deferred tax valuation allowance and $28 million of non-operating pension expense.
Compared with 2019, the benefits from lower input costs ($163 million), lower maintenance outage costs ($47 million), lower corporate and other costs ($44 million), lower net interest expense ($35 million) and lower tax expense ($16 million) were more than offset by lower average sales price and an unfavorable mix ($670 million), lower sales volumes ($70 million) and higher operating costs ($53 million). In addition, 2020 results included lower equity earnings, net of taxes, relating to the Company’s investments in Ilim and GPIP.
See Business Segment Results on pages 27 through 31 of Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for a discussion of the impact of these factors by segment.
INCOME TAXES
A net income tax provision of $245 million was recorded for 2020, including a tax benefit of $32 million related to the settlement of tax audits. Excluding this item, a $74 million net tax benefit for other special items and a $10 million tax expense related to non-operating pension income, the operational tax provision was $341 million, or 25% of pre-tax earnings before equity earnings.
A net income tax provision of $634 million was recorded for 2019, including tax expense of $203 million related to a foreign deferred tax valuation allowance, a tax benefit of $53 million related to internal investment restructuring, tax expense of $9 million related to a non U.S. tax rate change, tax expense of $3 million related to foreign tax audits and a tax benefit of $3 million related to state income tax legislative changes. Excluding these items, a $53 million net tax benefit for other special items and a $8 million tax benefit related to non-operating pension expense, the operational tax provision was $536 million, or 26% of pre-tax earnings before equity earnings.
EQUITY EARNINGS, NET OF TAXES
Equity earnings, net of taxes, consisted principally of the Company’s share of earnings from its 50% investment in Ilim of $48 million and $207 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and from its 15.0% ownership interest at December 31, 2020 in GPIP of $40 million in 2020, and from its 20.5% ownership interest at December 31, 2019 of $46 million in 2019 (see page 30).
INTEREST EXPENSE AND NONCONTROLLING INTEREST
Net corporate interest expense totaled $444 million in 2020 and $491 million in 2019. Net interest expense in 2020 includes $2 million of interest income associated with a foreign value-added tax refund accrual. Net interest expense in 2019 includes $3 million of interest income associated with a foreign value-added tax refund accrual and $1 million of interest expense related to foreign tax audits. The decrease in 2020 compared with 2019 was due to lower average outstanding debt.
Net earnings attributable to noncontrolling interests were zero in 2020, compared with a loss of $5 million in 2019. The loss in 2019 includes the allocation of loss of $9 million associated with the impairment of the net assets of our India Papers business.
SPECIAL ITEMS
Pre-tax special items totaling $764 million and $420 million were recorded in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Details of these charges were as follows:
(a) Includes $9 million and $35 million recorded in the Industrial Packaging business segment for 2020 and 2019, respectively; $5 million and $12 million recorded in the Global Cellulose Fibers business segment for 2020 and 2019, respectively; $3 million recorded in the Printing Papers business segment for 2019.
(b) Recorded in the Printing Papers business segment.
(c) Recorded in the Industrial Packaging business segment.
(d) Includes expense of $2 million for 2019 recorded in the Industrial Packaging business segment and expense of $2 million and income of $3 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, recorded in the Printing Papers business segment.
Net losses on sales and impairments of businesses included in special items totaled a pre-tax loss of $465 million and $205 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Details of these losses were as follows:
See Note 8 Divestitures and Impairments on pages 59 through 61 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further discussion.
International Paper continually evaluates its operations for improvement opportunities targeted to (a) focus our portfolio on our core businesses, (b) realign capacity to operate fewer facilities with the same revenue capability, (c) close high cost facilities, and (d) reduce costs. Additionally, the Company is committed to its capital allocation framework to maintain a strong balance sheet including reducing debt to maximize value creation and maintain our current investment grade credit rating.
During 2020 and 2019, pre-tax restructuring and other charges, net, totaling $195 million and $57 million were recorded. Details of these charges were as follows:
(a) Recorded in the Industrial Packaging business segment.
(b) Includes $6 million recorded in the Printing Papers business segment and $4 million recorded in the Global Cellulose Fibers business segment.
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS SEGMENTS
International Paper’s business segments discussed below are consistent with the internal structure used to manage these businesses. All segments are differentiated on a common product, common customer basis consistent with the business segmentation generally used in the forest products industry.
INDUSTRIAL PACKAGING
International Paper is the largest manufacturer of containerboard in the United States. Our U.S. production capacity is over 13 million tons annually. Our products include linerboard, medium, whitetop, recycled linerboard, recycled medium and saturating kraft. About 80% of our production is converted into corrugated boxes and other packaging by our 174 North American container plants. Additionally, we recycle approximately one million tons of OCC and mixed and white paper through our 18 recycling plants. Our container plants are supported by regional design centers, which offer total packaging solutions and supply chain initiatives. In EMEA, our operations include one recycled fiber containerboard mill in Morocco, a recycled containerboard mill in Spain and 27 container plants in France, Italy, Spain, Morocco, Turkey and Portugal. On January 5, 2021, the Company announced that it had entered into an agreement with Mondi Group to sell its 90.38% ownership interest in Olmuksan International Paper, a corrugated packaging business in Turkey. See Note 8 Divestitures and Impairments of Businesses on pages 59 through 61 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
International Paper also produces high quality coated paperboard for a variety of packaging end uses with 443,000 tons of annual capacity at our mills in Poland and Russia.
GLOBAL CELLULOSE FIBERS
Our cellulose fibers product portfolio includes fluff, market and specialty pulps. International Paper is the largest producer of fluff pulp which is used to make absorbent hygiene products like baby diapers, feminine care, adult incontinence and other non-woven products. Our market pulp is used for tissue and paper products. We continue to invest in exploring new innovative uses for our products, such as our specialty pulps, which are used for non-absorbent end uses including textiles, filtration, construction material, paints and coatings, reinforced plastics and more. Our products are made in the United States, Canada, France, Poland, and Russia and are sold around the world. International Paper facilities have annual dried pulp capacity of about 4 million metric tons.
PRINTING PAPERS
International Paper is one of the world’s largest producers of printing and writing papers. The primary product in this segment is uncoated papers. This business produces papers for use in copiers, desktop and laser printers and digital imaging. End-use applications include advertising and promotional materials such as brochures, pamphlets, greeting cards, books, annual reports and direct mail. Uncoated papers also produces a variety of grades that are converted by our customers into envelopes, tablets, business forms and file folders. Uncoated papers are sold under private label and International Paper brand names that include Hammermill, Springhill, Williamsburg, Postmark, Accent, Great White, Chamex, Ballet, Rey, Pol, and Svetocopy. The mills producing uncoated papers are located in the United States, France, Poland, Russia and Brazil. The mills have uncoated paper production capacity of over 4 million tons annually. Brazilian operations function through International Paper do Brasil, Ltda, which owns or manages approximately 314,000 acres of forestlands in Brazil. On December 3, 2020, the Company announced a plan to pursue a spin-off of the Printing Papers segment into SpinCo, a standalone, publicly-traded company. The transaction will be implemented through the distribution of SpinCo shares to International Paper shareholders. We expect the transaction to be tax-free for International Paper's shareholders for U.S. federal income tax purposes. International Paper will retain approximately 19.9% of the shares of SpinCo at the time of the separation, with the intent to monetize and provide additional proceeds to International Paper. The transaction is expected to close late in the third quarter of 2021 and is subject to customary conditions, including final approval by the International Paper board of directors and the filing and effectiveness of a Form 10 registration statement with the SEC. See further discussion in Note 8 Divestitures and Impairments of Businesses on pages 59 through 61 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
ILIM
In October 2007, International Paper and Ilim completed a 50:50 joint venture to operate a pulp and paper business located in Russia. Ilim’s facilities include three paper mills located in Bratsk, Ust-Ilimsk, and Koryazhma, Russia, with combined total pulp and paper capacity of over 3.6 million metric tons. Ilim has exclusive harvesting rights on timberland and forest areas exceeding 19.8 million acres (8.01 million hectares).
GPIP
On January 1, 2018, the Company completed the transfer of its North American Consumer Packaging business, which includes its North American Coated Paperboard and Foodservice businesses, to Graphic Packaging International Partners, LLC ("GPIP"), a subsidiary of Graphic Packaging Holding Company, in exchange for a 20.5% ownership interest in GPIP. GPIP subsequently transferred the North American Consumer Packaging business to Graphic Packaging International, LLC ("GPI"), a wholly-owned subsidiary of GPIP that holds the assets of the combined business.
On January 29, 2020, the Company exchanged 15,150,784 units of the aggregate units owned by the Company for an aggregated price of $250 million, resulting in a pre-tax gain of $33 million ($25 million after taxes) which was recorded in the first quarter of 2020. On August 7, 2020, the Company exchanged 17,399,414 units of the aggregate units owned by the Company for an aggregated price of $250 million, resulting in an immaterial gain which was recorded in the third quarter of 2020. After these transactions, the Company's ownership percentage in GPIP is approximately 15%. See Note 11 Equity Method Investments on pages 62 and 63 and Note 23 Subsequent Events on page 88 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further information.
Products and brand designations appearing in italics are trademarks of International Paper or a related company.
BUSINESS SEGMENT RESULTS
The following tables present net sales and operating profit (loss) which is the Company's measure of segment profitability.
INDUSTRIAL PACKAGING
Demand for Industrial Packaging products is closely correlated with non-durable industrial goods production, as well as with demand for e-commerce, processed foods, poultry, meat and agricultural products. In addition to prices and volumes, major factors affecting the profitability of Industrial Packaging are raw material and energy costs, freight costs, mill outage costs, manufacturing efficiency and product mix.
Industrial Packaging net sales for 2020 decreased 2% to $15.0 billion compared with $15.3 billion in 2019. Operating profits in 2020 were 12% lower than in 2019. Comparing 2020 with 2019, benefits from higher sales volumes ($66 million), lower input costs ($125 million) and lower maintenance outage costs ($56 million) were more than offset by lower average sales price and an unfavorable mix ($431 million) and higher operating costs ($73 million).
(a) Includes intra-segment sales of $116 million for 2020 and $118 million for 2019.
North American Industrial Packaging's sales volumes increased in 2020 compared with 2019 for boxes driven by strong demand in certain customer segments including e-commerce and shipping and distribution, reflecting the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Export containerboard sales volumes also increased. Total maintenance and economic downtime was about 942,000 tons lower in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to economic downtime. Average sales prices were lower for both export containerboard and box. Operating costs increased primarily due to inflation and costs related to the Riverdale conversion. Planned maintenance downtime costs were $60 million lower in 2020 than in 2019. Input costs were lower, driven by lower wood and energy costs partially offset by higher recovered fiber costs.
Looking ahead to the first quarter of 2021, compared with the fourth quarter of 2020, sales volumes for boxes are expected to be stable, with strong box demand offset by one less shipping day in the first quarter. Average sales margins are expected to be higher. Operating costs are expected to be lower. Planned maintenance downtime costs are expected to be $87 million higher. Input costs are expected to be higher primarily for recovered fiber, wood and energy.
EMEA Industrial Packaging's sales volumes in 2020 were higher than in 2019, despite the negative demand impact of the COVID-19 pandemic which was more than offset by improved economic conditions in Turkey and the full-year impact of 2019 acquisitions. Average sales margins improved
significantly in all regions driven by lower containerboard costs and stable sales prices for boxes. Operating costs were lower, driven by the ramp-up of the Madrid, Spain mill and improved box plant operations partially offset by inflation in Turkey. Planned maintenance outage costs were $3 million higher in 2020 compared with 2019. Other input costs were lower. Earnings were negatively affected by unfavorable foreign currency impacts in Turkey.
Entering the first quarter of 2021, compared with the fourth quarter of 2020, sales volumes are expected to be seasonally higher. Average sales margins are expected to be lower, reflecting higher input costs. Operating costs are expected to be lower. Planned maintenance outage costs are expected to be flat due to no outages in the fourth quarter and no planned outages in the first quarter. Input costs are expected to be stable.
On October 14, 2020, the Company closed the previously announced sale of its Brazilian Packaging business. See Note 8 Divestitures and Impairments on pages 59 through 61 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further discussion.
European Coated Paperboard's sales volumes in 2020 compared with 2019 were stable as higher volumes in Russia were offset by lower volumes in Europe. Average sales margins were slightly higher as higher sales prices in Russia and a favorable mix in Europe were mostly offset by an unfavorable mix in Russia. Operating costs were higher. Planned maintenance outage costs were $3 million higher in 2020 compared with 2019. Input costs were lower, driven by purchased pulp, wood and energy costs in Europe. In Russia, input costs were slightly higher, primarily for wood. Earnings benefited from favorable foreign currency impacts in Russia, partially offset by unfavorable impacts in Europe.
Looking forward to the first quarter of 2021, compared with the fourth quarter of 2020, sales volumes are expected to be stable in both regions. Average sales margins are expected to be slightly higher, driven by a favorable mix in Russia. Operating costs are expected to be lower. Planned maintenance outage costs are expected to be flat due to no outages in the fourth quarter and no planned outages in the first
quarter. Input costs are expected to be higher driven by purchased pulp, wood and energy in Europe.
GLOBAL CELLULOSE FIBERS
Demand for Cellulose Fibers products is closely correlated with changes in demand for absorbent hygiene products, primarily driven by the demographics and income growth in various geographic regions. It is further affected by changes in currency rates that can benefit or hurt producers in different geographic regions. Principal cost drivers include manufacturing efficiency, raw material and energy costs, mill outage costs, and freight costs.
Global Cellulose Fibers net sales for 2020 decreased 9% to $2.3 billion, compared with $2.6 billion in 2019. Operating profits in 2020 were significantly lower than in 2019. Comparing 2020 with 2019, benefits from higher sales volumes ($1 million), lower operating costs ($15 million), lower input costs ($33 million) and lower maintenance outage costs ($2 million) were more than offset by lower average sales price, net of mix ($282 million).
Sales volumes in 2020 compared with 2019 were slightly higher as higher volumes in North America were mostly offset by lower volumes in Europe and Russia. Total maintenance and economic downtime was about 104,000 tons lower in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to economic downtime. Average sales margins were significantly lower, reflecting lower average fluff and market pulp prices driven by the flow through of 2019 price decreases. Operating costs increased primarily due to inflation. Planned maintenance outage costs were $2 million lower in 2020. Input costs were lower, driven by wood, chemicals and energy.
Entering the first quarter of 2021, compared with the fourth quarter of 2020, sales volumes are expected to be stable. Average sales margins are expected to be higher. Operating costs are expected to be lower, reflecting the non-repeat of unfavorable items in the fourth quarter of 2020. Planned maintenance outage costs are expected to be $6 million lower than in the fourth quarter of 2020. Input costs are expected to be seasonally higher, primarily for wood, chemicals and energy.
PRINTING PAPERS
Demand for Printing Papers products is closely correlated with changes in commercial printing and
advertising activity, direct mail volumes and, for uncoated cut-size products, with changes in white-collar employment levels and work location that affect the usage of copy and laser printer paper. Principal cost drivers include manufacturing efficiency, raw material and energy costs, mill outage costs and freight costs.
Printing Papers net sales for 2020 of $3.0 billion decreased 29%, compared with $4.3 billion in 2019. Operating profits in 2020 were 57% lower than in 2019. Comparing 2020 with 2019, benefits from lower input costs ($63 million) and lower planned maintenance outage costs ($6 million), were more than offset by lower average sales price realizations and an unfavorable of mix ($194 million), lower sales volumes ($162 million) and higher operating costs ($14 million).
North American Printing Papers' sales volumes for 2020 were significantly lower across all grades for uncoated freesheet paper than in 2019 driven by the unprecedented demand decline due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Riverdale conversion also negatively impacted volumes. Total maintenance and economic downtime was about 281,000 tons higher in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to demand conditions. Average sales margins were lower, reflecting lower sales prices for cutsize paper and rolls, net of a favorable geographic mix. Operating costs were lower, reflecting cost reduction initiatives and strong cost management. Planned maintenance outage costs were flat in 2020 compared with 2019. Input costs were lower, primarily for wood and chemicals.
Entering the first quarter of 2021, compared with the fourth quarter of 2020, sales volumes are expected to be stable. Average sales margins are also expected to be stable. Operating costs are expected to be higher due to seasonality and inflation. Planned maintenance outage costs are expected to be about $4 million higher in the first quarter of 2021. Input
costs are expected to be higher, primarily for wood and chemicals.
(a) Includes intra-segment sales of $8 million for 2020 and $42 million for 2019.
Brazilian Papers' sales volumes for uncoated freesheet paper in 2020 were significantly lower compared with 2019 for both export and domestic markets reflecting the unprecedented negative demand impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Earnings were negatively impacted by economic downtime in 2020 due to the COVID-19 demand impact. Average sales margins were lower, driven by lower average export sales prices and an unfavorable geographic mix. Operating costs were lower. Planned maintenance outage costs were $1 million lower in 2020. Input costs were favorable, primarily for pulp and virgin fiber.
Looking ahead to the first quarter of 2021, compared with the fourth quarter of 2020, sales volumes for uncoated freesheet paper are expected to be seasonally lower. Average sales margins are expected to higher. Operating costs are expected to be flat. Planned maintenance outage costs are expected to be flat with no outages in either the fourth quarter of 2020 or the first quarter of 2021. Input costs are expected to be slightly higher, primarily for chemicals.
European Papers' sales volumes for uncoated freesheet paper in 2020 were significantly lower in both Europe and Russia compared with 2019, driven by the unprecedented negative demand impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Earnings in both regions were negatively impacted by economic downtime in 2020 due to the COVID-19 demand impact. Average sales margins decreased for uncoated freesheet paper in both regions, reflecting lower average sales prices and an unfavorable mix. Operating costs were lower. Planned maintenance outage costs were $2 million lower in 2020 than in 2019. Input costs were lower in Europe primarily for wood, energy and pulp. In Russia, input costs were slightly higher driven by wood costs. Earnings benefited from favorable foreign currency impacts in both regions.
Entering 2021, sales volumes for uncoated freesheet paper in the first quarter are expected to be flat in Europe and seasonally lower in Russia, compared to the fourth quarter of 2020. Average sales margins are expected to be slightly lower in Europe and stable in Russia. Operating costs are expected to be higher in both regions. Planned maintenance outage costs are expected to be about $2 million lower in the first quarter. Input costs are expected to be higher in both regions, primarily for wood, energy and chemicals.
On May 29, 2019, International Paper announced it had entered into an agreement to sell its controlling interest in its Indian Papers business. The transaction closed on October 30, 2019. See Note 8 Divestitures and Impairments on pages 59 through 61 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further discussion.
EQUITY EARNINGS, NET OF TAXES - ILIM
International Paper accounts for its investment in Ilim, a separate reportable industry segment, using the equity method of accounting.
The Company recorded equity earnings, net of taxes, related to Ilim of $48 million in 2020, compared with earnings of $207 million in 2019. Operating results recorded in 2020 included an after-tax non-cash foreign exchange loss of $50 million, compared with an after-tax foreign exchange gain of $32 million in 2019, primarily on the remeasurement of Ilim's U.S. dollar denominated net debt.
Driven by the newly modernized Ust Ilimsk pulp line and the upgraded Bratsk containerboard machine, sales volumes for the joint venture increased by 9% in 2020, primarily for softwood pulp shipments to China, Russia and other export markets, partially offset by lower shipments of hardwood pulp to China and Russia. Average sales price margins were significantly lower for sales of softwood pulp, hardwood pulp and containerboard in all areas. Input costs were higher, primarily for wood. Distribution costs were negatively impacted by transportation tariffs and inflation. Maintenance and repair expenses were higher. The Company received cash dividends from the joint venture of $141 million in 2020 and $246 million in 2019.
Entering the first quarter of 2021, sales volumes are expected to be lower than in the fourth quarter of 2020, due to the New Year holidays in China and other seasonal factors. Based on results to date in
the current quarter, average margins are expected to increase for softwood pulp, hardwood pulp and containerboard. Input costs and distribution costs are projected to be relatively flat.
EQUITY EARNINGS - GPIP
International Paper recorded equity earnings of $40 million in 2020 and $46 million in 2019 on its ownership position in GPIP. The Company received cash dividends from the investment of $20 million in 2020 and $27 million in 2019. See Description of Business Segments on pages 26 and 27 for further detail regarding our ownership interest in GPIP.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
OVERVIEW
A major factor in International Paper’s liquidity and capital resource planning is its generation of operating cash flow, which is highly sensitive to changes in the pricing and demand for our major products. While changes in key operating cash costs, such as raw material, energy, mill outage and distribution, do have an effect on operating cash generation, we believe that our focus on commercial and operational excellence, as well as our ability to tightly manage costs and working capital has improved our cash flow generation over an operating cycle.
Use of cash during 2020 was primarily focused on capital spending, debt reduction and returning cash to shareholders through dividends.
CASH PROVIDED BY OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Cash provided by operations totaled $3.1 billion in 2020, compared with $3.6 billion for 2019. Cash provided by working capital components (accounts receivable, contract assets and inventory less accounts payable and accrued liabilities, interest payable and other) totaled $324 million in 2020, compared with cash provided by working capital components of $342 million in 2019. Cash dividends received from equity investments were $162 million in 2020, compared with $273 million in 2019.
INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES
Cash outflows from investment activities in 2020 decreased from 2019, as 2019 included higher capital spending. The Company made a concerted effort to control spending in 2020 and will continue to do so throughout 2021. Capital spending was $751 million in 2020, or 58% of depreciation and amortization, compared with $1.3 billion in 2019, or 98% of depreciation and amortization. Across our segments, capital spending as a percentage of depreciation and amortization ranged from 35.8% to 63.6% in 2020.
The following table shows capital spending by business segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Capital spending in 2021 is expected to be approximately $800 million, or 61% of depreciation and amortization.
The Company also had total proceeds of $500 million related to first quarter and third quarter 2020 transactions where the Company sold a portion of its units in GPIP. See Note 11 Equity Method Investments on pages 62 and 63 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further information.
Acquisitions
See Note 7 Acquisitions on page 59 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for a discussion of the Company's acquisitions.
FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Financing activities during 2020 included debt issuance of $583 million and reductions of $2.3 billion for a net decrease of $1.7 billion. Financing activities during 2019 included debt issuances of $534 million and reductions of $1.5 billion for a net decrease of $973 million.
Amounts related to early debt extinguishment during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
(a)Reductions related to notes with interest rates ranging from 3.00% to 9.50% with original maturities from 2021 to 2048 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(b)Amounts are included in Restructuring and other charges in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
The Company’s early debt reductions in 2020 were comprised of debt tenders of $406 million with an interest rate of 7.50% due in 2021, $658 million with an interest rate of 3.65% due in 2024, $127 million with an interest rate of 3.80% due in 2026, and $297 million with an interest rate of 3.00% due in 2027. In
addition to these debt tenders, the Company had early debt extinguishments of approximately $152 million from open market repurchases related to debt with interest rates ranging from 3.00% to 4.40% and maturities dates from 2026 to 2048.
The Company had debt issuances in 2020 of $583 million related primarily to the AR securitization program and international debt. In addition to the early debt reductions, the Company had debt reductions of $638 million in 2020 related primarily to the AR securitization program, commercial paper, and international debt.
Other financing activities during 2020 included the net issuance of approximately one million shares of treasury stock. Repurchases of common stock and payments of restricted stock withholding taxes totaled $42 million, including $14 million related to shares repurchased under the Company's share repurchase program. The Company has repurchased 69.3 million shares at an average price of $47.17, for a total of approximately $3.3 billion, since the repurchase program began in September 2013 through December 31, 2020. The Company paid cash dividends totaling $806 million during 2020.
Other financing activities during 2019 included the net repurchase of approximately 8.5 million shares of treasury stock, including restricted stock tax withholding. Repurchases of common stock and payments of restricted stock withholding taxes totaled $535 million, including $485 million related to shares repurchased under the Company's share repurchase program. The Company paid cash dividends totaling $796 million during 2019.
Interest Rate Swaps
Our policy is to manage interest cost using a mixture of fixed-rate and variable-rate debt. To manage this risk, International Paper utilizes interest rate swaps to change the mix of fixed and variable rate debt. During the first quarter of 2020, International Paper terminated its interest rate swaps with a notional amount of $700 million and maturities ranging from 2024 to 2026 with an approximate fair value of $85 million. Subsequent to the termination of the interest rate swaps, the fair value basis adjustment is amortized to earnings as interest income over the same period as a debt premium on the previously hedged debt (see Note 17 Derivatives and Hedging Activities on pages 73 through 77 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data). At December 31, 2019 the Company had interest rate swaps with a notional amount of $700 million and during 2019, the inclusion of the offsetting interest income from short term investments reduced the effective interest rate from 4.8% to 4.4%.
Variable Interest Entities
Information concerning variable interest entities is set forth in Note 15 Variable Interest Entities on pages 70 through 72 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. In connection with the 2006 International Paper installment sale of forestlands, we received $4.8 billion of installment notes. These installment notes were used by variable interest entities as collateral for borrowings from third-party lenders. These variable interest entities were restructured in 2015 when the installment notes and third-party loans were extended. The restructured variable interest entities hold installment notes of $4.8 billion that mature in August 2021 and third-party loans of $4.2 billion, which, as a result of an extension in November 2020, mature in August 2021. These installment notes and third-party loans are shown in Current nonrecourse financial assets of variable interest entities and Current nonrecourse financial liabilities of variable interest entities, respectively, on the accompanying consolidated balance sheet. We will settle the third-party loans at their maturity in August 2021 with the proceeds from the installment notes which also mature in August 2021 resulting in expected cash proceeds of approximately $0.6 billion representing our equity in the variable interest entities. Maturity of the installment notes and termination of the monetization structure is expected to result in a $75 million cash tax payment in 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES OUTLOOK FOR 2021
We expect another year of solid cash generation in 2021. Furthermore, we intend to continue to make choices for the use of cash that are consistent with our capital allocation framework to drive long-term value creation. These include maintaining a strong balance sheet and investment grade credit rating, returning meaningful cash to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases and making organic investments to maintain our world-class system and strengthen our packaging business.
Under our share repurchase program most recently approved by our Board of Directors on October 9, 2018, which does not have an expiration date, approximately $1.73 billion aggregate amount of shares of common stock remains authorized for purchase under this program. We may continue to repurchase shares under such authorization in open market transactions (including block trades), privately negotiated transactions or otherwise, subject to prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, restrictions in our debt documents, applicable securities laws requirements and other factors. In addition, we pay regular quarterly cash dividends and expect to continue to pay regular quarterly cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
Each quarterly dividend is subject to review and approval by our Board of Directors, and is subject to restrictions in our debt documents.
Capital Expenditures and Long-Term Debt
Capital spending for 2021 is planned at approximately $800 million, or about 61% of depreciation and amortization.
At December 31, 2020, International Paper’s credit agreements totaled $2.8 billion, which is comprised of the $750 million contractually committed revolving credit agreement, the $1.5 billion contractually committed bank credit agreement, and up to $550 million under the receivables securitization program. Management believes these credit agreements are adequate to cover expected operating cash flow variability during the current economic cycle. The credit agreements generally provide for interest rates at a floating rate index plus a pre-determined margin dependent upon International Paper’s credit rating. At December 31, 2020, the Company had no borrowings outstanding under the $750 million revolving credit agreement, the $1.5 billion credit agreement, or the $550 million receivables securitization program. The Company’s credit agreements are not subject to any restrictive covenants other than the financial covenants as disclosed on pages 72 and 73 in Note 16 - Debt and Lines of Credit of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, and the borrowings under the receivables securitization program being limited by eligible receivables. The Company was in compliance with all its debt covenants at December 31, 2020 and was well below the thresholds stipulated under the covenants as defined in the credit agreements. Further the financial covenants do not restrict any borrowings under the credit agreements. After considering the Company’s liquidity position in relation to COVID-19 and the current economic environment, the Company's receivable securitization program was amended from a committed financing arrangement to an uncommitted financing arrangement in February 2021 with the borrowing limit and expiration date remaining unchanged.”
In addition to the $2.8 billion in credit agreements, International Paper has a commercial paper program with a borrowing capacity of $1.0 billion. Under the terms of the program, individual maturities on borrowings may vary, but not exceed one year from the date of issue. Interest bearing notes may be issued either as fixed or floating rate notes. The Company had no borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2020, and $30 million of borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2019, under this program.
International Paper expects to be able to meet projected capital expenditures, service existing debt and meet working capital and dividend requirements for the next 12 months with current cash balances and cash from operations, supplemented as required by its existing credit facilities. The Company will continue to rely on debt and capital markets for the majority of any necessary long-term funding not provided by operating cash flows. Funding decisions will be guided by our capital structure planning objectives. The primary goals of the Company’s capital structure planning are to maximize financial flexibility and maintain appropriate levels of liquidity to meet our needs while managing balance sheet debt and interest expense. The majority of International Paper’s debt is accessed through global public capital markets where we have a wide base of investors. During 2020, management took various actions to further strengthen the Company’s liquidity position in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. This included the Company amending its receivable securitization program from an uncommitted financing arrangement to a committed financing arrangement in April 2020 and also deferring the payment of our payroll taxes as allowed under CARES Act. The CARES Act allows for the deferral of the payment of the employer portion of Social Security taxes accrued between March 27, 2020, and December 31, 2020. Under the CARES Act 50% of the deferred payroll taxes will be paid by December 31, 2021 and the remainder will be paid by December 31, 2022. We believe that our credit agreements, commercial paper program, and the actions taken in response to COVID-19 provide us with sufficient liquidity to operate in this uncertain environment; however, an extended period of economic disruption could impact our access to additional sources of liquidity.
Maintaining an investment grade credit rating is an important element of International Paper’s financing strategy. At December 31, 2020, the Company held long-term credit ratings of BBB (stable outlook) and Baa2 (stable outlook) by S&P and Moody’s, respectively.
Contractual obligations for future payments under existing debt and lease commitments and purchase obligations at December 31, 2020, were as follows:
(a)Includes $945 million relating to fiber supply agreements entered into at the time of the 2006 Transformation Plan forestland sales and in conjunction with the 2008 acquisition of Weyerhaeuser Company’s Containerboard, Packaging and Recycling business. Also includes $993 million relating
to fiber supply agreements assumed in conjunction with the 2016 acquisition of Weyerhaeuser's pulp business.
(b)Not included in the above table due to the uncertainty of the amount and timing of the payment are unrecognized tax benefits of approximately $163 million. Also not included in the above table is $117 million of Deemed Repatriation Transition Tax associated with the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act which will be settled from 2021 - 2026.
We consider the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020, to be permanently reinvested and, accordingly, no U.S. income taxes have been provided thereon (see Note 13 Income Taxes on pages 65 through 68 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data). We do not anticipate the need to repatriate funds to the United States to satisfy domestic liquidity needs arising in the ordinary course of business, including liquidity needs associated with our domestic debt service requirements.
The Company expects significant cash generation through various transactions in 2021 including the sale of the Kwidzyn, Poland mill, further monetization of our investment in Graphic Packaging, the Printing Papers spin-off, the unwind of the 2005 timber monetization structure and the sale of its ownership interest in Olmuksan International Paper. We will deploy this cash in a manner consistent with our capital allocation framework by maintaining a strong balance sheet, returning cash to shareholders and investing in opportunities that generate returns above our cost of capital and grow earnings and cash.
Pension Obligations and Funding
At December 31, 2020, the projected benefit obligation for the Company’s U.S. defined benefit plans determined under U.S. GAAP was approximately $1.0 billion higher than the fair value of plan assets, excluding non-U.S. plans. Approximately $595 million of this amount relates to plans that are subject to minimum funding requirements. Under current IRS funding rules, the calculation of minimum funding requirements differs from the calculation of the present value of plan benefits (the "projected benefit obligation") for accounting purposes. In December 2008, the Worker, Retiree and Employer Recovery Act of 2008 ("WERA") was passed by the U.S. Congress which provided for pension funding relief and technical corrections. Funding contributions depend on the funding method selected by the Company, and the timing of its implementation, as well as on actual demographic data and the targeted funding level. The Company continually reassesses the amount and timing of any discretionary contributions and elected not to make any voluntary contributions in 2018, 2019 or 2020. At this time, we do not expect to have any required contributions to our plans in 2021, although the Company may elect to make future voluntary contributions. The timing and
amount of future contributions, which could be material, will depend on a number of factors, including the actual earnings and changes in values of plan assets and changes in interest rates.
ILIM SHAREHOLDER'S AGREEMENT
In October 2007, in connection with the formation of the Ilim joint venture, International Paper entered into a shareholder’s agreement that includes provisions relating to the reconciliation of disputes among the partners. This agreement provides that at any time, either the Company or its partners may commence procedures specified under the deadlock agreement. If these or any other deadlock procedures under the shareholder's agreement are commenced, although it is not obligated to do so, the Company may in certain situations choose to purchase its partners' 50% interest in Ilim. Any such transaction would be subject to review and approval by Russian and other relevant antitrust authorities. Based on the provisions of the agreement, the Company estimates that the current purchase price for its partners' 50% interests would be approximately $700 million, which could be satisfied by payment of cash or International Paper common stock, or some combination of the two, at the Company's option. The purchase by the Company of its partners’ 50% interest in Ilim would result in the consolidation of Ilim's financial position and results of operations in all subsequent periods. The parties have informed each other that they have no current intention to commence procedures specified under the deadlock provisions of the shareholder’s agreement.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires International Paper to establish accounting policies and to make estimates that affect both the amounts and timing of the recording of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Some of these estimates require subjective judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain.
Accounting policies whose application may have a significant effect on the reported results of operations and financial position of International Paper, and that can require judgments by management that affect their application, include the accounting for contingencies, impairment or disposal of long-lived assets and goodwill, pensions and income taxes. The Company has discussed the selection of critical accounting policies and the effect of significant estimates with the Audit and Finance Committee of
the Company’s Board of Directors and with its independent registered public accounting firm.
While we have taken into account certain impacts arising from COVID-19 in connection with the accounting estimates reflected in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the full impact of COVID-19 is unknown and cannot be reasonably estimated. However, we have made appropriate accounting estimates based on the facts and circumstances available as of the reporting date. To the extent there are differences between these estimates and actual results, our consolidated financial statements may be affected.
CONTINGENT LIABILITIES
Accruals for contingent liabilities, including personal injury, product liability, environmental, asbestos and other legal matters, are recorded when it is probable that a liability has been incurred or an asset impaired and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Liabilities accrued for legal matters require judgments regarding projected outcomes and range of loss based on historical litigation and settlement experience and recommendations of legal counsel and, if applicable, other experts. Liabilities for environmental matters require evaluations of relevant environmental regulations and estimates of future remediation alternatives and costs. Liabilities for asbestos-related matters require reviews of recent and historical claims data. The Company utilizes its in-house legal and environmental experts to develop estimates of its legal, environmental and asbestos obligations, supplemented as needed by third-party specialists to analyze its most complex contingent liabilities.
We calculate our workers' compensation reserves based on estimated actuarially calculated development factors. The workers' compensation reserves are reviewed at least quarterly to determine the adequacy of the accruals and related financial statement disclosure. While we believe that our assumptions are appropriate, the ultimate settlement of workers' compensation reserves may differ significantly from amounts we have accrued in our consolidated financial statements.
IMPAIRMENT OF LONG-LIVED ASSETS AND GOODWILL
An impairment of a long-lived asset exists when the asset’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, and is recorded when the carrying amount is not recoverable through undiscounted cash flows from future operations or disposals. A goodwill impairment exists when the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds its fair value. Assessments of possible impairments of long-lived assets and goodwill are made when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying
value of the asset may not be recoverable through future operations. Additionally, evaluation for possible impairment of goodwill is required annually. The amount and timing of any impairment charges based on these assessments may require the estimation of future cash flows or the fair market value of the related assets based on management’s best estimates of certain key factors, including future selling prices and volumes, operating, raw material, energy and freight costs, various other projected operating economic factors and other intended uses of the assets. As these key factors change in future periods, the Company will update its impairment analysis to reflect its latest estimates and projections.
ASU 2011-08, "Intangibles - Goodwill and Other," allows entities testing goodwill for impairment the option of performing a qualitative assessment before performing the quantitative goodwill impairment test. If a qualitative assessment is performed, an entity is not required to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test unless the entity determines that, based on that qualitative assessment, it is more likely than not that its fair value is less than its carrying value.
The Company performed its annual testing of its reporting units for possible goodwill impairments by performing the quantitative goodwill impairment test for its North America Industrial Packaging, EMEA Industrial Packaging, European Papers, Russian Papers, and Brazilian Papers reporting units as of October 1, 2020. The Company elected to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test for its reporting units due to the current economic environment. The quantitative goodwill impairment test was performed by comparing the carrying amount of each respective reporting unit to its estimated fair value. The Company calculated the estimated fair value of each of the reporting units with goodwill using a weighted approach based on discounted future cash flows, market multiples and transaction multiples. The determination of fair value using the discounted cash flow approach requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions related to forecasts of future revenues, operating profit margins, and discount rates. The determination of fair value using market multiples and transaction multiples requires management to make significant assumptions related to revenue multiples and adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization ("EBITDA") multiples. The results of our annual impairment test indicated that the carrying amount did not exceed the estimated fair value of any reporting units. For our EMEA Packaging reporting unit, the fair value exceeded the carrying amount by 13%. While the reporting unit’s forecasted results support the fair value, significant changes in or inability to achieve the forecasts could result in the impairment of all or a portion of the reporting unit’s $70 million goodwill balance as of December 31, 2020. While the Printing Papers
segment has experienced a significant decline in demand for its products in the current year as a result of COVID-19, the Company has determined the fair values for those reporting units have not been materially impacted based on management's cumulative long-term outlook and forecasts, which are inherently subjective given the uncertainty around the duration and magnitude of the economic impact of COVID-19. Currently all of our Printing Papers reporting units fair values exceed carrying values by more than 85%.
In addition, the Company considered whether there were any events or circumstances outside of the annual evaluation that would reduce the fair value of its reporting units below their carrying amounts and necessitate a goodwill impairment evaluation. In consideration of all relevant factors, there were no indicators that would require goodwill impairment subsequent to October 1, 2020.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, in conjunction with the annual testing of its reporting units for possible goodwill impairments, the Company calculated the estimated fair value of the Global Cellulose Fibers reporting unit, and it was determined that all of the goodwill in the reporting unit, totaling $52 million, was impaired. This impairment charge was recognized during the fourth quarter of 2019. The decline in the fair value of Global Cellulose Fibers and resulting impairment charge was due to a change in the outlook of the Global Cellulose Fibers reporting unit's operations.
PENSION BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS
The charges recorded for pension benefit obligations are determined annually in conjunction with International Paper’s consulting actuary, and are dependent upon various assumptions including the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, discount rates, projected future compensation increases and mortality rates.
The calculations of pension obligations and expenses require decisions about a number of key assumptions that can significantly affect liability and expense amounts, including the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets and the discount rate used to calculate plan liabilities.
Benefit obligations and fair values of plan assets as of December 31, 2020, for International Paper’s pension plan were as follows:
The table below shows the discount rate used by International Paper to calculate U.S. pension obligations for the years shown:
International Paper determines these actuarial assumptions, after consultation with our actuaries, on December 31 of each year or more frequently if required, to calculate liability information as of that date and pension expense for the following year. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is based on projected rates of return for current asset classes in the plan’s investment portfolio. The discount rate assumption was determined based on a hypothetical settlement portfolio selected from a universe of high quality corporate bonds.
The expected long-term rate of return on U.S. pension plan assets used to determine net periodic cost for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 7.00%.
Increasing (decreasing) the expected long-term rate of return on U.S. plan assets by an additional 0.25% would decrease (increase) 2021 pension expense by approximately $28 million, while a (decrease) increase of 0.25% in the discount rate would (increase) decrease pension expense by approximately $27 million.
Actual rates of return earned on U.S. pension plan assets for each of the last 10 years were:
The 2012, 2013 and 2014 returns above represent weighted averages of International Paper and Temple-Inland asset returns. International Paper and Temple-Inland assets were combined in October 2014. The annualized time-weighted rate of return earned on U.S. pension plan assets was 13.9% and 10.7% for the past five and ten years, respectively.
ASC 715, “Compensation - Retirement Benefits,” provides for delayed recognition of actuarial gains and losses, including amounts arising from changes in the estimated projected plan benefit obligation due to changes in the assumed discount rate, differences between the actual and expected return on plan assets, and other assumption changes. These net gains and losses are recognized in pension expense
prospectively over a period that approximates the average remaining service period of active employees expected to receive benefits under the plans to the extent that they are not offset by gains and losses in subsequent years.
Net periodic pension plan expenses, calculated for all of International Paper’s plans, were as follows:
The decrease in 2020 pension expense primarily reflects a higher return on assets and lower interest costs slightly offset by higher service cost.
Assuming that discount rates, expected long-term returns on plan assets and rates of future compensation increases remain the same as of December 31, 2020, projected future net periodic pension plan expense (income) would be as follows:
The Company estimates that it will record net pension income of approximately $114 million for its U.S. defined benefit plans in 2021, compared to expense of $32 million in 2020. The estimated decrease in net pension expense in 2021 is primarily due to higher return on assets, lower interest cost and lower amortization of actuarial losses partially offset by higher service cost.
The market value of plan assets for International Paper’s U.S. qualified pension plan at December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $12.0 billion, consisting of approximately 40% equity securities, 48% debt securities, 7% real estate funds and 5% other assets. The Company’s funding policy for its qualified pension plans is to contribute amounts sufficient to meet legal funding requirements, plus any additional amounts that the Company may determine to be appropriate considering the funded status of the plan, tax deductibility, the cash flows generated by the Company, and other factors. The Company continually reassesses the amount and timing of any discretionary contributions and could elect to make voluntary contributions in the future. There were no required contributions to the U.S. qualified plan in 2020. The nonqualified defined benefit plans are funded to the extent of benefit payments, which
totaled $31 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
INCOME TAXES
International Paper records its global tax provision based on the respective tax rules and regulations for the jurisdictions in which it operates. Where the Company believes that a tax position is supportable for income tax purposes, the item is included in its income tax returns. Where treatment of a position is uncertain, liabilities are recorded based upon the Company’s evaluation of the “more likely than not” outcome considering technical merits of the position based on specific tax regulations and facts of each matter. Changes to recorded liabilities are only made when an identifiable event occurs that changes the likely outcome, such as settlement with the relevant tax authority, the expiration of statutes of limitation for the subject tax year, change in tax laws, or recent court cases that are relevant to the matter.
Valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized. Significant judgment is required in evaluating the need for and magnitude of appropriate valuation allowances against deferred tax assets. The realization of these assets is dependent on generating future taxable income, as well as successful implementation of various tax planning strategies.
While International Paper believes that these judgments and estimates are appropriate and reasonable under the circumstances, actual resolution of these matters may differ from recorded estimated amounts.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
Information concerning the Company’s environmental and legal proceedings is set forth in Note 14 Commitments and Contingent Liabilities on pages 68 through 70 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
RECENT ACCOUNTING DEVELOPMENTS
See Note 2 Recent Accounting Developments on pages 54 and 55 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for a discussion of new accounting pronouncements.
EFFECT OF INFLATION
While inflationary increases in certain input costs, such as energy, wood fiber and chemical costs, have an impact on the Company’s operating results, changes in general inflation have had minimal impact
on our operating results in each of the last three years. Sales prices and volumes are more strongly influenced by economic supply and demand factors in specific markets and by exchange rate fluctuations than by inflationary factors.
FOREIGN CURRENCY EFFECTS
International Paper has operations in a number of countries. Its operations in those countries also export to, and compete with, imports from other regions. As such, currency movements can have a number of direct and indirect impacts on the Company’s financial statements. Direct impacts include the translation of international operations’ local currency financial statements into U.S. dollars and the remeasurement impact associated with non-functional currency financial assets and liabilities. Indirect impacts include the change in competitiveness of imports into, and exports out of, the United States (and the impact on local currency pricing of products that are traded internationally). In general, a weaker U.S. dollar and stronger local currency is beneficial to International Paper. The currencies that have the most impact are the Euro, the Brazilian real, the Polish zloty and the Russian ruble.
MARKET RISK
We use financial instruments, including fixed and variable rate debt, to finance operations, for capital spending programs and for general corporate purposes. Additionally, financial instruments, including various derivative contracts, are used to hedge exposures to interest rate, commodity and foreign currency risks. We do not use financial instruments for trading purposes. Information related to International Paper’s debt obligations is included in Note 16 Debt and Lines of Credit on pages 72 and 73 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. A discussion of derivatives and hedging activities is included in Note 17 Derivatives and Hedging Activities on pages 73 through 77 of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
The fair value of our debt and financial instruments varies due to changes in market interest and foreign currency rates and commodity prices since the inception of the related instruments. We assess this market risk utilizing a sensitivity analysis. The sensitivity analysis measures the potential loss in earnings, fair values and cash flows based on a hypothetical 10% change (increase and decrease) in interest and currency rates and commodity prices.
INTEREST RATE RISK
Our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to short- and long-term debt obligations and investments in marketable securities. We invest in investment-grade securities of financial institutions and money market mutual funds with a minimum rating of AAA and limit exposure to any one issuer or fund. Our investments in marketable securities at December 31, 2020 and 2019 are stated at cost, which approximates market due to their short-term nature. Our interest rate risk exposure related to these investments was not material.
We issue fixed and floating rate debt in a proportion that management deems appropriate based on current and projected market conditions. Derivative instruments, such as, interest rate swaps, may be used to execute this strategy. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the fair value of the net liability of financial instruments with exposure to interest rate risk was approximately $9.3 billion and $9.8 billion, respectively. The potential increase in fair value resulting from a 10% adverse shift in quoted interest rates would have been approximately $443 million and $511 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
COMMODITY PRICE RISK
The objective of our commodity exposure management is to minimize volatility in earnings due to large fluctuations in the price of commodities. Commodity swap or forward purchase contracts may be used to manage risks associated with market fluctuations in energy prices. At both December 31, 2020 and 2019, the net fair value of these contracts was immaterial and the potential loss in fair value from a 10% adverse change in quoted commodity prices for these contracts was also immaterial.
FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK
International Paper transacts business in many currencies and is also subject to currency exchange rate risk through investments and businesses owned and operated in foreign countries. Our objective in managing the associated foreign currency risks is to minimize the effect of adverse exchange rate fluctuations on our after-tax cash flows. We address these risks on a limited basis by entering into cross-currency interest rate swaps, or foreign exchange contracts. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the net fair value of financial instruments with exposure to foreign currency risk was approximately a $3 million liability and a $16 million asset, respectively. The
potential loss in fair value for such financial instruments from a 10% adverse change in quoted foreign currency exchange rates would have been approximately $26 million and $87 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.