Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is intended to help you understand The Interpublic Group of Companies, Inc. and its subsidiaries (the "Company," "IPG," "we," "us" or "our"). MD&A should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes included in this report. Our MD&A includes the following sections:
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY provides a discussion about our strategic outlook, factors influencing our business and an overview of our results of operations and liquidity.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS provides an analysis of the consolidated and segment results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019 and 2019 compared to 2018.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES provides an overview of our cash flows, funding requirements, contractual obligations, financing and sources of funds, and debt credit ratings.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES provides a discussion of our accounting policies that require critical judgment, assumptions and estimates.
RECENT ACCOUNTING STANDARDS, by reference to Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, provides a discussion of certain accounting standards that have been adopted during 2020 or that have not yet been required to be implemented and may be applicable to our future operations.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURE provides a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measure with the most directly comparable generally accepted accounting principles in the United States ("U.S. GAAP") financial measures and sets forth the reasons we believe that presentation of the non-GAAP financial measure contained therein provides useful information to investors regarding our results of operations and financial condition.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization categorized the novel coronavirus ("COVID-19") as a pandemic, and it continues to spread extensively throughout the United States and the rest of the world. The outbreak of COVID-19 and public and private sector measures to reduce its transmission, such as forced business closures and limits on operations, the imposition of social distancing and orders to work-from-home, stay-at-home and shelter-in-place, have adversely impacted our business and demand for our services. Some businesses have adjusted, reduced or suspended operating activities, which has negatively impacted the markets we serve. We continue to believe that our focus on our strategic strengths, which include talent, our differentiated go-to-market strategy, data management capabilities, and the relevance of our offerings, position us well to navigate a rapidly changing marketplace. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have negatively impacted and will likely continue to negatively impact our results of operations, cash flows and financial position; however, the extent of the impact will vary depending on the duration and severity of the economic and operational impacts of COVID-19 as well as the effectiveness of mass vaccination and other public health efforts to mitigate the impact of the pandemic.
We have taken steps to protect the safety of our employees, and to support their working arrangements, with a majority of our worldwide workforce continuing to work from home. We believe we have had significant success in maintaining and continuing to advance the quality of our services notwithstanding extensive changes required by the pandemic. With respect to managing costs, we undertook multiple initiatives, which continue, to align our expenses with changes in revenue. The steps we have taken across our agencies and corporate group include deferred merit increases, freezes on hiring and temporary labor, major cuts in non-essential spending, staff reductions, furloughs in markets where that option is available and salary reductions, including voluntary salary reductions for our senior corporate management team.
Starting in the second quarter of 2020 and continuing through the year, the Company took restructuring actions to lower our operating expenses structurally and permanently relative to revenue and to accelerate the transformation of our business (the “2020 Plan”). Most of these actions are based on our recent experience and learning in the COVID-19 pandemic and a resulting review of our operations, which continues, to address certain operating expenses such as occupancy expense and salaries and related expenses. Notably, we foresee a greater role for work-from-home in a hybrid office-home model to deliver and support our services in a post-COVID world. In addition, we remain committed to and have intensified our efforts around cash flow discipline, including the identification of significant capital expenditures that can be deferred, and working capital management.
We saw the effects of COVID-19 on client spending throughout the year, beginning in March, first in the Asia Pacific region in the first quarter and subsequently in the U.S., Europe and other markets. Growth in our retail and healthcare sector clients was offset by broad-based declines across most other sectors due to economic conditions, though more so in our second
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
quarter than our third and fourth quarters, with the greatest declines in our experiential and events businesses. We saw continued negative impacts on our fourth-quarter results as clients continue to respond to the current economic conditions by reducing their marketing budgets, which affected the demand for our services. We expect many of these trends will continue in 2021, with prospects for general economic recovery and improved financial performance in the second half of the year depending on the progression of the pandemic and the efficacy and speed of vaccination efforts globally. See Item 1A, Risk Factors, in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We have also taken steps to strengthen our financial position during this period of heightened uncertainty, as discussed in more detail under the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section in this Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A"). On March 30, 2020, we issued $650.0 aggregate principal amount of 4.75% senior unsecured notes due 2030 (the “4.75% Senior Notes”) and on March 27, 2020, we entered into a new $500.0 364-day revolving credit facility. On July 28, 2020, we entered into amendments to our committed corporate credit facility and our new 364-day credit facility to increase our flexibility under the maximum leverage ratio covenant in each facility. We believe these steps will further enhance our financial resources as we navigate the period ahead.
Our Business
We are one of the world’s premier global advertising and marketing services companies. Our companies specialize in consumer advertising, digital marketing, media planning and buying, public relations, specialized communications disciplines and data management. Our agencies create customized marketing programs for clients that range in scale from large global marketers to regional and local clients. Comprehensive global services are critical to effectively serve our multinational and local clients in markets throughout the world as they seek to build brands, increase sales of their products and services, and gain market share.
We operate in a media landscape that continues to evolve at a rapid pace. Media channels continue to fragment, and clients face an increasingly complex consumer environment. To stay ahead of these challenges and to achieve our objectives, we have made and continue to make investments in creative, strategic and technology talent in areas including fast-growth digital marketing channels, high-growth geographic regions and strategic world markets. We consistently review opportunities within our Company to enhance our operations through acquisitions and strategic alliances and internal programs that encourage intra-company collaboration. As appropriate, we also develop relationships with technology and emerging media companies that are building leading-edge marketing tools that complement our agencies' skill sets and capabilities.
Our financial goals include competitive organic net revenue growth and expansion of Adjusted EBITA margin, as defined and discussed within the Non-GAAP Financial Measure section of this MD&A, which we expect will further strengthen our balance sheet and total liquidity and increase value to our shareholders. Accordingly, we remain focused on meeting the evolving needs of our clients while concurrently managing our cost structure. We continually seek greater efficiency in the delivery of our services, focusing on more effective resource utilization, including the productivity of our employees, real estate, information technology and shared services, such as finance, human resources and legal. The improvements we have made and continue to make in our financial reporting and business information systems in recent years allow us more timely and actionable insights from our global operations. Our disciplined approach to our balance sheet and liquidity provides us with a solid financial foundation and financial flexibility to manage and grow our business. We believe that our strategy and execution position us to meet our financial goals and to deliver long-term shareholder value.
Our Financial Information
When we analyze period-to-period changes in our operating performance, we determine the portion of the change that is attributable to changes in foreign currency rates and the net effect of acquisitions and divestitures, and the remainder we call organic change, which indicates how our underlying business performed. We exclude the impact of billable expenses in analyzing our operating performance as the fluctuations from period to period are not indicative of the performance of our underlying businesses and have no impact on our operating income or net income.
The change in our operating performance attributable to changes in foreign currency rates is determined by converting the prior-period reported results using the current-period exchange rates and comparing these prior-period adjusted amounts to the prior-period reported results. Although the U.S. Dollar is our reporting currency, a substantial portion of our revenues and expenses are generated in foreign currencies. Therefore, our reported results are affected by fluctuations in the currencies in which we conduct our international businesses. Our exposure is mitigated as the majority of our revenues and expenses in any given market are generally denominated in the same currency. Both positive and negative currency fluctuations against the U.S. Dollar affect our consolidated results of operations, and the magnitude of the foreign currency impact to our operations related to each geographic region depends on the significance and operating performance of the region. The foreign currencies that most adversely impacted our results during the year ended December 31, 2020 were the Brazilian Real, Argentine Peso, Mexican Peso, Indian Rupee and South African Rand.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
For purposes of analyzing changes in our operating performance attributable to the net effect of acquisitions and divestitures, transactions are treated as if they occurred on the first day of the quarter during which the transaction occurred. During the past few years, we have acquired companies that we believe will enhance our offerings and disposed of businesses that are not consistent with our strategic plan.
The metrics that we use to evaluate our financial performance include organic change in net revenue as well as the change in certain operating expenses, and the components thereof, expressed as a percentage of consolidated net revenue, as well as Adjusted EBITA. These metrics are also used by management to assess the financial performance of our reportable segments, Integrated Agency Networks ("IAN") and IPG DXTRA ("DXTRA"). In certain of our discussions, we analyze net revenue by geographic region and by business sector, in which we focus on our top 500 clients, which typically constitute approximately 80% to 85% of our annual consolidated net revenues.
The Consolidated Financial Statements and MD&A presented herein reflect the latest estimates and assumptions made by us that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosures as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods presented. We believe we have used reasonable estimates and assumptions to assess the fair values of the Company’s goodwill, long-lived assets and indefinite-lived intangible assets; assessment of the annual effective tax rate; valuation of deferred income taxes and the allowance for expected credit losses on future uncollectible accounts receivable. If actual market conditions vary significantly from those currently projected, these estimates and assumptions could materially change resulting in adjustments to the carrying values of our assets and liabilities.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
The following table presents a summary of our financial performance for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
1In 2018, results include transaction costs of $35.0 related to the Acxiom acquisition.
2In 2020, results include restructuring charges of $413.8. In 2019, results include restructuring charges of $33.9. See "Restructuring Charges" in MD&A and Note 11 of Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further information.
3Adjusted EBITA is a financial measure that is not defined by U.S. GAAP. Adjusted EBITA is calculated as net income available to IPG common stockholder before provision for incomes taxes, total (expenses) and other income, equity in net income (loss) of unconsolidated affiliates, net income attributable to noncontrolling interests and amortization of acquired intangibles. Refer to the Non-GAAP Financial Measure section of this MD&A for additional information and for a reconciliation to U.S. GAAP measures.
Our organic net revenue decrease of 4.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on advertising, marketing and media spending in the auto and transportation, technology and telecom, consumer goods and financial services sectors, partially offset by a combination of net client wins and net higher spending from existing clients in the healthcare and retail sectors. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our Adjusted EBITA margin on net revenue decreased to 8.4% from 13.6% in the prior-year period. The decrease was primarily due to restructuring charges taken to lower our leased real estate, a result of the increased role in our operations of work from home arrangements for our workforce, in response to the global health crisis, discussed in the "Results of Operations" section.
Our organic net revenue increase of 3.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019 was driven by growth across nearly all geographic regions, attributable to a combination of net higher spending from existing clients and net client wins, most notably in the financial services, healthcare, retail and technology and telecom sectors, partially offset by a decrease in the auto and transportation sector. During the year ended December 31, 2019, our Adjusted EBITA margin on net revenue grew to 13.6%
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
from 13.0% in the prior-year period as the increase in net revenue outpaced the overall increase in our operating expense, excluding billable expenses and amortization of acquired intangibles.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Results of Operations
Net Revenue
Our net revenue is directly impacted by the retention and spending levels of existing clients and by our ability to win new clients. Most of our expenses are recognized ratably throughout the year and are therefore less seasonal than revenue. Our net revenue is typically lowest in the first quarter and highest in the fourth quarter, reflecting the seasonal spending of our clients.
The organic decrease in our domestic market was primarily due to the impact of the pandemic on the economy at our sports and experiential marketing businesses, primarily due to sports and other event cancellations, and on our discretionary digital project-based offerings. The decreases were partially offset by growth at our advertising and media businesses. In our international markets, the organic decrease was primarily driven by the revenue declines at our advertising and sports and experiential marketing businesses and public relations agencies, primarily in the Asia Pacific and United Kingdom regions as well as the revenue declines at our media businesses, primarily in the Continental Europe and Asia Pacific regions.
The organic increase in our domestic market was primarily driven by growth at our advertising and media businesses as well as our data management business. In our international markets, the organic increase was primarily driven by strong performance at our media businesses throughout all geographic regions. In addition, the organic increase was also driven by growth at our advertising businesses and our public relations agencies as well as at our digital specialist agencies in Latin America. Consolidated net acquisitions primarily includes net revenue during the first nine months ended September 30, 2019 from Acxiom, which we acquired on October 1, 2018, partially offset by divestitures, mostly in our domestic market, Asia Pacific and Continental Europe regions.
Refer to the segment discussion later in this MD&A for information on changes in revenue by segment.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
Salaries and Related Expenses
Salaries and related expenses decreased by 4.0% compared to our net revenue decline of 6.5% during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior-year period. The decrease was primarily driven by reductions in base salaries, benefits and tax and lower incentive and temporary help expenses in response to the decline in net revenue, which was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on economic conditions. The overall decreases were partially offset by increased severance expense.
Net revenue growth of 7.4% outpaced the increase in salaries and related expenses of 5.1% during the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the prior-year period, primarily due to base salaries, benefits and tax, and temporary help expenses increasing at rates less than net revenue growth. The improved ratio was also attributable to the inclusion of Acxiom, for the full year in 2019, which has a lower ratio of salaries and related expenses as a percentage of its net revenue as well as a result of carefully managing our employee costs.
Office and Other Direct Expenses
1Includes production expenses, travel and entertainment, professional fees, spending to support new business activity, telecommunications, office supplies, bad debt expense, adjustments to contingent acquisition obligations, foreign currency losses (gains) and other expenses.
Office and other direct expenses decreased by 12.5% compared to our net revenue decrease of 6.5% during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior-year period. The decrease in office and other direct expenses was mainly due to decreases in travel and entertainment expenses and new business and promotion expenses as well as lower occupancy expense and professional consulting fees, partially offset by an increase in bad debt expense.
Office and other direct expenses increased by 15.4% compared to net revenue growth of 7.4% during the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the prior-year period. The increase in office and other direct expenses was mainly due to the inclusion of Acxiom, for the full year in 2019, which has a higher ratio of office and other direct expenses as a percentage of its net revenue, primarily driven by client service costs and professional fees. Additionally, contributing to the increase was a year-over-year change in contingent acquisition obligations, partially offset by leverage on occupancy expense.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A") are primarily the unallocated expenses of our Corporate and other group, as detailed further in the segment discussion later in this MD&A, excluding depreciation and amortization. SG&A as a
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
percentage of net revenue decreased to 0.7% in 2020 from 1.1% in the prior-year period, primarily attributable to a decrease in employee insurance expense as well as lower incentive expense and a decrease in travel and entertainment expenses. SG&A as a percentage of net revenue decreased to 1.1% in 2019 from 2.1% in the prior-year period, primarily attributable to lower professional fees, mainly driven by transaction costs related to the Acxiom acquisition in 2018 and an increase in allocated service fees from Selling, General and Administrative expenses to Cost of Services, mainly as a result of the inclusion of Acxiom.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization as a percentage of net revenue was 3.6% in 2020, 3.2% in 2019 and 2.5% in 2018. The increases in 2019 compared to the prior-year period was primarily due to the inclusion of Acxiom. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, amortization of acquired intangibles was $85.9, $86.0 and $37.6, respectively.
Restructuring Charges
2020 Restructuring Plan
Beginning in the second quarter of 2020, the Company took restructuring actions to lower its operating expenses structurally and permanently relative to revenue and to accelerate the transformation of our business (the “2020 Plan”). These actions continued through the fourth quarter and most are based on our recent experience and learning in the COVID-19 pandemic and a resulting review of our operations to address certain operating expenses such as occupancy expense and salaries and related expenses.
A summary of the restructuring activities related to the 2020 Plan is as follows:
Our charges for restructuring actions for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $413.8 and were designed to reduce our expenses, such as occupancy expense and salaries and related expenses, relative to our net revenue on an ongoing basis. These actions, taken during the second, third and fourth quarters, reduced our global real estate footprint by approximately 15% or 1,700,000 square feet and, further, downsized selected levels of management and staff with severance costs for 1,520 employees or approximately 3%. Of the total charges for the year ended December 31, 2020, $265.6 or 64%, is non-cash, mainly representing the impairment of right-of-use assets of operating leases. We expect to realize approximately $160.0 of annualized cost savings associated with the actions taken as part of the 2020 Restructuring Plan.
Net restructuring charges were comprised of $317.9 at IAN and $78.8 at DXTRA for the year ended December 31, 2020, which include non-cash lease impairment costs of $190.4 and $59.8, respectively.
Lease impairment costs, which relate to the office spaces that were vacated as part of the 2020 Plan, included impairments of operating lease right-of-use assets and associated leasehold improvements, furniture and asset retirement obligations. Lease impairments were calculated based on estimated fair values using market participant assumptions including forecasted net discounted cash flows related to the operating lease right-of-use assets.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
2019 Restructuring Plan
In the first quarter of 2019, the Company implemented a cost initiative (the “2019 Plan”) to better align our cost structure with our revenue primarily related to specific client losses occurring in 2018. All restructuring actions were identified and initiated by the end of the first quarter of 2019, with all actions substantially completed by the end of the second quarter of 2019, and there have not been any restructuring adjustments.
EXPENSES AND OTHER INCOME
Net Interest Expense
For 2020, net interest expense remained relatively flat as compared to the prior-year period. For 2019, net interest expense increased by $63.6 as compared to 2018, primarily attributable to increased cash interest expense from the issuance of $2,500.0 of long-term debt in September and October of 2018 in order to finance the acquisition of Acxiom, partially offset by an increase in interest income, primarily due to higher cash balances in international markets.
Other Expense, Net
Results of operations include certain items that are not directly associated with our revenue-producing operations.
Net losses on sales of businesses - During 2020 and 2019, the amounts recognized were related to sales of businesses and the classification of certain assets and liabilities, consisting primarily of cash, as held for sale within our IAN and DXTRA reportable segments. During 2018, the amounts recognized were related to sales of businesses and the classification of certain assets and liabilities, consisting primarily of cash, as held for sale within our IAN reportable segment. The businesses held for sale as of year-end primarily represent unprofitable, non-strategic agencies which are expected to be sold within the next twelve months. The sales of businesses and the classification of certain assets and liabilities as held for sale included cash, net of proceeds, of $62.9, $6.7 and $30.8 for the years ended 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, which is classified within the Other Investing Activities line in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Other - During 2020, the amounts recognized were primarily a result of gains on remeasurement of equity interests arising from a change in ownership. During 2019, the amounts recognized were primarily a result of changes in fair market value of equity investments, partially offset by the sale of an equity investment. During 2018, the amounts recognized were primarily a result of transaction-related costs from the Acxiom acquisition, partially offset by changes in fair market value of equity investments.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
INCOME TAXES
Effective Tax Rate
Our tax rates are affected by many factors, including our worldwide earnings from various countries, changes in legislation and tax characteristics of our income.
In 2020, our effective income tax rate of 2.2% was positively impacted by the settlement of the U.S. Federal income tax audit of the years 2006 to 2016, partially offset by losses in certain foreign jurisdictions where we received no tax benefit due to 100% valuation allowances, by net losses on sales of businesses and the classification of certain assets as held for sale for which we received minimal tax benefit and by tax expense associated with the change to our assertion regarding the permanent reinvestment of undistributed earnings attributable to certain foreign subsidiaries.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was enacted and signed into law. The CARES Act includes several provisions for corporations including increasing the amount of deductible interest, allowing companies to carryback certain net operating losses (“NOLs”) and increasing the amount of NOLs that corporations can use to offset income. The CARES Act did not materially affect our quarter or year-to-date income tax provision, deferred tax assets and liabilities, or related taxes payable.
In the second quarter of 2020, in response to changes in non-U.S. tax law, a decision was made to change our indefinite reinvestment assertion on a $120.0 of undistributed foreign earnings of specific subsidiaries. We recorded $10.4 of income tax costs associated with this change to our assertion.
In the third quarter of 2020, in response to restructuring actions taken within foreign subsidiaries, a decision was made to change our indefinite reinvestment assertion on a $46.0 of undistributed foreign earnings of specific subsidiaries. We recorded $3.2 of income tax costs associated with this change to our assertion.
On July 29, 2020, the Internal Revenue Service notified the Company that the U.S. Federal income tax audit of years 2006 through 2016 has been finalized and settled. As a result, we recognized an income tax benefit of $136.2 in the third quarter of 2020.
In 2019, our effective income tax rate of 23.3% was positively impacted by the reversal of valuation allowances primarily in Continental Europe, by the settlement of state income tax audits and by excess tax benefits on employee share-based payments. The effective tax rate was negatively impacted by losses in certain foreign jurisdictions where we receive no tax benefit due to 100% valuation allowances, net losses on sales of businesses and the classification of certain assets as held for sale, for which we received minimal tax benefit.
In 2018, our effective income tax rate of 23.8% was positively impacted by U.S. tax incentives, foreign tax credits from a distribution of unremitted earnings, the net reversal of valuation allowance in Continental Europe and research and development credits. The effective income tax rate was negatively impacted by losses in certain foreign jurisdictions where we received no tax benefit due to 100% valuation allowances, non-deductible losses on sales of businesses and assets held for sale, by tax expense associated with the change to our assertion regarding the permanent reinvestment of undistributed earnings attributable to certain foreign subsidiaries, and by tax expense related to the true-up of our December 31, 2017 tax reform estimates as permitted by SEC Staff issued Accounting Bulletin No. 118 (“SAB 118”).
Public Law 115-97, commonly referred to as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the "Tax Act") was signed into law on December 22, 2017. The Tax Act legislated many new tax provisions which impacted our operations. At December 31, 2017, provisional amounts were recorded as permitted by SAB 118. The impact of the Tax Act as required by SAB 118, resulted in a net tax expense of $13.4 in 2018, which was primarily attributable to our estimate of the tax imposed on the deemed repatriation of unremitted foreign earnings.
The Company has historically asserted that its unremitted foreign earnings are permanently reinvested, and therefore did not record income taxes on such amounts. In light of increased debt and associated servicing commitments in connection with the Acxiom acquisition that was consummated on October 1, 2018, the Company re-evaluated its global cash needs and as a result determined that approximately $435.0 of undistributed foreign earnings from certain international entities were no longer subject to the permanent reinvestment assertion. We recorded a tax expense of $10.8 in 2018 representing our estimate of the
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
tax costs associated with this change to our assertion. We did not change our permanent reinvestment assertion with respect to any other international entities as we used the related historical earnings and profits to fund international operations and investments.
The Tax Act imposed a new tax on certain foreign earnings generated in 2018 and forward. These global intangible low-taxed income ("GILTI") tax rules are complex. U.S. GAAP allows us to choose an accounting policy which treats the U.S. tax under GILTI provisions as either a current expense, as incurred, or as a component of the Company’s measurement of deferred taxes. The Company elected to account for the GILTI tax as a current expense.
See Note 9 in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further information.
EARNINGS PER SHARE
Basic earnings per share available to IPG common stockholders for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $0.90, $1.70 and $1.61 per share, respectively. Diluted earnings per share available to IPG common stockholders for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $0.89, $1.68 and $1.59 per share, respectively.
Basic and diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2020 included a negative impact of $0.18 from the amortization of acquired intangibles, a negative impact of $0.82 from restructuring charges, a negative impact of $0.16 from net losses on sales of businesses and the classification of certain assets as held for sale, partially offset by a net positive impact of $0.31 from various discrete tax items.
Basic and diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2019 included a negative impact of $0.18 from the amortization of acquired intangibles, a negative impact of $0.06 from first-quarter restructuring charges, a negative impact of $0.12 from net losses on sales of businesses and the classification of certain assets as held for sale, for which we received minimal tax benefit, partially offset by a net positive impact of $0.10 from various discrete tax items.
Basic and diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2018 included negative impacts of $0.16 and $0.15, respectively, from net losses on sales of businesses and the classification of certain assets as held for sale primarily in our international markets, negative impacts of $0.10 and $0.09, respectively, from transaction costs directly related to the acquisition of Acxiom, and negative impacts of $0.09 and $0.08, respectively, from the amortization of acquired intangibles, partially offset by net positive impacts of $0.06 and $0.06, respectively, from various discrete tax items.
Segment Results of Operations
As discussed in Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we have two reportable segments as of December 31, 2020: IAN and DXTRA. We also report results for the "Corporate and other" group. Segment information for the prior period has been recast to conform to the current-period presentation.
IAN
Net Revenue
The organic decrease was mainly attributable to lower spending from existing clients, primarily related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The revenue decrease was in the auto and transportation, technology and telecom, consumer goods, and financial services sectors, partially offset by net client wins and net higher spending from existing clients in the healthcare and retail sectors. The organic decrease in our domestic market was primarily driven by the impact of the pandemic on the economy at discretionary-based digital service offerings partially offset by growth at our advertising and media businesses. In our international markets, the organic decrease was mainly driven by our advertising businesses, primarily in the Asia Pacific and United Kingdom regions, as well as the revenue declines at our media businesses, primarily in the Continental Europe and Asia Pacific regions.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
The organic increase was attributable to a combination of net higher spending from existing clients and net client wins, most notably in the financial services, healthcare, retail and technology and telecom sectors, partially offset by a decrease in the auto and transportation sector. The organic increase in our domestic market was primarily driven by growth at our advertising and media businesses as well as our data management business. In our international markets, the organic increase was primarily driven by strong performance at our media businesses throughout all geographic regions. In addition, the organic increase was also driven by growth at our advertising businesses and our digital specialist agencies in Latin America. Consolidated net acquisitions primarily includes net revenue during the first nine months ended September 30, 2019 from Acxiom, which we acquired on October 1, 2018, partially offset by divestitures, mostly in our domestic market, Asia Pacific and Continental Europe regions.
Segment EBITA
1Segment EBITA and Segment EBITA margin on net revenue include $317.9 and $27.0 of restructuring charges in the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See "Restructuring Charges" in MD&A and Note 11 of Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further information.
Segment EBITA margin decreased during 2020 when compared to 2019, mainly due to the decrease in net revenue of 5.6%, the organic component of which is discussed in detail above, primarily related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Operating expense, excluding billable expenses and amortization of acquired intangibles, remained flat as compared to the prior-year period mainly due to an increase in restructuring charges, partially offset by decreases in salaries and related expenses and office and other direct expenses. The decrease in salaries and related expenses was primarily driven by reductions in base salaries, benefits and tax, lower temporary help and incentive expenses in response to the declines in net revenue, primarily due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on economic conditions. The overall decreases were partially offset by increased severance. The decrease in office and other direct expenses was primarily driven by decreases in travel and entertainment expenses and new business and promotion expenses as well as lower occupancy expense and professional fees, partially offset by an increase in bad debt expense and a year-over-year change in contingent acquisition obligations. During the full-year of 2020, Segment EBITA included restructuring charges of $317.9 as compared to $27.0 during the full-year of 2019. Depreciation and amortization, excluding amortization of acquired intangibles, as a percentage of net revenue increased to 2.6% in 2020 from 2.2% in the prior-year period.
Segment EBITA margin decreased during 2019 when compared to 2018, as the increase in operating expenses, excluding billable expenses and amortization of acquired intangibles, outpaced the net revenue growth of 9.0%, the organic component of which was discussed in detail above. The Segment EBITA margin decrease of 0.3% included restructuring charges of $27.0, or 0.4% as a percentage of net revenue, during 2019 to better align our cost structure with our revenue. The comparison was also adversely impacted due to higher allocated service fees, from our Selling, General and Administrative expenses, to Cost of Services, mainly as a result of the inclusion of Acxiom. Net revenue growth outpaced the increase in salaries and related expenses as compared to the prior-year period, primarily driven by lower percentages of its net revenue in base salaries, benefits and tax, temporary help expenses and incentive expense. The improved salaries and related expenses ratio was also attributable to the inclusion of Acxiom, which has a lower ratio of salaries and related expenses as a percentage of its net revenue as well as a result of carefully managing our employee costs. The increase in office and other direct expenses outpaced the growth in net revenue as compared to the prior-year period, mainly due to the inclusion of Acxiom, which has a higher ratio of office and other direct expense as a percentage of its net revenue, driven by client service costs and professional fees. However, overall office and other direct expenses primarily benefited from leverage on occupancy expense. Depreciation and amortization, excluding amortization of acquired intangibles, as a percentage of net revenue increased to 2.2% in 2019 from 2.0% in the prior-year period, primarily due to the inclusion of Acxiom.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
DXTRA
Net Revenue
The organic decrease was mainly attributable to lower spending from existing clients, primarily related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The revenue decrease was in the auto and transportation, technology and telecom and financial services sectors, partially offset by a combination of net client wins and net higher spending from existing clients in the healthcare and food and beverage sectors. The organic decrease in our domestic market was primarily driven by our sports and experiential marketing businesses, primarily due to sports and other event cancellations. In our international markets, the organic decrease was mainly driven by our public relations agencies and sports and experiential marketing businesses, primarily in the Asia Pacific and United Kingdom regions.
The organic increase was primarily attributable to net client wins and net higher spending from existing clients, most notably in the healthcare and food and beverage sectors, partially offset by a decrease in the auto and transportation sector. The organic decrease in our domestic market was primarily due to revenue decline at our public relations agencies, partially offset by growth at our sports marketing business. The international organic increase was driven by growth across all geographic regions and disciplines, primarily at our public relations agencies, most notably in the United Kingdom and Continental Europe regions, and sports marketing business, most notably in the Asia Pacific region.
Segment EBITA
1Segment EBITA and Segment EBITA margin on net revenue include $78.8 and $6.2 of restructuring charges in the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See "Restructuring Charges" in MD&A and Note 11 of Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further information.
Segment EBITA margin decreased during 2020 when compared to 2019, as the decrease in net revenue of 11.8% exceeded the overall decrease in operating expenses, including restructuring charges and excluding billable expenses and amortization of acquired intangibles. The decrease in salaries and related expenses was primarily driven by reductions in base salaries, benefits and tax, lower temporary help and incentive expenses in response to the declines in net revenue, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on economic conditions. The overall decrease was partially offset by an increase in severance expense. The decrease in office and other direct expenses was primarily driven by decreases in travel and entertainment expenses and new business and promotion expenses as well as lower occupancy expense. During the full-year of 2020, segment EBITA included restructuring charges of $78.8 as compared to $6.2 during the full-year of 2019. Depreciation and amortization, excluding amortization of acquired intangibles, as a percentage of net revenue increased to 1.8% in 2020 from 1.6% in the prior-year period.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
Segment EBITA margin decreased during 2019 compared to 2018, mainly due to the decrease in net revenue of 1.1%, the organic component of which is discussed in detail above, and the slight increase in operating expenses, primarily driven by the restructuring charges of $6.2 in 2019, higher salaries and related expenses to support business growth and an increase in year-over-year change in contingent acquisition obligations, partially offset by lower incentive expense. Depreciation and amortization, excluding amortization of acquired intangibles, as a percentage of net revenue remained flat as compared to the prior-year period.
CORPORATE AND OTHER
Our corporate and other segment is primarily comprised of selling, general and administrative expenses including corporate office expenses as well as shared service center and certain other centrally managed expenses that are not fully allocated to operating divisions; salaries, long-term incentives, annual bonuses and other miscellaneous benefits for corporate office employees; professional fees related to internal control compliance, financial statement audits and legal, information technology and other consulting services that are engaged and managed through the corporate office; and rental expense for properties occupied by corporate office employees. A portion of centrally managed expenses is allocated to operating divisions based on a formula that uses the planned revenues of each of the operating units. Amounts allocated also include specific charges for information technology-related projects, which are allocated based on utilization.
Corporate and other expenses decreased by $20.5 to $81.3 during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily attributable to a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses, which was discussed in the Results of Operations section, partially offset by an increase in restructuring charges. Corporate and other expenses in 2019 decreased by $74.2 to $101.8 compared to 2018, primarily attributable to lower professional fees, mainly driven by transaction costs of $35.0 related to the Acxiom acquisition in 2018 and an increase in allocated service fees from Selling, General and Administrative expenses to Cost of Services, mainly as a result of the inclusion of Acxiom.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, corporate and other expense includes $17.1 and $0.7 of restructuring charges, respectively. See "Restructuring Charges" in MD&A and Note 11 of Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further information.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
CASH FLOW OVERVIEW
The following tables summarize key financial data relating to our liquidity, capital resources and uses of capital.
1Reflects net income adjusted primarily for depreciation and amortization of fixed assets and intangible assets, non-cash restructuring charges, amortization of restricted stock and other non-cash compensation, net losses on sales of businesses, provision for uncollectible receivables and deferred income taxes.
2Reflects changes in accounts receivable, other current assets, accounts payable, accrued liabilities and contract liabilities.
Operating Activities
Due to the seasonality of our business, we typically use cash from working capital in the first nine months of a year, with the largest impact in the first quarter, and generate cash from working capital in the fourth quarter, driven by the seasonally strong media spending by our clients. Quarterly and annual working capital results are impacted by the fluctuating annual media spending budgets of our clients as well as their changing media spending patterns throughout each year across various countries.
The timing of media buying on behalf of our clients across various countries affects our working capital and operating cash flow and can be volatile. In most of our businesses, our agencies enter into commitments to pay production and media costs on behalf of clients. To the extent possible, we pay production and media charges after we have received funds from our clients. The amounts involved, which substantially exceed our revenues, primarily affect the level of accounts receivable, accounts
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
payable, accrued liabilities and contract liabilities. Our assets include both cash received and accounts receivable from clients for these pass-through arrangements, while our liabilities include amounts owed on behalf of clients to media and production suppliers. Our accrued liabilities are also affected by the timing of certain other payments. For example, while annual cash incentive awards are accrued throughout the year, they are generally paid during the first quarter of the subsequent year.
Net cash provided by operating activities during 2020 was $1,847.2, which was an increase of $318.0 as compared to 2019, and the comparison includes $900.1 generated from working capital in 2020, compared with $442.8 generated from working capital in 2019. Working capital in 2020 was primarily impacted by the variation in the timing of collections and payments around the reporting period, which was favorable in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Net cash provided by operating activities during 2019 was $1,529.2, which was an increase of $964.1 as compared to 2018, and the comparison includes $442.8 generated from working capital in 2019, compared with $431.1 used in working capital in 2018. Working capital in 2019 was primarily impacted by the variation in the timing of collections and payments around the reporting period, of which the timing that was unfavorable in late 2018 compared to 2017 was a benefit in 2019, as well as the spending levels and pattern of our clients as compared to 2018.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during 2020 consisted primarily of payments for capital expenditures of $167.5, related mostly to computer hardware and software and leasehold improvements.
Net cash used in investing activities during 2019 consisted primarily of payments for capital expenditures of 198.5, related mostly to leasehold improvements and computer hardware and software.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities during 2020 was driven by repayment of long-term debt of $503.7 and the payment of dividends of $398.1, partially offset by proceeds of $646.2, net of discount of $3.8, from the issuance of our 4.75% Senior Notes due March 30, 2030 (the “4.75% Senior Notes").
Net cash used in financing activities during 2019 was driven by repayment of long-term debt of $403.3 and the payment of dividends of $363.1.
Foreign Exchange Rate Changes
The effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash included in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows resulted in a net increase of $31.0 in 2020. This increase was primarily a result of several foreign currencies strengthening compared to the U.S. dollar, including the Euro and the Australian Dollar.
The effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash included in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows resulted in a net decrease of $6.0 in 2019.
LIQUIDITY OUTLOOK
We expect our cash flow from operations and existing cash and cash equivalents to be sufficient to meet our anticipated operating requirements at a minimum for the next twelve months. We also have a commercial paper program, a committed corporate credit facility, a 364-Day credit facility that matures on March 26, 2021, and uncommitted lines of credit to support our operating needs. Borrowings under our commercial paper program are supported by our committed corporate credit agreement. We continue to maintain a disciplined approach to managing liquidity, with flexibility over significant uses of cash, including our capital expenditures, cash used for new acquisitions, our common stock repurchase program and our common stock dividends.
From time to time, we evaluate market conditions and financing alternatives for opportunities to raise additional funds or otherwise improve our liquidity profile, enhance our financial flexibility and manage market risk. Our ability to access the capital markets depends on a number of factors, which include those specific to us, such as our credit ratings, and those related to the financial markets, such as the amount or terms of available credit. Particularly in light of the current market conditions, there can be no guarantee that we would be able to access new sources of liquidity, or continue to access existing sources of liquidity, on commercially reasonable terms, or at all.
Funding Requirements
Our most significant funding requirements include our operations, non-cancelable operating lease obligations, capital expenditures, acquisitions, common stock dividends, taxes and debt service. Additionally, we may be required to make payments to minority shareholders in certain subsidiaries if they exercise their options to sell us their equity interests.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
Notable funding requirements include:
•Debt service - Our 3.75% Senior Notes in aggregate principal amount of $500.0 mature on October 1, 2021. We expect to use available cash on hand as well as additional short-term borrowings as needed to fund the principal repayment. Our 3.50% Senior Notes in aggregate principal amount of $500.0 matured on October 1, 2020 and we used available cash, including the proceeds from the offering of our 4.75% Senior Notes, to fund the principal repayment. As of December 31, 2020, we had outstanding short-term borrowings of $48.0 from our uncommitted lines of credit used primarily to fund short-term working capital needs. The remainder of our debt is primarily long-term, with maturities scheduled from 2022 through 2048.
•Acquisitions - We paid cash of $5.6, net of cash acquired of $2.9, for acquisitions completed in 2020. We also paid deferred payments of $48.8 for prior acquisitions as well as ownership increases in our consolidated subsidiaries. In addition to potential cash expenditures for new acquisitions, we expect to pay approximately $48.0 over the next twelve months related to all completed acquisitions as of December 31, 2020. We may also be required to pay approximately $14.0 related to put options held by minority shareholders if exercised, over the next twelve months. We will continue to evaluate strategic opportunities to grow and continue to strengthen our market position, particularly in our digital and marketing services offerings, and to expand our presence in high-growth and key strategic world markets.
•Dividends - During 2020, we paid four quarterly cash dividends of $0.255 per share on our common stock, which corresponded to aggregate dividend payments of $398.1. On February 10, 2021, we announced that our Board of Directors (the "Board") had declared a common stock cash dividend of $0.27 per share, payable on March 15, 2021 to holders of record as of the close of business on March 1, 2021. Assuming we pay a quarterly dividend of $0.27 per share and there is no significant change in the number of outstanding shares as of December 31, 2020, we would expect to pay approximately $422.0 over the next twelve months. Whether to declare and the amount of any such future dividend is at the discretion of our Board and will depend upon factors such as our earnings, financial position and cash requirements.
•Restructuring - During 2020, we paid cash of $73.6 for restructuring costs related to our 2020 Plan designed to lower our operating expenses structurally and permanently relative to revenue and to accelerate the transformation of our business. As of December 31, 2020, our remaining liability related to restructuring actions was $74.6. Most of our restructuring actions are based on our recent experience and learning in the COVID-19 pandemic and a resulting review of our operations to address certain operating expenses such as occupancy expense and salaries and related expenses.
The following summarizes our estimated contractual cash obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 and their effect on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods.
1Amounts represent maturity at book value and interest payments based on contractual obligations. We may at our option and at any time redeem all or some of any outstanding series of our senior notes reflected in this table at the redemption prices set forth in the applicable supplemental indentures under which such senior notes were issued. See Note 4 in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further information.
2Non-cancellable operating lease obligations are presented net of future receipts on contractual sublease arrangements. See Note 3 in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further information.
3We have structured certain acquisitions with additional contingent purchase price obligations based on factors including future performance of the acquired entity. See Note 6 and Note 16 in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further information.
4The amounts presented are estimates due to inherent uncertainty of tax settlements, including the ability to offset liabilities with tax loss carryforwards.
Share Repurchase Program
On July 2, 2018, in connection with the announcement of the Acxiom acquisition, we announced that share repurchases will be suspended for a period of time in order to reduce the increased debt levels incurred in conjunction with the acquisition.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
As of December 31, 2020, $338.4, excluding fees, remains available for repurchase under the share repurchase programs authorized in previous years, which have no expiration date.
FINANCING AND SOURCES OF FUNDS
Substantially all of our operating cash flow is generated by our agencies. Our cash balances are held in numerous jurisdictions throughout the world, including at the holding company level. Below is a summary of our sources of liquidity.
At December 31, 2020, we held $932.4 of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities in foreign subsidiaries. The Company has historically asserted that its unremitted foreign earnings are permanently reinvested, and therefore has not recorded any deferred taxes on such amounts. In the second quarter of 2020, in response to changes in non-U.S. tax law, and in the third quarter of 2020, in response to restructuring actions taken within foreign subsidiaries, the Company determined that approximately $120.0 and $46.0, respectively, of undistributed foreign earnings from certain international entities were no longer subject to the permanent reinvestment assertion, of which $102.4 remains undistributed as of December 31, 2020.
During the third quarter ended September 30, 2018, the Company re-evaluated its global cash needs and as a result determined that approximately $435.0 of undistributed foreign earnings from certain international entities were no longer subject to the permanent reinvestment assertion, of which $173.7 remains undistributed as of December 31, 2020. We have not changed our permanent reinvestment assertion with respect to any other international entities as we intend to use the related historical earnings and profits to fund international operations and investments.
Credit Arrangements
We maintain a committed corporate credit facility, originally dated as of July 18, 2008, which has been amended and restated from time to time (the "Credit Agreement"). We use our Credit Agreement to increase our financial flexibility, to provide letters of credit primarily to support obligations of our subsidiaries and to support our commercial paper program. The Credit Agreement is a revolving facility, expiring in November 2024, under which amounts borrowed by us or any of our subsidiaries designated under the Credit Agreement may be repaid and reborrowed, subject to an aggregate lending limit of $1,500.0, or the equivalent in other currencies. The Company has the ability to increase the commitments under the Credit Agreement from time to time by an additional amount of up to $250.0, provided the Company receives commitments for such increases and satisfies certain other conditions. The aggregate available amount of letters of credit outstanding may decrease or increase, subject to a sublimit of $50.0, or the equivalent in other currencies. Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are unsecured. As of December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings under the Credit Agreement; however, we had $9.0 of letters of credit under the Credit Agreement, which reduced our total availability to $1,491.0.
On March 27, 2020, we entered into an agreement for a 364-Day revolving credit facility (the "364-Day Credit Facility") that matures on March 26, 2021. The 364-Day Credit Facility is a revolving facility, under which amounts borrowed by us may be repaid and reborrowed, subject to an aggregate lending limit of $500.0. The cost structure of the 364-Day Credit Agreement is based on our current credit ratings. The applicable margin for Base Rate Advances (as defined in the 364-Day Credit Facility) is 0.250%, the applicable margin for Eurodollar Rate Advances (as defined in the 364-Day Credit Facility) is 1.250%, and the facility fee payable on a lender's revolving commitment is 0.250%. In addition, the 364-Day Credit Facility includes covenants that among other things, (i) limit our liens and the liens of our consolidated subsidiaries, and (ii) limit subsidiary debt. The 364-Day Credit Facility also contains a financial covenant that requires us to maintain, on a consolidated basis as of the end of each fiscal quarter, a leverage ratio for the four quarters then ended. The leverage ratio and other covenants set forth in the 364-Day Credit Facility are equivalent to the covenants contained in the Company's existing Credit Agreement, which remains in full effect. As of December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings under the 364-Day Credit Facility.
On July 28, 2020, we entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Credit Agreement and Amendment No. 1 to the 364-Day Credit Facility (together, the “Amendments”). The Amendments increased the maximum leverage ratio covenant to 4.25x in the case of the 364-Day Credit Facility and, in the case of the Credit Agreement, to (i) 4.25x through the quarter ended June 30, 2021, and (ii) 3.50x thereafter. Amendment No.1 to the Credit Agreement also increased the Applicable Margin (as defined in the Credit Agreement) for any borrowings we make under the Credit Agreement if our long-term public debt ratings are BB+/Ba1 or below at the time of borrowing. We have the option to terminate Amendment No.1 to the Credit Agreement at any time, provided that at the time we deliver a termination notice, the leverage ratio as of the end of the most recently ended fiscal quarter did not exceed 3.50x. The Credit Agreement reverts to its original terms on June 30, 2021, or following any such early termination, whichever is earlier. We paid amendment fees of $2.0 in connection with the Amendments.
We were in compliance with all of our covenants in both the Credit Agreement and the 364-Day Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020. The financial covenant in the Credit Agreement and the 364-Day Credit Facility requires that we maintain, as of the end of each fiscal quarter, a certain leverage ratio for the four quarters then ended.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
The table below sets forth the financial covenant in effect as of December 31, 2020.
1The leverage ratio is defined as debt as of the last day of such fiscal quarter to EBITDA (as defined in the Credit Agreement and the 364-Day Credit Facility) for the four quarters then ended.
2On July 28, 2020, the Amendments increased the maximum leverage ratio covenant to 4.25x in the case of the 364-Day Credit Facility and, in the case of the Credit Agreement, to (i) 4.25x through the quarter ended June 30, 2021, and (ii) 3.50x thereafter.
3Includes adjustments of the following items from our Consolidated Statement of Operations in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data: provision for income taxes, total (expenses) and other income, equity in net income of unconsolidated affiliates, and net income attributable to noncontrolling interests.
Uncommitted Lines of Credit
We also have uncommitted lines of credit with various banks that permit borrowings at variable interest rates and that are primarily used to fund working capital needs. We have guaranteed the repayment of some of these borrowings made by certain subsidiaries. If we lose access to these credit lines, we would have to provide funding directly to some of our operations. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had uncommitted lines of credit in an aggregate amount of $857.6, under which we had outstanding borrowings of $48.0 classified as short-term borrowings on our Consolidated Balance Sheet. The average amount outstanding during 2020 was $86.5, with a weighted-average interest rate of approximately 3.6%.
Commercial Paper
The Company is authorized to issue unsecured commercial paper up to a maximum aggregate amount outstanding at any time of $1,500.0. Borrowings under the commercial paper program are supported by the Credit Agreement described above. Proceeds of the commercial paper are used for working capital and general corporate purposes, including the repayment of maturing indebtedness and other short-term liquidity needs. The maturities of the commercial paper vary but may not exceed 397 days from the date of issue. As of December 31, 2020, there was no commercial paper outstanding. The average amount outstanding under the program was $105.8 in 2020, with a weighted-average interest rate of 1.5% and a weighted-average maturity of twelve days.
Cash Pooling
We aggregate our domestic cash position on a daily basis. Outside the United States, we use cash pooling arrangements with banks to help manage our liquidity requirements. In these pooling arrangements, several IPG agencies agree with a single bank that the cash balances of any of the agencies with the bank will be subject to a full right of set-off against amounts other agencies owe the bank, and the bank provides for overdrafts as long as the net balance for all agencies does not exceed an agreed-upon level. Typically, each agency pays interest on outstanding overdrafts and receives interest on cash balances. Our Consolidated Balance Sheets reflect cash, net of bank overdrafts, under all of our pooling arrangements, and as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 the amounts netted were $2,702.2 and $2,274.9, respectively.
DEBT CREDIT RATINGS
Our debt credit ratings as of February 11, 2021 are listed below.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning credit rating agency. The rating of each credit rating agency should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Credit ratings could have an impact on liquidity, either adverse or favorable, because, among other things, they could affect funding costs in the capital markets or otherwise. For example, our Credit Agreement fees and borrowing rates are based on a credit ratings grid, and our access to the commercial paper market is contingent on our maintenance of sufficient short-term debt ratings.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements and related disclosures requires us to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported and disclosed in the accompanying financial statements and footnotes. Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We believe that of our significant accounting policies, the following critical accounting estimates involve management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments. We consider these accounting estimates to be critical because changes in the underlying assumptions or estimates have the potential to materially impact our Consolidated Financial Statements. Management has discussed with our Audit Committee the development, selection, application and disclosure of these critical accounting estimates. We regularly evaluate our judgments, assumptions and estimates based on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be relevant under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenues are primarily derived from the planning and execution of multi-channel advertising and communications, marketing services, including public relations, meeting and event production, sports and entertainment marketing, corporate and brand identity, strategic marketing consulting, and providing marketing data and technology services around the world.
Most of our client contracts are individually negotiated and, accordingly, the terms of client engagements and the basis on which we earn fees and commissions vary significantly. Our contracts generally provide for termination by either party on relatively short notice, usually 30 to 90 days, although our data management contracts typically have non-cancelable terms of more than one year. Our payment terms vary by client, and the time between invoicing date and due date is typically not significant. We generally have the legally enforceable right to payment for all services provided through the end of the contract or termination date.
We recognize revenue when we determine our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue as or when we satisfy the performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that IPG will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are distinct performance obligations. We then assess whether we act as an agent or a principal for each identified performance obligation and include revenue within the transaction price for third-party costs when we determine that we act as principal.
Net revenue, primarily consisting of fees, commissions and performance incentives, represents the amount of our gross billings excluding billable expenses charged to a client. Generally, our compensation is based on a negotiated fixed price, rate per hour, a retainer, commission or volume. The majority of our fees are recognized over time as services are performed, either utilizing a function of hours incurred and rates per hour, as compared to periodically updated estimates to complete, or ratably over the term of the contract. For certain less-frequent commission-based contracts which contain clauses allowing our clients to terminate the arrangement at any time for no compensation, revenue is recognized at a point in time, typically the date of broadcast or publication.
Contractual arrangements with clients may also include performance incentive provisions designed to link a portion of our revenue to our performance relative to mutually agreed-upon qualitative and/or quantitative metrics. Performance incentives are treated as variable consideration which is estimated at contract inception and included in revenue based on the most likely amount earned out of a range of potential outcomes. Our estimates are based on a combination of historical award experience, anticipated performance and our best judgment. These estimates are updated on a periodic basis and are not expected to result in a reversal of a significant amount of the cumulative revenue recognized.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
The predominant component of billable expenses are third-party vendor costs incurred for performance obligations where we have determined that we are acting as principal. These third-party expenses are generally billed back to our clients. Billable expenses also includes incidental costs incurred in the performance of our services including airfare, mileage, hotel stays, out-of-town meals and telecommunication charges. We record these billable expenses within total revenue with a corresponding offset to operating expenses.
In international markets, we may receive rebates or credits from vendors based on transactions entered into on behalf of clients. Rebates and credits are remitted back to our clients in accordance with our contractual requirements or may be retained by us based on the terms of a particular client contract and local law. Amounts owed back to clients are recorded as a liability and amounts retained by us are recorded as revenue when earned.
In certain international markets, our media contracts may allow clients to terminate our arrangement at any time for no compensation to the extent that media has not yet run. For those contracts, we do not recognize revenue until the media runs which is the point in time at which we have a legally enforceable right to compensation.
Performance Obligations
Our client contracts may include various goods and services that are capable of being distinct, are distinct within the context of the contract and are therefore accounted for as separate performance obligations. We allocate revenue to each performance obligation in the contract at inception based on its relative standalone selling price.
Our advertising businesses include a wide range of services that involve the creation of an advertising idea, concept, campaign, or marketing strategy in order to promote the client’s brand ("creative services"), and to act as an agent to facilitate the production of advertisements by third-party suppliers ("production services”). Our clients can contract us to perform one or both of these services, as they can derive stand-alone benefit from each. Production services can include formatting creative material for different media and communication mediums including digital, large-scale reproduction such as printing and adaptation services, talent engagement and acquisition, television and radio production, and outdoor billboard production. Our contracts that include both services are typically explicit in the description of which activities constitute the creative advertising services and those that constitute the production services. Both the creative and production services are sold separately, the client can derive utility from each service on its own, we do not provide a significant service of integrating these activities into a bundle, the services do not significantly modify one another, and the services are not highly interrelated or interdependent. As such, we typically identify two performance obligations in the assessment of our advertising contracts.
Our media businesses include services to formulate strategic media plans ("media planning services") and to act as an agent to purchase media (e.g., television and radio spots, outdoor advertising, digital banners, etc.) from vendors on our clients' behalf ("media buying services"). Our contracts that include both services are typically explicit in the description of which activities constitute the planning services and those that constitute the buying services. Both the planning and buying services are sold separately, the client can derive utility from each service on its own, we do not provide a significant service of integrating these activities into a bundle, the services do not significantly modify one another, and the services are not highly interrelated or interdependent. As such, we typically identify two performance obligations in the assessment of our media contracts.
Our events businesses include creative services related to the conception and planning of custom marketing events as well as activation services which entail the carrying out of the event, including, but not limited to, set-up, design and staffing. Additionally, our public relations businesses include a broad range of services, such as strategic planning, social media strategy and the monitoring and development of communication strategies, among others. While our contracts in these businesses may include some or all of these services, we typically identify only one performance obligation in the assessment of our events and public relations contracts as we provide a significant service of integrating the individual services into a combined service for which the customer has contracted.
Our data and technology services businesses include data management, data and data strategy, identity resolution, and measurement and analytics products and services. While our contracts in these businesses may include some or all of these services, we typically identify each product and service as an individual performance obligation.
Principal vs. Agent
When a third-party is involved in the delivery of our services to the client, we assess whether or not we are acting as a principal or an agent in the arrangement. The assessment is based on whether we control the specified services at any time before they are transferred to the customer. We have determined that in our events and public relations businesses, we generally act as a principal as our agencies provide a significant service of integrating goods or services provided by third parties into the specified deliverable to our clients. In addition, we have determined that we are responsible for the performance of the third-party suppliers, which are combined with our own services, before transferring those services to the customer. We have also determined that we act as principal when providing creative services and media planning services, as we perform a significant
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
integration service in these transactions. For performance obligations in which we act as principal, we record the gross amount billed to the customer within total revenue and the related incremental direct costs incurred as billable expenses.
When a third-party is involved in the production of an advertising campaign and for media buying services, we have determined that we act as the agent and are solely arranging for the third-party suppliers to provide services to the customer. Specifically, we do not control the specified services before transferring those services to the customer, we are not primarily responsible for the performance of the third-party services, nor can we redirect those services to fulfill any other contracts. We do not have inventory risk or discretion in establishing pricing in our contracts with customers. For performance obligations for which we act as the agent, we record our revenue as the net amount of our gross billings less amounts remitted to third parties.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes includes U.S. federal, state, local and foreign taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the year in which the temporary differences are expected to be reversed. Changes to enacted tax rates would result in either increases or decreases in the provision for income taxes in the period of change.
We are required to evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets, which is primarily dependent on future earnings. A valuation allowance shall be recognized when, based on available evidence, it is “more likely than not” that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The factors used in assessing valuation allowances include all available evidence, such as past operating results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of tax planning strategies. In circumstances where there is negative evidence, establishment of a valuation allowance must be considered. We believe that cumulative losses in the most recent three-year period represent significant negative evidence when evaluating a decision to establish a valuation allowance. Conversely, a pattern of sustained profitability represents significant positive evidence when evaluating a decision to reverse a valuation allowance. Further, in those cases where a pattern of sustained profitability exists, projected future taxable income may also represent positive evidence, to the extent that such projections are determined to be reliable given the current economic environment. Accordingly, the increase and decrease of valuation allowances has had and could have a significant negative or positive impact on our current and future earnings.
The authoritative guidance for uncertainty in income taxes prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement criteria for the financial statement reporting of a tax position that an entity takes or expects to take in a tax return. Additionally, guidance is provided for de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition. The assessment of recognition and measurement requires critical estimates and the use of complex judgments. We evaluate our tax positions using the “more likely than not” recognition threshold and then apply a measurement assessment to those positions that meet the recognition threshold. We have established tax reserves that we believe to be adequate in relation to the potential for additional assessments in each of the jurisdictions in which we are subject to taxation. We regularly assess the likelihood of additional tax assessments in those jurisdictions and adjust our reserves as additional information or events require.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
We account for our business combinations using the acquisition accounting method, which requires us to determine the fair value of net assets acquired and the related goodwill and other intangible assets. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management's judgment and involves the use of significant estimates, including projections of future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, asset lives and market multiples. Considering the characteristics of advertising, specialized marketing and communication services companies, our acquisitions usually do not have significant amounts of tangible assets, as the principal asset we typically acquire is creative talent. As a result, a substantial portion of the purchase price is allocated to goodwill and other intangible assets.
We review goodwill and other intangible assets with indefinite lives not subject to amortization as of October 1st each year and whenever events or significant changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. We evaluate the recoverability of goodwill at a reporting unit level. We have 12 reporting units that were subject to the 2020 annual impairment testing. Our annual impairment review as of October 1, 2020 did not result in an impairment charge at any of our reporting units.
In performing our annual impairment review, we first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is “more likely than not” that the goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets are impaired. Qualitative factors to consider may include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors that may have a negative effect on earnings, financial performance, and other relevant entity-specific events such as changes in management, key personnel, strategy or clients, as well as pending litigation. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances such as those described above, an entity determines that it is "more likely than not" that the goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired, then the
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
entity is required to determine the fair value and perform the quantitative impairment test by comparing the fair value with the carrying value. Otherwise, no additional testing is required.
For reporting units not included in the qualitative assessment, or for any reporting units identified in the qualitative assessment as "more likely than not" that the fair value is less than its carrying value, a quantitative impairment test is performed. For our annual impairment test, we compare the respective fair value of our reporting units' equity to the carrying value of their net assets. The sum of the fair values of all our reporting units is reconciled to our current market capitalization plus an estimated control premium. Goodwill allocated to a reporting unit whose fair value is equal to or greater than its carrying value is not impaired, and no further testing is required. Should the carrying amount for a reporting unit exceed its fair value, then the quantitative impairment test is failed, and impaired goodwill is written down to its fair value with a charge to expense in the period the impairment is identified.
For both the 2020 and 2019 annual impairment tests, we performed a qualitative impairment assessment for seven reporting units and performed the quantitative impairment test for five reporting units. For the qualitative analysis we took into consideration all the relevant events and circumstances, including financial performance, macroeconomic conditions and entity-specific factors such as client wins and losses. Based on this assessment, we have concluded that for each of our reporting units subject to the qualitative assessment, it is not “more likely than not” that its fair value was less than its carrying value; therefore, no additional testing was required.
The 2020 and 2019 fair values of reporting units for which we performed quantitative impairment tests were estimated using a combination of the income approach, which incorporates the use of the discounted cash flow method, and the market approach, which incorporates the use of earnings and revenue multiples based on market data. We generally applied an equal weighting to the income and market approaches for our analysis. For the income approach, we used projections, which require the use of significant estimates and assumptions specific to the reporting unit as well as those based on general economic conditions. Factors specific to each reporting unit include revenue growth, profit margins, terminal value growth rates, capital expenditures projections, assumed tax rates, discount rates and other assumptions deemed reasonable by management. For the market approach, we used judgment in identifying the relevant comparable-company market multiples.
These estimates and assumptions may vary between each reporting unit depending on the facts and circumstances specific to that reporting unit. The discount rate for each reporting unit is influenced by general market conditions as well as factors specific to the reporting unit. For the 2020 test, the discount rate we used for our reporting units tested ranged between 11.0% and 13.0%, and the terminal value growth rate was 3.0%. The terminal value growth rate represents the expected long-term growth rate for our industry, which incorporates the type of services each reporting unit provides as well as the global economy. For the 2020 test, the revenue growth rates for our reporting units used in our analysis were generally between 3.0% and 8.0%. Factors influencing the revenue growth rates include the nature of the services the reporting unit provides for its clients, the geographic locations in which the reporting unit conducts business and the maturity of the reporting unit. We believe that the estimates and assumptions we made are reasonable, but they are susceptible to change from period to period. Actual results of operations, cash flows and other factors will likely differ from the estimates used in our valuation, and it is possible that differences and changes could be material. A deterioration in profitability, adverse market conditions, significant client losses, changes in spending levels of our existing clients or a different economic outlook than currently estimated by management could have a significant impact on the estimated fair value of our reporting units and could result in an impairment charge in the future.
We also perform a sensitivity analysis to detail the impact that changes in assumptions may have on the outcome of the first step of the impairment test. Our sensitivity analysis provides a range of fair value for each reporting unit, where the low end of the range increases discount rates by 0.5%, and the high end of the range decreases discount rates by 0.5%. We use the average of our fair values for purposes of our comparison between carrying value and fair value for the quantitative impairment test.
The table below displays the midpoint of the fair value range for each reporting unit tested in the 2020 and 2019 annual impairment tests, indicating that the fair value exceeded the carrying value for all reporting units by greater than 20%, except for reporting unit B in 2020 whose fair value exceeded its carrying value by more than 15.0%.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
Based on the analysis described above, for the reporting units for which we performed the quantitative impairment test, we concluded that our goodwill was not impaired as of October 1, 2020, because these reporting units passed the test as the fair values of each of the reporting units were substantially in excess of their respective net book values.
We review intangible assets with definite lives subject to amortization whenever events or circumstances indicate that a carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is determined by comparing the carrying value of these assets to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by these asset groups. These asset groups are impaired when their carrying value exceeds their fair value. Impaired intangible assets with definite lives subject to amortization are written down to their fair value with a charge to expense in the period the impairment is identified. Intangible assets with definite lives are amortized on a straight-line basis with estimated useful lives generally between 7 and 15 years. Events or circumstances that might require impairment testing include the loss of a significant client, the identification of other impaired assets within a reporting unit, loss of key personnel, the disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit, significant decline in stock price or a significant adverse change in business climate or regulations.
Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans
We use various actuarial assumptions in determining our net pension and postretirement benefit costs and obligations. Management is required to make significant judgments about a number of actuarial assumptions, including discount rates and expected returns on plan assets, which are updated annually or more frequently with the occurrence of significant events.
The discount rate is a significant assumption that impacts our net pension and postretirement benefit costs and obligations. We determine our discount rates for our domestic pension and postretirement benefit plans and significant foreign pension plans based on either a bond selection/settlement approach or bond yield curve approach. Using the bond selection/settlement approach, we determine the discount rate by selecting a portfolio of corporate bonds appropriate to provide for the projected benefit payments. Using the bond yield curve approach, we determine the discount rate by matching the plans' cash flows to spot rates developed from a yield curve. Both approaches utilize high-quality AA-rated corporate bonds and the plans' projected cash flows to develop a discounted value of the benefit payments, which is then used to develop a single discount rate. In countries where markets for high-quality long-term AA corporate bonds are not well developed, a portfolio of long-term government bonds is used as a basis to develop hypothetical corporate bond yields, which serve as a basis to derive the discount rate.
The discount rate used to calculate net pension and postretirement benefit costs is determined at the beginning of each year. For the year ended December 31, 2020, discount rates of 3.35% for the domestic pension plan and 3.25% for the domestic postretirement benefit plan and a weighted-average discount rate of 1.84% for the significant foreign pension plans were used to calculate 2020 net pension and postretirement benefit costs. A 25 basis-point increase or decrease in the discount rate would not have impacted the 2020 net pension and postretirement benefit cost.
The discount rate used to measure our benefit obligations is determined at the end of each year. As of December 31, 2020, we used discount rates of 2.60% for the domestic pension plan and 2.50% for the domestic postretirement benefit plan and a weighted-average discount rate of 1.35% for our significant foreign pension plans to measure our benefit obligations. A 25 basis-point increase or decrease in the discount rate would have decreased or increased the benefit obligation as of December 31, 2020 by approximately $28.0 and $30.0, respectively.
The expected rate of return on pension plan assets is another significant assumption that impacts our net pension cost and is determined at the beginning of the year. Our expected rate of return considers asset class index returns over various market and economic conditions, current and expected market conditions, risk premiums associated with asset classes and long-term inflation rates. We determine both a short-term and long-term view and then select a long-term rate of return assumption that matches the duration of our liabilities.
For 2020, the weighted-average expected rates of return of 6.00% and 4.70% were used in the calculation of net pension costs for the domestic and significant foreign pension plans, respectively. For 2021, we plan to use expected rates of return of 5.75% and 4.47% for the domestic and significant foreign pension plans, respectively. Changes in the rates are typically due to
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
lower or higher expected future returns based on the mix of assets held. A lower expected rate of return would increase our net pension cost. A 25 basis-point increase or decrease in the expected return on plan assets would have decreased or increased the 2020 net pension cost by approximately $1.0.
RECENT ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
See Note 17 in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further information on certain accounting standards that have been adopted during 2020 or that have not yet been required to be implemented and may be applicable to our future operations.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURE
This MD&A includes both financial measures in accordance with U.S. GAAP, as well as a non-GAAP financial measure. The non-GAAP financial measure represents Net Income Available to IPG Common Stockholder before Provision for Income Taxes, Total (Expenses) and Other Income, Equity in Net Income (Loss) of Unconsolidated Affiliates, Net Income Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests and Amortization of Acquired Intangibles which we refer to as “Adjusted EBITA”.
Adjusted EBITA should be viewed as supplemental to, and not as an alternative for Net Income Available to IPG Common Stockholders calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP ("net income") or operating income calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP ("operating income"). This section also includes reconciliation of this non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures, as presented below.
Adjusted EBITA is used by our management as an additional measure of our Company’s performance for purposes of business decision-making, including developing budgets, managing expenditures, and evaluating potential acquisitions or divestitures. Period-to-period comparisons of Adjusted EBITA help our management identify additional trends in our Company’s financial results that may not be shown solely by period-to-period comparisons of net income or operating income. In addition, we may use Adjusted EBITA in the incentive compensation programs applicable to some of our employees in order to evaluate our Company’s performance. Our management recognizes that Adjusted EBITA has inherent limitations because of the excluded items, particularly those items that are recurring in nature. Management also reviews operating income and net income as well as the specific items that are excluded from Adjusted EBITA, but included in net income or operating income, as well as trends in those items. The amounts of those items are set forth, for the applicable periods, in the reconciliation of Adjusted EBITA to net income that accompany our disclosure documents containing non-GAAP financial measures, including the reconciliations contained in this MD&A.
We believe that the presentation of Adjusted EBITA is useful to investors in their analysis of our results for reasons similar to the reasons why our management finds it useful and because it helps facilitate investor understanding of decisions made by management in light of the performance metrics used in making those decisions. In addition, as more fully described below, we believe that providing Adjusted EBITA, together with a reconciliation of this non-GAAP financial measure to net income, helps investors make comparisons between our Company and other companies that may have different capital structures, different effective income tax rates and tax attributes, different capitalized asset values and/or different forms of employee compensation. However, Adjusted EBITA is intended to provide a supplemental way of comparing our Company with other public companies and is not intended as a substitute for comparisons based on net income or operating income. In making any comparisons to other companies, investors need to be aware that companies may use different non-GAAP measures to evaluate their financial performance. Investors should pay close attention to the specific definition being used and to the reconciliation between such measures and the corresponding U.S. GAAP measures provided by each company under the applicable rules of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
The following is an explanation of the items excluded by us from Adjusted EBITA but included in net income:
•Total (Expense) and Other Income, Provision for Income Taxes, Equity in Net Income (Loss) of Unconsolidated Affiliates and Net Income Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests. We exclude these items (i) because these items are not directly attributable to the performance of our business operations and, accordingly, their exclusion assists management and investors in making period-to-period comparisons of operating performance and (ii) to assist management and investors in making comparisons to companies with different capital structures. Investors should note that these items will recur in future periods.
•Amortization of Acquired Intangibles. Amortization of acquired intangibles is a non-cash expense relating to intangible assets arising from acquisitions that are expensed on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the related assets. We exclude amortization of acquired intangibles because we believe that (i) the amount of such expenses in any specific period may not directly correlate to the underlying performance of our business operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - (continued)
(Amounts in Millions, Except Per Share Amounts)
and (ii) such expenses can vary significantly between periods as a result of new acquisitions and full amortization of previously acquired intangible assets. Accordingly, we believe that this exclusion assists management and investors in making period-to-period comparisons of operating performance. Investors should note that the use of acquired intangible assets contributed to revenue in the periods presented and will contribute to future revenue generation and should also note that such expense may recur in future periods.
The following table presents the reconciliation of Net Income Available to IPG Common Stockholders to Adjusted EBITA for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
1Calculations include restructuring charges of $413.8 in 2020 and $33.9 and 2019 and transaction costs of $35.0 related to the Acxiom acquisition in 2018.