ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, including statements about our expectations related to the progress, continuation, timing and success of drug discovery and development activities conducted by the Company, other statements regarding our future product development and regulatory strategies, including with respect to specific indications such as, among others, COVID-19; our ability to obtain additional capital to fund our operations, changes in our research and development spending, realizing new revenue streams and obtaining future out-licensing or collaboration agreements that include up-front, milestone and/or royalty payments, our ability to realize up-front milestone and royalty payments under current and future agreements, future research and development spending and projections relating to the level of cash we expect to use in operations, our working capital requirements and our future headcount requirements. In some cases, forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of terms such as “anticipates,” “believes,” “hopes,” “estimates,” “looks,” “expects,” “plans,” “intends,” “goal,” “potential,” “may,” “suggest,” “will,” or “continue,” or the negative thereof or other comparable terms. These statements are based on current expectations, projections and assumptions made by management and are not guarantees of future performance. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements contained herein are reasonable, these expectations or any of the forward-looking statements could prove to be incorrect and actual results could differ materially from those projected or assumed in the forward-looking statements. Our future financial condition, as well as any forward-looking statements are subject to significant risks and uncertainties including, but not limited to the factors set forth under the heading “Item 1A. Risk Factors” under Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and in other reports we file with the SEC. All forward-looking statements are made as of the date of this report and, unless required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our accompanying audited financial statements and related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our fiscal year ends on June 30. When we refer to a fiscal year, we are referring to the year in which the fiscal year ends. Therefore, fiscal 2021 refers to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Management’s Plan of Operation
The Company devotes most of its efforts and resources on drug development, regulatory matters, and clinical trials. Presently, our efforts are primarily focused on evaluating our drug candidate Brilacidin; as a therapeutic for coronaviruses, particularly SARS-CoV-2, the novel coronavirus responsible for COVID-19; for decreasing the incidence of severe oral mucositis as a complication of chemoradiation; for treatment of IBD; and for treatment of skin infections. Our other drug candidate, Kevetrin, is for the treatment of cancer. We anticipate using our expertise to manage and perform what we believe are the most critical aspects of the product development process, which include: (i) design and oversight of clinical trials; (ii) development and execution of strategies for the protection and maintenance of intellectual property rights; and (iii) interactions with regulatory authorities domestically and internationally. We expect to concentrate on product development and engage in a limited way in product discovery, avoiding the significant investment of time and financial resources that is generally required for a promising compound to be identified and brought into clinical trials.
In the ordinary course of business, we engage in a continual review of opportunities to license our drug compounds and enter into partnering, joint development or similar arrangements with other companies. We currently, and generally at any time, have such opportunities in various stages of active review, including, for example, entry into indications of interest and term sheets and participation in preliminary discussions and negotiations. Any such transaction could be material to us.
As a result of the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic, we were approached by several organizations, including two academic institutions having Biosafety Level 3 Laboratories (BSL-3), interested in evaluating Brilacidin as an experimental new drug for COVID-19 and its underlying coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). Early research indicated that Brilacidin was a promising therapeutic candidate and subsequent extensive pre-clinical research in multiple human cell lines have lent further evidence and support for continued research into Brilacidin’s antiviral properties. Brilacidin has shown consistent in vitro inhibition in a cell-type independent manner in different strains of coronaviruses, alphaviruses and bunyaviruses. In light of the ongoing pandemic and drug development environment, we have prioritized development of Brilacidin for COVID-19, including the conduct of a Phase 2 randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial of Brilacidin in patients hospitalized with moderate-to-severe COVID-19. The trial has fully enrolled, with the Company preparing for study unblinding, statistical analysis and reporting of data.
Brilacidin formulation development work is in progress: For treating ulcerative colitis, we are engaged in the development of an oral formulation (i.e. capsule or tablet). For treating oral mucositis we are engaged in optimizing an oral rinse formulation for the treatment of severe oral mucositis.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our accompanying financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP, and which requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Note 3. Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements, to the financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates are the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities, which in turn may impact our reported revenue and expenses. Our actual results could differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3. Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements to the consolidated financial statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and their effect, if any, on our financial statements.
Results of Operations
We expect to incur losses from operations for the next few years. We expect to incur increasing research and development expenses, including expenses related to additional clinical trials for our proprietary programs. We currently anticipate that future budget expenditures will be approximately $10.2 million for the next 12 months, including approximately $8.2 million for clinical activities, supportive research, and drug product. However, continuing operations for the next 12 months from the date of this filing is very much dependent upon our ability to raise equity from existing or new financing sources. There can be no assurance as to the availability or terms upon which such financing and capital might be available.
Revenue
We generated revenue of $0 and $0.4 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Revenue during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2020 represented the initial non-refundable payment from the exclusive license agreement signed with Alfasigma (see Note 7. Exclusive License Agreement of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
We incurred operating expenses of approximately $9.0 million and $5.1 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Research and Development Expenses for Proprietary Programs
Below is a summary of our research and development expenses for our proprietary programs by categories of costs for the fiscal years presented (rounded to nearest thousand):
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 - Research and development expenses for proprietary programs increased during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared with the year ended June 30, 2020, primarily due to more spending on our Brilacidin program for the fiscal year 2021.
Officers’ payroll decreased during the year ended June 30, 2021 because the Company’s President and Chief Medical Officer resigned on December 19, 2019.
Employees payroll and payroll tax expenses increased during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared with the year ended June 30, 2020, due to more employees engaged in preclinical development after June 30, 2020, which led to the increase in employees’ payroll during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Stock-based compensation for employee decreased during the year ended June 30, 2021 due to equity-based awards issued to an employee in 2016 and in 2017 being fully expensed during the year ended June 30, 2020, therefore, less stock-based compensation - employee was incurred during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Stock-based compensation - consultants increased during the year ended June 30, 2021 due to more options being issued to consultants during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared with the year ended June 30, 2020.
Our research and development expenses include costs related to preclinical and clinical trials, outsourced services and consulting, officers’ payroll and related payroll tax expenses, other wages and related payroll tax expenses, stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization expenses. Clinical studies and development expenses may increase in future reporting periods depending on the Company’s current and future financial liquidity. We manage our proprietary programs based on scientific data and achievement of research plan goals. Accordingly, the accurate assignment of time and costs to a specific project is difficult and may not give a true indication of the actual costs of a particular project. As a result, we do not report costs on an individual program basis.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist mainly of compensation and associated fringe benefits not included in the cost of research and development expenses for proprietary programs and include other management, business development, accounting, information technology and administration costs, including patent filing and prosecution, recruiting, consulting and professional services, travel and meals, sales commissions, facilities, depreciation and other office expenses.
Below is a summary of our general and administrative expenses (rounded to nearest thousand):
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 - General and administrative expenses decreased during the fiscal 2021, primarily due to the decrease in stock-based compensation - officers of $237,000 (see Note 13. Equity Transactions of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K) and decrease in business development expense of $236,000 due to less business development consultants’ fees and business events during fiscal 2021.
Officers’ payroll and payroll tax expenses
Below is a summary of our Officers’ payroll and payroll tax expenses (rounded to nearest thousand):
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 - There was a slight increase in officers’ payroll and payroll tax expenses for the Company during the fiscal 2021, due to the increase in payroll taxes.
Professional fees
Below is a summary of our Professional fees (rounded to nearest thousand):
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 - Professional fees increased during the fiscal 2021 primarily related to the increases in legal fees and other professional fees in 2021.
Other Income (Expense)
Below is a summary of our other income (expense) (rounded to nearest thousand):
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
There was a decrease in interest expenses paid on the note payable - related party, because of the decrease in the note payable balance due to the Company’s Chairman and CEO. He exercised his options to purchase 3.1 million shares of Class B common stock by the cancellation of debt during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 (see Note 11. Convertible Note Payable - Related Party of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
There was an increase in interest expense - preferred stock liability during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared with the year ended June 30, 2020 related to the new issuances of Series B-2 preferred stock in January and February, 2021. The interest expense - preferred stock liability of 2021 consists mainly of beneficial conversion feature and warrant discounts of $4,663,000 and issuance costs paid of $25,000 and accrued dividend of $15,000.
There was a decrease in change in fair value related to the Series B preferred stock during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared with the year ended June 30, 2020, due to the valuation of the warrants to purchase Preferred stock performed in 2020.
There was a decrease in warrants modification expense of approximately $1,212,000 during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared with the year ended June 30, 2020, due to modification expense in connection with the extension of the termination date for each warrant in 2020. The Company did not have this expense in the year ended June 30, 2021.
There was a decrease in impairment expense of operating lease of approximately $643,000, related to the operating lease right-of-use asset associated with the office space vacated by the Company in December 2019.
Net Losses
We incurred net losses of $13.9 million and $6.6 million for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, because of the above-mentioned factors.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Projected Future Working Capital Requirements - Next 12 Months
As of June 30, 2021, we had approximately $10.2 million in cash compared to $6.0 million of cash as of June 30, 2020, and as of the date of this filing, we have approximately $11.3 million in cash. We currently anticipate that future budget expenditures will be approximately $10.2 million for the next 12 months, including approximately $8.2 million for clinical activities, supportive research, and drug product. Alternatively, if we decide to pursue a more aggressive plan with our clinical trials, we will require additional sources of capital during the fiscal year 2022 to meet our working capital requirements for our planned clinical trials. Potential sources for capital include grant funding for COVID-19 research and equity financings (see below). There can be no assurances that we will be successful in receiving any grant funding for our programs.
This assessment is based on current estimates and assumptions regarding our clinical development programs and business needs. Actual working capital requirements could differ materially from this above working capital projection.
On July 31, 2020, the Company entered into a new common stock purchase agreement (the “2020 Agreement”) with Aspire Capital which provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth therein, Aspire Capital is committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $30.0 million of the Company’s common stock over the 24-month term of the 2020 Agreement.
Our ability to successfully raise sufficient funds through the sale of equity securities, when needed, is subject to many risks and uncertainties and even if we are successful, future equity issuances would result in dilution to our existing stockholders. Our risk factors are described under the heading “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
If we are unable to generate enough working capital from our current or future financing agreements with Aspire Capital when needed or secure additional sources of funding, it may be necessary to significantly reduce our current rate of spending through reductions in staff and delaying, scaling back or stopping certain research and development programs, including more costly Phase 2 and Phase 3 clinical trials on our wholly-owned development programs as these programs progress into later stage development. Insufficient liquidity may also require us to relinquish greater rights to product candidates at an earlier stage of development or on less favorable terms to us and our stockholders than we would otherwise choose in order to obtain up-front license fees needed to fund operations. These events could prevent us from successfully executing our operating plan.
Shelf Registration Statement - Current Status
The Company has an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3, registering the sale of up to $60 million of the Company’s securities. However, in the future, the Company may not satisfy the conditions for use of Form S-3 for primary offerings of securities, in which case the Company may utilize Form S-1 to register the sale of its securities, although Form S-1 offers less flexibility on the timing and types of offerings compared to Form S-3.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash position, cash flows and capital expenditures for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 (rounded to nearest thousand):
The increase in net cash used in operating activities of $5.3 million versus the prior-year was mainly due to the increase in our loss from operations of $7.2 million, largely attributable to an increase in spending for clinical research and development expenses of $4.4 million. This also included the repayment of accrued officers’ salaries of $1.2 million.
The use of cash principally resulted from our losses from operations, mentioned above, as adjusted for non-cash charges for stock-based compensation of $0.2 million, patent amortization of $0.4 million, interest expense on preferred stock of $4.6 million, and changes in our working capital accounts.
Investing activities
The decrease in net cash used in investing activities versus the prior-year was due to decrease in spending in patent costs.
Financing activities
In 2021, we raised approximately $14.6 million in net cash proceeds, from exercise of warrants to purchase preferred stock and the issuance of common stock, offset by purchase of treasury stock of $0.7 million and repayment of note payable to officer of $0.2 million.
In 2020, we raised approximately $9.7 million in net cash proceeds, from exercise of warrants to purchase preferred stock and the issuance of common stock, offset by purchase of treasury stock of $0.06 million.
Requirement for Additional Working Capital
The Company, contingent on future sales of its securities, currently expects to incur total operating expenses of approximately $10.2 million for the next 12 months, including approximately $8.2 million for clinical activities, supportive research, and drug product development. The Company has limited experience with pharmaceutical drug development. As such, this budget estimate may change in the future. In addition, the actual work to be performed is not known at this time, other than a broad outline, as is normal with any scientific work. As further work is performed, additional work may become necessary or a change in plans or workload may occur. Such changes may have an adverse impact on our estimated budget and on our projected timeline of drug development.
The Company will be unable to proceed with its planned drug development programs, meet its administrative expense requirements, capital costs, or staffing costs without accessing its financing available with Aspire Capital of approximately $30 million, of which approximately $25.4 million remains as of the date of this filing. Management believes, as of the date of this filing that the funding amount from Aspire Capital will be available as needed by the Company and that adverse market conditions in the Company’s common stock price and trading volume, will not prevent the Company from funding its working capital requirements for the next 12 months from the date of this filing.
In the event that we are unable to generate sufficient cash from our 2020 Agreement with Aspire Capital or raise additional funds from others, we may be required to delay, reduce or severely curtail our operations or otherwise impede our on-going business efforts, which could have a material adverse effect on our future business, operating results, financial condition and long-term prospects. The Company expects to seek to obtain additional funding through business development activities (i.e. licensing and partnerships) and future equity issuances. There can be no assurance as to the availability or terms upon which such financing and capital might be available to us.
Commitments and Contingencies
Please see Note 9. Commitments and Contingencies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for a discussion of recent contractual commitments and contingent liability - disputed invoices.
Equity Transactions
From July 31, 2020 (date of agreement) to September 14, 2020, the Company has generated additional proceeds of approximately $1.8 million under the 2020 Agreement with Aspire Capital from the sale of approximately 8.5 million shares of its common stock. Since September 14, 2020, we have not obtained financing through Aspire Capital.
During the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company issued 3,053 shares of its Series B-2 5% convertible preferred stock, for aggregate gross proceeds of $3.0 million, upon exercise of 3,053 Series 1 warrants issued by the Company. In addition, the Company issued 2,053 shares of its Series B-2 5% convertible preferred stock, for aggregate gross proceeds of $2.0 million, upon exercise of 2,053 Series 2 warrants issued by the Company.
Subsequent Events
Equity Transactions
From July 1, 2021 to the date of the issuance of the accompanying financial statements, the Company issued 2,036 shares of its Series B-2 5% convertible preferred stock, for aggregate gross proceeds of $2.0 million, upon exercise of 2,036 Series 1 warrants issued by the Company. In addition, the Company issued 1,000 shares of its Series B-2 5% convertible preferred stock, for aggregate gross proceeds of $1.0 million, upon exercise of 1,000 Series 2 warrants issued by the Company. At the same time, there were 3,036 preferred stock shares converted to approximately 18.9 million shares of common stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 304(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.