ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere herein. The Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. When used, the words “believe,” “plan,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “target,” “estimate,” “expect,” and the like, and/or future-tense or conditional constructions (“will,” “may,” “could,” “should,” etc.), or similar expressions, identify certain of these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements in this form. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors.
Historical results may not indicate future performance. Our forward-looking statements reflect our current views about future events, are based on assumptions and are subject to known and unknown risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by these statements. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, including any changes that might result from any facts, events, or circumstances after the date hereof that may bear upon forward-looking statements. Furthermore, we cannot guarantee future results, events, levels of activity, performance, or achievements.
Overview
iPower Inc. is an online hydroponic equipment supplier based in the United States. Through the operations of our e-commerce platform, www.Zenhydro.com, and our combined 72,000 square foot fulfillment centers in Los Angeles, California, we believe we are one of the leading marketers, distributors and retailers of grow-light systems, ventilation systems, activated carbon filters, nutrients, growing media, hydroponic water-resistant grow tents, trimming machines, pumps and accessories for hydroponic gardening, based on management’s estimates. We have a diverse customer base that includes commercial users and individuals. Our core strategy continues to focus on expanding our geographic reach across the United States through organic growth, both in terms of expanding customer base as well as brand and product development.
We are actively developing and acquiring our in-house branded products, which to date include the iPower and Simple Deluxe brands, and consist of more than 2,600 SKUs of products such as grow-light systems, ventilation systems, activated carbon filters, nutrients, growing media, hydroponic water-resistant grow tents, trimming machines, pumps and many more hydroponic-related items; some of which have been designated as Amazon best seller product leaders, among others. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, our top five product categories consisted of ventilation systems (24% of sales), nutrients (13% of total sales), air filtration devices (8% of sales), grow light systems (7% of sales), and gardening equipment (5% of sales). While we will continue focusing on our top products, we are working to expand its product line to include nutrients.
Trends and Expectations
Product and Brand Development
We plan to increase investments in product sourcing, product and brand development, marketing research and promotion. We actively evaluate and pursue acquisitions of product brand names and improvements on existing products.
COVID-19 Outbreak
We are continuing to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our business, results of operations and financial results. The situation surrounding the COVID-19 outbreak remains fluid and the full extent of the positive or negative impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our business will depend on certain developments including the length of time that the outbreak continues, the impact on consumer activity and behaviors and the effect on our customers, employees, suppliers, and stockholders, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. See “Risk Factors” beginning on page 11 for additional details. Our focus remains on promoting the health, safety and financial security of our employees and serving our customers. As a result, we have taken a number of precautionary measures, including implementing social distancing and enhanced cleaning measures in our facilities, suspending all non-essential travel, transitioning certain of our employees to working-from-home arrangements, reimbursing certain employee technology purchases, providing emergency paid time off and targeted hourly pay increases and developing no contact delivery methods.
In an effort to contain or slow the COVID-19 outbreak, authorities across the world have implemented various measures, some of which have been subsequently rescinded or modified, including travel bans, stay-at-home orders and shutdowns of certain businesses. We anticipate that these actions and the global health crisis caused by the COVID-19 outbreak, including any resurgences, will continue to negatively impact global economic activity. While the COVID-19 outbreak has not had a material adverse impact on our operations to date and we believe the long-term opportunity that we see for shopping online remains unchanged, it is difficult to predict all of the positive or negative impacts the COVID-19 outbreak will have on our business.
In the short term, we have continued to see increased sales and order activity in the market since the COVID-19 outbreak. In order to keep up with the increased orders, we have hired and are continuing to hire additional personnel. However, much is unknown and accordingly the situation remains dynamic and subject to rapid and possibly material change. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, local or foreign authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our customers, employees, suppliers, stockholders and communities.
Regulatory Environment
We sell hydroponic gardening products to end users that may use such products in new and emerging industries or segments, including the growing of cannabis. The demand for hydroponic gardening products depends on the uncertain growth of these industries or segments due to varying, inconsistent, and rapidly changing laws, regulations, administrative practices, enforcement approaches, judicial interpretations and consumer perceptions. For example, certain countries and a total of 44 U.S. states plus the District of Columbia have adopted frameworks that authorize, regulate and tax the cultivation, processing, sale and use of cannabis for medicinal and/or non-medicinal use, including legalization of hemp and CBD, while the U.S. Controlled Substances Act and the laws of U.S. states prohibit growing cannabis. Demand for our products could be impacted by changes in the regulatory environment with respect to such industries and segments.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For the years ended June, 2021 and 2020
The following table presents certain consolidated statement of operations information and presentation of that data as a percentage of change from period to period.
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased 35.40% to $54,075,922 as compared to $39,938,472 for the year ended June 30, 2020. While pricing remained stable, the increased revenue mainly resulted from an increase in sales volume. In addition to our organic growth, which we achieved as a result of improved products and more effective online marketing efforts, the increase in sales was attributable to more people shopping online and pursuing gardening and growing projects during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we cannot assure that this trend will continue, and our business may be adversely affected by poor overall economic conditions caused by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Costs of Goods Sold
Costs of goods sold for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased 25.98% to $31,257,358 as compared to $24,810,907 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was due to an increase in sales as discussed above. In addition, we experienced a decrease of cost of goods sold as a percentage of revenue as a result of selling more products under in-house brands as opposed to third party brands. See discussions on gross profit below.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $22,818,564 for the year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to $15,127,565 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The gross profit ratio also increased to 42.20% for the year ended June 30, 2021 from 37.88% for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was due to a combination of an increase in sales as discussed above and a decrease in cost of goods sold resulting from selling more products under in-house brands as opposed to third party brands. The gross margin for in-house branded products is, on average, approximately 20% higher than our gross margin for third party brands.
Selling, Fulfillment, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, fulfillment, general and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased 62.51% to $19,858,000 as compared to $12,219,616 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was mainly due to an increase in selling and fulfillment expenses of $4.5 million and general and administrative expenses of $3.1 million, which included payroll expenses, IPO-related indirect expenses, stock-based compensation expense, and other operating expenses.
Other (Expense)
Other (expenses) consists of interest expense, financing fees and other non-operating income (expenses). Other expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $(2,969,551) as compared to $(147,549) for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in other expenses was mainly due to an increase in financing fees of $148,139, amortization of debt discount of $1.5 million, and change in fair value of conversion feature and warrant liabilities of $1.4 million resulted from the issuance of our Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, convertible notes and warrants during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Net (Loss) Income
Net loss for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $775,749 as compared to net income of $1,986,962 for the year ended June 30, 2020, representing a decrease of $2,762,711. While gross profit as a percentage of revenues increased to 42.20% in the year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to 37.88% for the year ended June 30, 2020, the decrease in net income for the year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily due to the increase in operating and non-operating expenses discussed above.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Sources of Liquidity
During the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, we primarily funded our operations with cash and cash equivalents generated from operations, as well as through completion of two private placements in 2020 and 2021, completion of our initial public offering in May of 2021, and borrowing under our credit facility and loans from the Small Business Administration. We had cash and cash equivalents of $6,651,705 as of June 30, 2021, representing a $5,674,070 increase from $977,635 of cash as of June 30, 2020. The cash increase was primarily the result of the closing of the 2020 and 2021 private placements and the IPO. The loans and lines of credit consisted of the following: (i) a PPP Loan, dated April 13, 2020 (the “PPP Loan”), with Royal Business Bank, pursuant to which we received a $175,500 loan, with a two year term and bearing an interest rate of 1% per annum, which PPP Loan was fully forgiven on March 22, 2021; (ii) a Small Business Administration Loan, dated April 18, 2020 (the “SBA Loan”), pursuant to which we received $500,0000 in exchange for issuing a 30-year, $500,000 note bearing an interest rate of 3.75% per annum, with repayment of $2,437 per month to commence on the one year anniversary date of the SBA Loan; and (iii) a Loan and Security Agreement with WFC Fund, LLC (“WFC”), dated May 3, 2019 (the “Loan and Security Agreement”), pursuant to which WFC provided us a $2,000,000 revolving loan facility with a one year maturity date, which had an interest rate equal to the prime rate plus 4.25% per annum. The Company’s obligations under the Loan and Security Agreement were secured by all of the Company’s assets and guaranteed by Allan Huang, a former director and executive officer and one of our major shareholders and founders. On May 26, 2020, the Loan and Security Agreement was amended and restated as a Receivables Purchase Agreement (the “Original RPA”), pursuant to which WFC may, but is not obligated to, purchase accounts receivable from the Company from time to time. The credit limit of the revolving facility under the Original RPA was $2,000,000, which had a discount rate equal to the prime rate plus 4.25% per annum on the outstanding amount. This revolving credit facility is secured by all of the Company’s assets and guaranteed by Mr. Huang. Pursuant to the Original RPA, the purchases of accounts receivable were made with full recourse to the Company, and the Company was obligated to collect the accounts receivables and to repurchase or pay back the amount drawn if the accounts receivable were not collected. On November 16, 2020, the Original RPA was further amended and restated (the “Restated RPA”) to increase the credit limit of the revolving facility from $2,000,000 to $3,000,000, which bears a discount rate of 3.05555%, subject to a rebate of 0.0277% per day. This revolving credit facility is secured by all of the Company’s assets and guaranteed by Chenlong Tan, our CEO, President and one of our major shareholders and founders. Pursuant to the agreement, all purchases of accounts receivables are without recourse to the Company, and WFC assumes the risk of nonpayment of the accounts receivable due to a customer’s financial inability to pay the accounts receivable or the customer’s insolvency (“Credit Risk”) but not the risk of non-payment of the accounts receivable for any other reason. The Company is obligated to collect the accounts receivables and to repurchase or pay back the amount drawn if the accounts receivable are not collected for any reason other than Credit Risk. The Restated RPA has an initial term of 12 months and automatically renews for successive 12-month periods on each anniversary of the Restated RPA, unless either party notifies the other party prior to the renewal date (or, in the case of WFC, at any time a default is continuing under the Restated RPA) that such notifying party is terminating the Restated RPA. If the Restated RPA is terminated six months or more prior to its then-scheduled termination date, the Company is obligated to pay WFC a termination fee equal to 1% of the facility limit. We do not believe that the terms of the Restated RPA will materially change our ability to access funds, other than by providing us with an additional $1,000,000 in potential cash availability through the revolving credit facility. The loans and revolving credit facility are discussed in greater detail in Note 8 to our financial statements for the years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020.
On December 30, 2020, we closed on a private placement offering pursuant to which we sold to three accredited investors an aggregate of $345,000 in Series A convertible preferred stock, at a purchase price of $10.00 per share, which stock automatically converted into Common Stock upon completion of our IPO at a discount of 30% to the IPO per share purchase price. The offering was completed pursuant to an exemption from registration under Rule 506(b) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
On January 27, 2021, we completed a private placement offering pursuant to which we sold to two accredited investors an aggregate of $3,000,000 of our 6% convertible notes due six months from the date of issuance, subject to extension as provided below (the “Convertible Notes”). Upon completion of our IPO, the Convertible Notes will automatically converted into 857,144 shares of Common Stock using a conversion price equal to $3.50 per share, representing a 30% discount to the public offering price per share of the Common Stock in our IPO. Boustead Securities LLC acted as placement agent in both the December 30, 2020 and the January 27, 2021 private placements.
In addition to the Convertible Notes, the purchasers of the Convertible Notes received three-year warrants entitling the holders to purchase 685,714 shares of Common Stock which equals 80% of the number of shares of Common Stock issuable upon conversion of the Convertible Notes.
Prior to the completion of our IPO, on April 14, 2021, we amended and restated our articles of incorporation to eliminate the Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock designations. And on May 14, 2020, the Company closed its IPO under a registration statement, effective May 11, 2021, in which we issued and sold 3,360,000 shares of Common Stock at a purchase price of $5.00 per share (the “Public Offering Price”). On May 21, 2021, the Company closed on the IPO’s overallotment option, selling an additional 504,000 shares of Common Stock to the IPO’s underwriters at the Public Offering Price. The Company received net proceeds of approximately $16.5 million from the IPO after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses.
Following completion of the IPO, on May 14, 2021, the Series A convertible preferred stock and Convertible Notes were converted into an aggregate of 955,716 shares of the Common Stock. The Company also issued 24,451 shares of Common Stock upon the cashless exercise of warrants held by Boustead Securities LLC, the placement agent of the Company’s private placement offerings completed in December 2020 and January 2021.
As of the date of this report, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $1.5 million. The decrease in cash was due to an increase in purchasing additional inventory and investing in product sourcing and marketing promotions.
Working Capital
As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, our working capital was $23,281,891 and $3,161,389, respectively. The historical seasonality in our business during the year can cause cash and cash equivalents, inventory, and accounts payable to fluctuate, resulting in changes in our working capital.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash (used in) / provided by operating activities for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was ($12,756,949) and $1,109,043, respectively. The increase in use of cash in operating activities was resulted from an increased purchase of products in order to maintain the higher inventory levels required to meet our increasing sales volumes and prepayments for product sourcing and marketing promotions.
Investing Activities
For the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, net cash used in investing activities was the result of additions to property and equipment of $61,498 and $6,252, respectively, which are mainly related to the purchase of office equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by / (used in) financing activities was $18,492,517 and ($596,614), respectively, for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. The main reason for the increase in net cash provided was primarily a result of proceeds from our IPO, our revolving facility with WFC and the closing of our private placements of an aggregate of $345,000 in Series A convertible preferred stock and $3,000,000 in convertible notes.
October 2019 Share Exchange Agreement and Rescission
In October 2019, we entered into a share exchange agreement (the “Share Exchange Agreement”) with Sugarmade, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Sugarmade”), pursuant to which, among other things, the Company and its stockholders agreed to sell 100% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of the Company to Sugarmade in exchange for $870,000 in cash, $7,130,000 under a promissory note, up to 650,000 shares of Sugarmade’s common stock, and up to 3,500,000 shares of Sugarmade’s Series B preferred stock.
Due to certain disputes that arose between the parties with respect to certain terms and conditions contained in the Share Exchange Agreement, the parties entered into a Rescission and Mutual Release Agreement on January 15, 2020 (the “Rescission Agreement”). Pursuant to the terms of the Rescission Agreement, the Company and its stockholders returned the shares of Sugarmade common stock and preferred stock and issued to Sugarmade 102,248 (204,496 post-forward split) shares of the Company’s Common Stock then valued at $427,010.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements (as that term is defined in Item 303 of Regulation S-K) that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Securities Exchange Commission (“SEC”). The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. In some cases, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, actual results could differ materially from our estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial condition and results of operations will be affected. We base our estimates on experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. We refer to accounting estimates of this type as critical accounting policies, which we discuss further below. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our audited consolidated financial statements.
Variable interest entity
The Company entered into an agreement with E Marketing Solution Inc. (“E Marketing”), an entity incorporated in California and owned by Shanshan Huang, one of the shareholders of the Company. The Company also entered into an agreement with Global Product Marketing Inc. (“GPM”), an entity incorporated in the State of Nevada on September 4, 2020. GPM is owned by Chenlong Tan, the Chairman, CEO, President and one of the majority shareholders of the Company. The Company does not have direct ownership in E Marketing and GPM but has been actively involved in their operations and has the power to direct the activities and significantly impact E Marketing’s and GPM’s economic performance. The Company also bears all the risk of losses and has the right to receive all of the benefits from E Marketing and GPM. As such, in accordance with ASC 810-10-25-38A through 25-38J, E Marketing and GPM are considered variable interest entities (“VIEs”) of the Company and the financial statements of E Marketing and GPM were consolidated from the date of control existed.
On May 18, 2021, the Company entered into equity purchase agreements (“Equity Purchase Agreements”) with the shareholders of each of our variable interest entities, E Marketing Solution Inc. (“E Marketing”) and Global Product Marketing Inc. (“GPM”), pursuant to which we acquired 100% of the equity interests of each of E Marketing and GPM. The Company paid nominal consideration of $10.00 for the acquisition of each of E Marketing and GPM, which then became the Company’s wholly owned subsidiaries.
Revenue recognition
The Company has adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 since its inception on April 11, 2018 and recognizes revenue from product sales revenues, net of promotional discounts and return allowances, when the following revenue recognition criteria are met: a contract has been identified, separate performance obligations are identified, the transaction price is determined, the transaction price is allocated to separate performance obligations and revenue is recognized upon satisfying each performance obligation. The Company transfers the risk of loss or damage upon shipment, therefore, revenue from product sales is recognized when it is shipped to the customer. Return allowances, which reduce product revenue by the Company’s best estimate of expected product returns, are estimated using historical experience.
The Company evaluates the criteria of ASC 606 - Revenue Recognition Principal Agent Considerations in determining whether it is appropriate to record the gross amount of product sales and related costs or the net amount earned as commissions. Generally, when the Company is primarily responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide a specified good or service, the Company is subject to inventory risk before the good or service has been transferred to a customer and the Company has discretion in establishing the price, revenue is recorded at gross.
Payments received prior to the delivery of goods to customers are recorded as customer deposits.
The Company periodically provides incentive offers to its customers to encourage purchases. Such offers include current discount offers, such as percentage discounts off current purchases and other similar offers. Current discount offers, when accepted by the Company’s customers, are treated as a reduction to the purchase price of the related transaction.
Sales discounts are recorded in the period in which the related sale is recognized. Sales return allowances are estimated based on historical amounts and are recorded upon recognizing the related sales. Shipping and handling costs are recorded as selling expenses.
Inventory
Inventory consists of finished goods ready for sale and is stated at the lower of cost or market. The Company value its inventory using the weighted average costing method. The Company’s policy is to include as a part of cost of goods sold any freight incurred to ship the product from its vendors to warehouses. Outbound freight costs related to shipping costs to customers are considered period costs and reflected in selling and fulfillment expenses. The Company regularly review inventory and consider forecasts of future demand, market conditions and product obsolescence.
If the estimated realizable value of the inventory is less than cost, the Company makes provisions in order to reduce its carrying value to its estimated market value. The Company also reviews inventory for slow moving and obsolescence and records allowance for obsolescence.
Leases
On its inception date, April 11, 2018, the Company adopted ASC 842 - Leases (“ASC 842”), which requires lessees to record right-of-use, or ROU, assets and related lease obligations on the balance sheet, as well as disclose key information regarding leasing arrangements.
ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease terms and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As the Company’s leases do not provide an implicit rate, the Company generally uses its incremental borrowing rate based on the estimated rate of interest for collateralized borrowing over a similar term of the lease payments at commencement date. The operating lease ROU asset also includes any lease payments made and excludes lease incentives. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company applies ASC No. 718, “Compensation-Stock Compensation,” which requires that share-based payment transactions with employees and nonemployees upon adoption of ASU 2018-07, be measured based on the grant date fair value of the equity instrument and recognized as compensation expense over the requisite service period, with a corresponding addition to equity. Under this method, compensation cost related to employee share options or similar equity instruments is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award, which generally is the vesting period.
On October 15, 2020, the Company’s Board adopted, and its stockholders approved and ratified, the iPower Inc. 2020 Equity Incentive Plan (the “Plan”). The Plan allows for the issuance of up to 5,000,000 shares of Common Stock, whether in the form of options, restricted stock, restricted stock units, stock appreciation rights, performance units, performance shares and other stock or cash awards. The general purpose of the Plan is to provide an incentive to the Company’s directors, officers, employees, consultants and advisors by enabling them to share in the future growth of the Company’s business.
Following completion of the IPO, pursuant to their letter agreements, the Company awarded a total of 46,546 restricted stock units (“RSUs”) under the Plan to its independent directors, Chief Financial Officer, and certain other employees and consultants, all of which are subject to certain vesting conditions. The fair value of the RSUs was determined to be based on $5.0 per share, the initial listing price of the Company’s common stock on the grant date. As of June 30, 2021, the Company had granted total of 46,546 RSUs, of which 22,137 were vested and 24,409 were unvested. For the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company recorded $110,683 of stock-based compensation expense.
The Company will recognize forfeitures as they occur.
Commitments and Contingencies
In the normal course of business, the Company is subject to certain contingencies, including legal proceedings and claims arising out of the business that relate to a wide range of matters, such as government investigations and tax matters. The Company recognizes a liability for such contingency if it determines it is probable that a loss has occurred and a reasonable estimate of the loss can be made. The Company may consider many factors in making these assessments including historical and specific facts and circumstances of each matter.
Earnings per share
Basic earnings per share are computed by dividing net income attributable to holders of common stock by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding during the year. Diluted earnings per share reflect the potential dilution that could occur if securities to issue common stock were exercised.
Convertible notes and warrants
On January 27, 2021, the Company completed a private placement offering pursuant to which the Company sold to two accredited investors an aggregate of $3,000,000 in convertible notes with a 6% interest per annum (the “Convertible Notes”) and warrants to purchase shares of Class A Common Stock equaling 80% of the number of shares of Class A Common Stock issuable upon conversion of the Convertible Notes. The warrants shall be exercisable for a period of three years from the IPO completion date at a per share exercise price equal to the IPO. The Convertible Notes shall be automatically converted into the Company’s Class A Common Stock upon a qualified IPO (the “Mandatory Conversion”) or repayable in cash at the option of the holders of the Convertible Notes with repayment to commence six months after January 27, 2021. The Convertible Notes convert at a price equal to the lesser of (a) a price representing a 30% discount to the public offering price per share of the Class A Common Stock in this Offering, or (b) a price representing a 30% discount to the price per share equal to dividing $200 million by the total number of (x) outstanding shares of Class A Common Stock immediately prior to the IPO, (y) the number of Class A Common Stock issuable upon conversion of the 34,500 shares of Series A Preferred Stock, and (z) the number of Class A Common Stock issuable upon conversion of all outstanding Convertible Notes. In the event the Company does not receive a minimum of $15,000,000 of gross proceeds in the Offering or otherwise close on the Offering, the Convertible Notes will bear interest at a rate of 6% per annum which shall accrue from January 27, 2021 and be repayable in six equal monthly installments between July 27, 2021 and January 27, 2022. Alternatively, the Convertible Notes may be converted at the conversion price into shares of Class A Common Stock at the option of the holder prior to the maturity date (the “Conversion Option”). If the notes are converted, either on a Mandatory Conversion basis or through each holder’s exercise of the Conversion Option, any interest accrued on the Convertible Note shall be waived.
In connection with the Convertible Note offering, the Company issued placement agent warrants to purchase 7.0% of the shares of Class A Common Stock underlying the Convertible Notes exercisable at the conversion price of the Convertible Note (the “Conversion Price”). The placement agent warrants shall be exercisable for a period of five years from the issuance date and are treated as a debt issuance cost.
The conversion feature included in the terms of the Convertible Notes creates an obligation to the Company requiring it to repay the notes for cash in January 2022, if an IPO does not occur. Upon an IPO, the Conversion Option is settleable with a variable number of the Company’s shares resulting in a fixed monetary amount known at inception in accordance with ASC 480-10-25-14a. As such, the conversion feature was determined to be a derivative liability, which represent an embedded derivative predominately based on fixed monetary amount. The Convertible Note warrants and placement agent warrants were determined to be derivative liabilities, which represent free-standing derivative instruments. The Company measured the derivative liabilities at fair value at the issuance date of the convertible notes, convertible note warrants and placement agent warrants based on a Modified Black Scholes option-pricing model. The derivative liabilities were recorded with a corresponding debit to debt discount that will be amortized over the life of the notes using effective interest rate method. At time of issuance, the convertible notes and warrant liabilities were recorded on the balance sheet as liabilities. Debt issuance costs resulting from placement agent warrants are allocated to derivative liabilities based on its fair value at issuance to total proceeds received. Debt issuance costs associated with warrant liabilities are expensed immediately and the debt issuance cost associated with the debt host are amortized over the life of the notes.
Upon conversion on May 14, 2021, the Company measured the conversion liability and placement agent warrant liability to fair value using the Modified Black Scholes Option Pricing Model, a level 3 valuation method, based on the expected fair value of the underlying stock. Change in fair value was recorded in other-operating expenses.
On May 14, 2021, the fair value of the outstanding warrants held by the Convertible Note investors were also remeasured with change in fair value recorded in other-operating expenses. Then the fair value was reclassed to additional paid in capital as the terms became fixed upon closing of the IPO.
Series A Convertible Preferred Stock
On December 30, 2020, the Company issued a total of 34,500 shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share. Pursuant to the certificate of designations, the Series A Convertible Preferred Stock automatically converted into shares of the Common Stock (the “Conversion Shares”) at a conversion price equal to 70% of the per share purchase price of the Common Stock in our IPO. If the IPO failed to occur by December 31, 2021, the Company would have been obligated to redeem and repurchase for cash all of the outstanding shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock for a purchase price equal to (a) the product of multiplying the $10.00 Stated Value of each outstanding share of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock by the total number of outstanding shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, plus (b) all accrued and unpaid Dividends at 9% per annum (the “Redemption Feature”). In the event that the Series A Convertible Preferred Stock converted into Conversion Shares, no Dividend shall accrue or be payable.
The Redemption Feature creates an obligation to the Company requiring it to redeem the Preferred Shares for cash on December 31, 2021, if an IPO has not yet occurred. Upon completion of an IPO, the Conversion Option is settleable with a variable number of the Company’s shares resulting in a fixed monetary amount known at inception in accordance with ASC 480-10-25-14a. The Series A convertible preferred stock are mandatorily redeemable and should be classified as a liability in accordance with ASC 480-10 and the Company has elected to record the Series A Convertible Preferred Stock at fair value with changes in fair value recorded through earnings under the ASC 825-10-15-4 fair value option (“FVO”) election.
Upon conversion on May 14, 2021, the fair value of the Series A Convertible Preferred Stock was measured based on the fixed monetary amount of the convertible share upon IPO. The change in fair value was recorded as other non-operating expense.
Series A Preferred Stock Warrant
In connection with the private placement of Series A Preferred Stock the Company issued warrants to the placement agent to purchase shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock. The exercise price of the warrants is $10 per share. The Company accounts for its redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants as a liability, and they are recorded at their estimated fair value, because the warrants may conditionally obligate the Company to transfer assets at some point in the future. At the end of each reporting period, changes in the estimated fair value during the period are recorded in other income (expense), net in the statement of operations. The Company will continue to adjust the liability for changes in estimated fair value until the earlier of the expiration of the warrants, exercise of the warrants, or conversion of the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants into common stock warrants upon the completion of a liquidation event, including the completion of an IPO.
On May 14, 2021, the fair value of the outstanding Series A Preferred Stock warrant held by the placement agent were remeasured with change in fair value recorded in other-operating expenses.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40).” This ASU reduces the number of accounting models for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock, as well as amend the guidance for the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity to reduce form-over-substance-based accounting conclusions. In addition, this ASU improves and amends the related EPS guidance. This standard is effective for the Company on July 1, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Adoption is either a modified retrospective method or a fully retrospective method of transition. The Company is currently assessing the impact the new guidance will have on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740) - Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The update is intended to simplify the current rules regarding the accounting for income taxes and addresses several technical topics including accounting for franchise taxes, allocating income taxes between a loss in continuing operations and in other categories such as discontinued operations, reporting income taxes for legal entities that are not subject to income taxes, and interim accounting for enacted changes in tax laws. The new standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020; however, early adoption is permitted. The Company does not expect the adoption of this standard have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
The Company does not believe other recently issued but not yet effective accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the consolidated financial position, statements of operations and cash flows.
Recent Financing
Initial Public Offering
On May 11, 2021, the Company entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with D.A. Davidson & Co., a Delaware limited liability company (“D.A. Davidson”), pursuant to which D.A. Davidson agreed to act as the lead underwriter in our initial public offering (the “IPO”) of up to 3,864,000 shares of the Company’s common stock, at an initial public offering price of $5.00 per share (the “IPO Purchase Price”). The IPO closed on May 14, 2021, with the sale of 3,360,000 shares of the Company’s Common Stock for gross proceeds of $16.80 million, and on May 21, 2021, the Company closed on a $2.52 million overallotment option through the sale of an additional 504,000 shares at the IPO Purchase Price.
Private Placement of Convertible Notes and Warrants
On January 27, 2021, the Company completed a private placement offering pursuant to which we sold to two accredited investors an aggregate of $3,000,000 of our 6% convertible notes due six months from the date of issuance, subject to extension as provided below (the “Convertible Notes”), and warrants (the “Warrants”) pursuant to an exemption from registration under Rule 506(b) of Regulation D of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. Boustead Securities, LLC acted as placement agent in the Convertible Note and Warrant offering and received commissions and non-accountable reimbursements of 8% of the gross proceeds received, of which one-half of such fees and expenses were payable upon the conversion of the Convertible Notes. In connection with the Convertible Note and Warrant offering, we issued placement agent warrants to purchase 7% of the shares of Common Stock underlying the Convertible Notes exercisable at the conversion price of the Convertible Note (the “Conversion Price”), of which Boustead Securities, LLC received 80% of the placement agent warrants, which were cashlessly exercised for a total of 21,378 shares of Common Stock on May 14, 2021.
Upon completion of our IPO, the Convertible Notes automatically converted into 857,144 shares of common stock in accordance with the terms of the Convertible Notes. In addition to the Convertible Notes, the purchasers of the Convertible Notes received three-year warrants entitling the holders to purchase a total of 685,714 shares of Common Stock which equals 80% of the number of shares of Common Stock issuable upon conversion of the Convertible Notes. In the event the Convertible Notes are repaid in cash by the Company, the warrants will expire and have no further value.
This description of Convertible Notes and Warrants is intended to be a useful overview of the material provisions of the Convertible Notes and Warrants. However, you should read the Form of Convertible Note and Warrant for a complete description of the obligations of the Company.
Private Placement of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock
On December 30, 2020, the Company sold in a private placement to approximately three accredited investors under Rule 506(b) promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, an aggregate of 34,500 shares of the Company’s Series A convertible preferred stock (the “Series A Preferred Stock”) and received gross proceeds of $345,000. Boustead Securities, LLC acted as placement agent in such private placement and received commissions of $24,150 or 7% of the gross proceeds received, a non-accountable expense allowance of 1% of such gross proceeds and warrants to purchase 2,415 shares of Series A Preferred Stock at an exercise price equal to $10 per share, the offering price of the Series A Preferred Stock, which warrants were cashlessly exercised for a total of 3,073 shares of common stock on May 14, 2021. Upon completion of our IPO, the Series A Preferred Stock automatically converted into a total of 98,572 shares of our common stock.
Terms of the Series A Convertible Preferred Stock
Pursuant to the certificate of designations of rights, privileges and limitations, the Series A Preferred Stock, prior to conversion:
· pays a dividend of nine percent (9%) per annum (the “Dividend”), which Dividend shall be cumulative and payable in cash only in the event of Redemption of the Series A Preferred Stock. In the event that the Series A Preferred Stock is converted into shares of Common Stock, no Dividend shall accrue or be payable;
· has one vote per share; however, shall have no right to vote as a separate class on any matter submitted to vote by the stockholders of the Corporation, excluding any proposed amendment that would adversely alter or change any preference or any relative or other right given to the Series A Preferred Stock, in which event the Series A Preferred Stock may vote as a separate class with respect to such amendment;
· on a sale or liquidation of the Company the Series A Preferred Stock has a $10.00 per share preference over the Company Common Stock;
· by its terms, upon consummation of this offering, all of the issued and outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock will automatically convert into shares of the Common Stock (the “Conversion Shares”) at a conversion price equal to 70% of the initial price per share of the Common Stock upon closing of the IPO);
· if the IPO has not been completed by December 31, 2021, the Company shall redeem and repurchase for cash all of the outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock for a purchase price equal to (a) the product of multiplying the $10.00 Stated Value of each outstanding share of Series A Preferred Stock by the total number of outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock, plus (b) all accrued and unpaid Dividends owed thereon.
Emerging Growth Company
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Accordingly, certain specified reporting and other regulatory requirements for public companies are reduced for businesses that meet the qualifications for emerging growth companies.
These provisions include:
(1) an exemption from the auditor attestation requirement in the assessment of our internal controls over financial reporting required by Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002;
(2) an exemption from the adoption of new or revised financial accounting standards until they would apply to private companies;
(3) an exemption from compliance with any new requirements adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, or the PCAOB, requiring mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report in which the auditor would be required to provide additional information about our audit and our financial statements; and
(4) reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements.