ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
Overview
We have grown our organization to $797.3 million in assets at June 30, 2021 from $377.2 million in assets at June 30, 2009. We have increased our assets primarily through increased investment securities and loan growth.
Historically, we have operated as a traditional thrift institution. As recently as June 30, 2009, approximately 72.4% of our loan portfolio, consisted of longer-term, one- to four-family residential real estate loans. However, in recent years, we have increased our focus on the origination of commercial real estate loans, multi-family real estate loans and commercial business loans, which generally provide higher returns than one- to four-family residential mortgage loans, have shorter durations and are often originated with adjustable rates of interest.
Our results of operations depend primarily on our net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between the interest income we earn on our interest-earning assets, consisting primarily of loans, investment securities and other interest-earning assets, and the interest paid on our interest-bearing liabilities, consisting primarily of savings and transaction accounts, certificates of deposit, repurchase agreements, and Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago advances. Our results of operations also are affected by our provision for loan losses, noninterest income and noninterest expense. Noninterest income consists primarily of customer service fees, brokerage commission income, insurance commission income, net realized gains on loan sales, mortgage banking income, and income on bank-owned life insurance. Noninterest expense consists primarily of compensation and benefits, occupancy and equipment, data processing, professional fees, marketing, office supplies, federal deposit insurance premiums, and foreclosed assets. Our results of operations also may be affected significantly by general and local economic and competitive conditions, changes in market interest rates, governmental policies and actions of regulatory authorities.
Our net interest rate spread (the difference between the yield on average interest-earning assets and the cost of average interest-bearing liabilities) was 2.75% and 2.52% for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net interest income increased to $20.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, from $18.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Our net income for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $5.3 million, compared to a net income of $4.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Our emphasis on conservative loan underwriting has resulted in low levels of non-performing assets. Our non-performing assets totaled $411,000, or 0.1% of total assets at June 30, 2021, and $1.1 million, or 0.2% of assets at June 30, 2020.
Other than our loans for the construction of one- to four-family residential properties and the draw portion of our home equity lines of credit, we do not offer “interest only” mortgage loans on one- to four-family residential properties (where the borrower pays interest but no principal for an initial period, after which the loan converts to a fully amortizing loan). We also do not offer loans that provide for negative amortization of principal, such as “Option ARM” loans, where the borrower can pay less than the interest owed on their loan, resulting in an increased principal balance during the life of the loan. We do not offer “subprime loans” (loans that generally target borrowers with weakened credit histories typically characterized by payment delinquencies, previous charge-offs, judgments, bankruptcies, or borrowers with questionable repayment capacity as evidenced by low credit scores or high debt-burden ratios) or Alt-A loans (traditionally defined as loans having less than full documentation). We also do not own any private label mortgage-backed securities that are collateralized by Alt-A, low or no documentation or subprime mortgage loans.
The Association’s legal lending limit to any one borrower is 15% of unimpaired capital and surplus. On July 30, 2012 the Association received approval from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency to participate in the Supplemental Lending Limits Program (SLLP). This program allows eligible savings associations to make additional residential real estate loans or extensions of credit to one borrower, small business loans or extensions of
credit to one borrower, or small farm loans or extensions of credit to one borrower. For our association this additional limit (or “supplemental limit(s)”) for one- to four-family residential real estate, business or small farm loans is 10% of our Association’s capital and surplus. In addition, the total outstanding amount of the Association’s loans or extensions of credit or parts of loans and extensions of credit made to all of its borrowers under the SLLP may not exceed 100% of the Association’s capital and surplus. By Association policy, participation of any credit facilities in the SLLP is to be infrequent and all credit facilities are to be with prior Board approval.
All of our mortgage-backed securities have been issued by Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae or Ginnie Mae, U.S. government-sponsored enterprises. These entities guarantee the payment of principal and interest on our mortgage-backed securities.
On July 7, 2011, we completed our initial public offering of common stock in connection with Iroquois Federal’s mutual-to-stock conversion, selling 4,496,500 shares of common stock at $10.00 per share, including 384,900 shares sold to Iroquois Federal’s employee stock ownership plan, and raising approximately $45.0 million of gross proceeds. In addition, we issued 314,755 shares of our common stock to the Iroquois Federal Foundation.
COVID-19 and the CARES Act
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused economic and social disruption on an unprecedented scale. While some industries have been impacted more severely than others, all businesses have been impacted to some degree. This disruption has resulted in the shuttering of businesses and schools across the country, significant job loss, restrictions on travel and social distancing protocols, highly volatile financial markets and aggressive measures by the federal government. Significant progress has been made to combat the outbreak of COVID-19; however, the global pandemic has adversely impacted a broad range of industries in which the Company’s customers operate and could still impair their ability to fulfill their financial obligations to the Company.
Congress, the President, and the Federal Reserve have taken several actions designed to cushion the economic fallout. Most notably, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act was signed into law at the end of March 2020 as a $2 trillion legislative package. The goal of the CARES Act is to prevent a severe economic downturn through various measures, including direct financial aid to American families and economic stimulus to significantly impacted industry sectors. The package also includes extensive emergency funding for hospitals and healthcare providers. The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 was signed into law on December 27, 2020, and is intended to provide critical support to the American people and to further strengthen our economic recovery. The Economic Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits and Venues (Economic Aid Act), which was part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, extends the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) to include a second round of funding to certain businesses that received funding under the original PPP. In addition to the general impact of COVID-19, certain provisions of the CARES Act and the Economic Aid Act, as well as other recent legislative and regulatory relief efforts are expected to have a material impact on our operations.
Due to the uncertainty surrounding the emergence of the pandemic, it is not possible to determine the overall impact of the pandemic on the Company’s business. To the extent that customers are not able to fulfill their contractual obligations to the Company, the Company’s business operations, asset valuations, financial condition, cash flows and results of operations could be materially impacted. Material adverse impacts may include all or a combination of valuation impairments on our intangible assets, investments, loans, deferred tax assets, or other real estate owned.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operations and financial performance will depend on future developments related to the duration, extent and severity of the pandemic and the length of time that mandated business and school closures, restrictions on travel and social distancing remain in place. The Company’s operations rely on third-party vendors to process, record and monitor transactions. If any of these vendors are unable to provide these services, our ability to serve customers could be disrupted. The pandemic could negatively impact customers’ ability to conduct banking and other financial transactions. The Company’s operations could be adversely impacted if key personnel or a significant number of employees were unable to work due to illness or restrictions. With the availability and distribution of COVID-19 vaccines, we anticipate continued improvements in commercial and consumer activity and in the U.S. economy. However, if there is a resurgence in the virus, the Company could experience further adverse effects on its business, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and cash flows, the extent to which is uncertain.
Financial position and results of operations
As of June 30, 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a significant negative impact on our financial condition and results of operations. While the general element of our allowance for loan losses increased in our prior fiscal year due to COVID-related changes in the economic forecast, the majority of our provision for loan losses in the year ended June 30, 2021, were due to loan growth, a change in loan portfolio mix, and to a lesser extent, additional reserves for all loans that remain under temporary COVID-19 modifications. Refer to our discussions in MD&A below for additional information on COVID-19 modifications. Should economic conditions worsen, we could experience further increases in our required allowance for loan losses and record additional credit loss expense. The execution of the payment deferrals discussed in the following commentary assisted our ratio of past due loans to total loans. It is possible that our asset quality could worsen at future measurement periods if the effects of COVID-19 are prolonged.
Our fee income could be reduced due to COVID-19. We are working with COVID-19 affected customers by temporarily waiving fees when appropriate including insufficient funds and overdraft fees, and ATM fees. At this time, we do not anticipate a material impact on our fee income due to COVID-19.
Our interest income could be reduced due to COVID-19. In keeping with guidance from regulators, we are actively working with COVID-19 affected borrowers to defer their payments, interest, and fees. While interest and fees will still accrue to income through normal GAAP accounting, should eventual credit losses on these deferred payments emerge, interest income and fees accrued would need to be reversed. In such a scenario, interest income in future periods could be negatively impacted. At this time, we are unable to project the materiality of such an impact, but recognize the breadth of the economic impact may affect our borrowers’ ability to repay in future periods.
Capital and liquidity
As of June 30, 2021, all of our capital ratios were in excess of all regulatory requirements. While we believe that we have sufficient capital to withstand an extended economic recession brought about by COVID-19, our reported and regulatory capital ratios could be adversely impacted by further credit losses.
We maintain access to multiple sources of liquidity. Wholesale funding markets have remained open to us and rates become more stable in the past couple months. If funding costs are elevated for an extended period of time, it could have an adverse effect on our net interest margin. If an extended recession caused large numbers of our deposit customers to withdraw their funds, we might become more reliant on volatile or more expensive sources of funding.
Asset valuation
Currently, we do not expect COVID-19 to affect our ability to account timely for the assets on our balance sheet; however, this could change in future periods. While certain valuation assumptions and judgments will change to account for pandemic-related circumstances such as widening credit spreads, we do not anticipate significant changes in methodology used to determine the fair value of assets measured in accordance with GAAP. As of June 30, 2021 we did not have any impairment with respect to our intangible assets, premises and equipment or other long-lived assets.
Our Business Continuity and Pandemic Response Plan
The Company maintains a Disaster Recovery/Business Continuity Plan to ensure the maintenance or recovery of operations, including services to customers, when confronted with adverse events such as natural disasters, technological failures, human error, cybercrime, terrorism or pandemic outbreak. When the COVID-19 pandemic declaration was announced, the Disaster Planning/Recovery team activated the Disaster Recovery Plan, including the Pandemic Response Plan, with a focus on maintaining virtually all customer services in the event of a total or partial closure of banking offices and/or staffing shortages. The team implemented protocols for employee
safety, reviewed critical business processes, identified staff who could work remotely, and began mobilizing and preparing the equipment that would be required. An Employee Telecommuting Agreement was developed to establish controls and expectations for those working remotely, including adherence to security and privacy policies. Timely communication was provided to employees and customers. ATM and vault cash was increased at all locations in anticipation of greater demand. The Company’s quick and decisive plan implementation resulted in minimal impacts to operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Prior technology planning enabled the successful deployment of certain operations and other personnel to remote environments thereby reducing the number of employees working from physical banking offices. In addition, bank lobbies were closed and customer traffic limited to drive-up facilities, with the exception of the Hoopeston lobby which remained open with protective screening. This reduced the number of employees required to be on-site at any given time and allowed teams to rotate in and out at periodic intervals, helping to facilitate the effective implementation of social distancing standards. All offices are now fully open with masks required and other safety protocols in place.
We do not anticipate any material cost related to the deployment of safety protocols, including PPE or the remote working strategy. No material operational or internal control challenges or risks have been identified to date. Our COVID-19 Response Team continues to anticipate and respond to COVID-19 developments. We don’t anticipate any significant challenges to our ability to maintain our systems and controls and we do not currently face any material resource constraint through the implementation of our business continuity plans.
Lending operations and accommodations to borrowers
We are working with customers directly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue to offer and provide short-term assistance in accordance with regulatory guidelines. As a result of the current economic environment caused by COVID-19, we are engaging in more frequent communication with borrowers to better understand their situation and the challenges faced by them, allowing us to respond proactively as needs and issues arise.
In keeping with regulatory guidance to work with borrowers during this unprecedented situation, the Company is executing payment deferrals for our lending clients that are adversely affected by the pandemic. Under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) that was signed into law on March 27, 2020, certain COVID-19 loan modifications are not designated as TDRs. The CARES Act allowed the Company to presume a loan modification is not a TDR if it is (1) related to COVID-19; (2) executed on a loan that was not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019; and (3) executed between March 1, 2020, and the earlier of (a) 60 days after the date of termination of the National Emergency or (b) December 31, 2020. This relief was extended by the Economic Aid Act, which was included in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, until the earlier of 60 days after the national emergency termination date or January 1, 2022. A total of 139 loans with current balances of $72.1 million have received COVID-19 modifications. These modifications allowed borrowers to defer the principal component of loan payments for up to six months. As of June 30, 2021, 132 of these loans totaling $66.1 million have returned to principal and interest payments, leaving 7 loans for $6.0 million still under temporary modifications. These 7 loans include 5 one- to four-family loans totaling $1.8 million, 1 commercial real estate loan for $2.9 million and one commercial business loan for $1.2 million.
With the passage of the PPP, administered by the SBA, the Company has actively participated in assisting our customers with applications for resources through the program. Most PPP loans have a five-year term and earn interest at 1%. We believe that the majority of these loans will ultimately be forgiven by the SBA in accordance with the terms of the program. While we closed 305 SBA PPP loans representing $26.3 million in funding during 2020 and another 361 SBA PPP loans representing $18.5 million in funding as of June 30, 2021, after SBA forgiveness to date, we have 364 loans totaling $20.6 million remaining in our portfolio at June 30, 2021. It is our understanding that all of our loans funded through the PPP program are fully guaranteed by the U.S. government. Should those circumstances change, we could be required to establish additional allowance for credit loss through additional credit loss expense charged to earnings.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, management identified food and accommodations as industries that were most likely to be adversely impacted in the near-term by economic disruption caused by the pandemic. As of June 30, 2021, our food and accommodation loans were $5.4 million, or 1.0% of total loans. These loans are mostly real estate loans on restaurants and bars, and include $1.2 million in COVID-19 modifications. As of June 30, 2021, one of these loans with a balance of $20,000 was 30 or more days past due.
Retail operations
With the health and safety of our customers and staff in mind, and consistent with recommendations from the CDC and State and Local governments concerning COVID-19, all our banking offices are now open with masks required and safety protocols in place. Although our bank lobbies were closed for a portion of the year, most banking transactions continued through the drive-ups, including opening new deposit accounts. Online and Mobile Banking is available for customers to open an account, apply for a mortgage or personal loan, check their balance, transfer funds, and pay bills. Checks can be deposited using Mobile Banking. Our network of over 50,000 ATMs are available for cash withdrawals with no service charge. Throughout the pandemic, we are have been operating and serving our customers with uninterrupted access to their account information and the ability to complete banking transactions.
Critical Accounting Policies
We consider accounting policies that require management to exercise significant judgment or discretion or make significant assumptions that have, or could have, a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets or on income, to be critical accounting policies. We consider the following to be our critical accounting policies.
Allowance for Loan Losses. We believe that the allowance for loan losses and related provision for loan losses are particularly susceptible to change in the near term, due to changes in credit quality which are evidenced by trends in charge-offs and in the volume and severity of past due loans. In addition, our portfolio is comprised of a substantial amount of commercial real estate loans which generally have greater credit risk than one- to four-family residential mortgage and consumer loans because these loans generally have larger principal balances and are non-homogenous.
The allowance for loan losses is maintained at a level to cover probable credit losses inherent in the loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. Based on our estimate of the level of allowance for loan losses required, we record a provision for loan losses as a charge to earnings to maintain the allowance for loan losses at an appropriate level. The estimate of our credit losses is applied to two general categories of loans:
•
loans that we evaluate individually for impairment under ASC 310-10, “Receivables;” and
•
groups of loans with similar risk characteristics that we evaluate collectively for impairment under ASC 450-20, “Loss Contingencies.”
The allowance for loan losses is evaluated on a regular basis by management and reflects consideration of all significant factors that affect the collectability of the loan portfolio. The factors used to evaluate the collectability of the loan portfolio include, but are not limited to, current economic conditions, our historical loss experience, the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, the financial strength of the borrower, and estimated value of any underlying collateral. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are subject to significant revision as more information becomes available. Actual loan losses may be significantly more than the allowance for loan losses we have established which could have a material negative effect on our financial results. See also “Business - Allowance for Loan Losses.”
Income Tax Accounting. The provision for income taxes is based upon income in our consolidated financial statements, rather than amounts reported on our income tax return. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of a change in tax rates on our deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized as income or expense in the period that includes the enactment date. Under GAAP, a valuation allowance is required to be recognized if it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will not be realized. The determination as to
whether we will be able to realize the deferred tax assets is highly subjective and dependent upon judgment concerning our evaluation of both positive and negative evidence, our forecasts of future income, applicable tax planning strategies, and assessments of current and future economic and business conditions. Positive evidence includes the existence of taxes paid in available carryback years as well as the probability that taxable income will be generated in future periods, while negative evidence includes any cumulative losses in the current year and prior two years and general business and economic trends. Any reduction in estimated future taxable income may require us to record a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. Any required valuation allowance would result in additional income tax expense in the period and could have a significant impact on our future earnings. Positions taken in our tax returns may be subject to challenge by the taxing authorities upon examination. The benefit of an uncertain tax position is initially recognized in the financial statements only when it is more likely than not the position will be sustained upon examination by the tax authorities. Such tax positions are both initially and subsequently measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement with the tax authority, assuming full knowledge of the position and all relevant facts. Differences between our position and the position of tax authorities could result in a reduction of a tax benefit or an increase to a tax liability, which could adversely affect our future income tax expense.
We believe our tax policies and practices are critical accounting policies because the determination of our tax provision and current and deferred tax assets and liabilities have a material impact on our net income and the carrying value of our assets. We believe our tax liabilities and assets are properly recorded in the consolidated financial statements at June 30, 2021 and no valuation allowance was necessary.
Comparison of Financial Condition at June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020
Total assets increased $61.8 million, or 8.4%, to $797.3 million at June 30, 2021 from $735.5 million at June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $29.3 million increase in cash and cash equivalents, a $27.5 million increase in investments and a $3.6 million increase in net loans.
Cash and cash equivalents increased by $29.3 million to $62.7 million at June 30, 2021, from $33.5 million at June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase in deposits from public entities. One public entity collects real estate taxes in two installments, due in June and September, and then makes distributions from the account in early July and September. Amounts received prior to June 30, and subsequently distributed the first week of July were $55.6 million and $45.3 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Investment securities, consisting entirely of securities available for sale, increased $27.5 million, or 16.9%, to $189.9 million at June 30, 2021 from $162.4 million at June 30, 2020. We had no held-to-maturity securities at June 30, 2021 or June 30, 2020.
Net loans receivable, including loans held for sale, increased by $3.6 million, or 0.7%, to $513.4 million at June 30, 2021 from $509.8 million at June 30, 2020. The increase in net loans receivable during this period was due primarily to a $10.8 million, or 7.4%, increase in commercial real estate loans, an $8.2 million, or 8.6%, increase in multi-family loans, a $3.3 million, or 15.0%, increase in construction loans, and a $124,000, or 1.6%, increase in consumer loans, partially offset by an $11.4 million, or 8.9%, decrease in one- to four-family loans, a $4.5 million, or 4.2%, decrease in commercial business loans, and a $1.9 million, or 21.8%, decrease in home equity lines of credit.
Between June 30, 2020 and June 30, 2021, premises and equipment decreased $400,000 to $9.8 million, accrued interest receivable decreased $11,000 to $1.9 million, and foreclosed assets held for sale decreased $127,000 to $259,000, while Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) stock increased $1.2 million to $4.2 million, deferred income taxes increased $1.1 million, to $1.7 million, mortgage servicing rights increased $298,000 to $1.0 million, and other assets increased $264,000 to $898,000. The decrease in premises and equipment was the result of ordinary depreciation, and the decrease in accrued interest receivable was due to decreases in the average rates of both loans and securities. The decrease in foreclosed assets held for sale was due to the sale of property. The increase in FHLB stock was the result of a higher stock requirement early in the period due to a temporary increase in FHLB advances. We maintained the higher-than-required stock balance throughout the period. The increase in deferred income taxes was mostly due to a decrease in unrealized gains on the sale of available-for sale securities. The increase in mortgage servicing rights was the result of an increase in the number of loans serviced and an increase in the valuation, and the increase in other assets resulted from a year-over-year fluctuation in items in process.
Our investment in bank-owned life insurance was $9.3 million at both June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020. We invest in bank-owned life insurance to provide us with a funding source for our benefit plan obligations. Bank-owned life insurance also generally provides us noninterest income that is non-taxable. Federal regulations generally limit our investment in bank-owned life insurance to 25% of the Association’s Tier 1 capital plus our allowance for loan losses. At June 30, 2021, our investment of $9.3 million in bank-owned life insurance was 11.0% of our Tier 1 capital plus our allowance for loan losses.
Deposits increased $65.9 million, or 11.0%, to $667.6 million at June 30, 2021 from $601.7 million at June 30, 2020. Savings, NOW, and money market accounts increased $76.0 million, or 32.7%, to $308.7 million, noninterest bearing demand accounts increased $9.4 million, or 10.8%, to $96.9 million, certificates of deposit, excluding brokered certificates of deposit, decreased $18.0 million, or 6.7%, to $251.2 million, and brokered certificates of deposit decreased $1.6 million, or 12.7%, to $10.8 million.
Repurchase agreements increased $2.5 million, or 67.1%, to $6.2 million. Borrowings consisted of advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago and a line of credit from CIBC Bank USA. The FHLB advances decreased $9.5 million, or 27.5%, to $25.0 million at June 30, 2021 from $34.5 million at June 30, 2020, while the line of credit balance was $3.0 million at both June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020.
Total equity increased $2.7 million, or 3.3%, to $85.3 million at June 30, 2021 from $82.6 million at June 30, 2020. Equity increased due to net income of $5.3 million and ESOP and stock equity plan activity of $572,000, partially offset by a decrease of $2.3 million in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, and the payment of approximately $909,000 in dividends to our shareholders.
Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
General. Net income increased $1.1 million, or 26.0%, to $5.3 million net income for the year ended June 30, 2021 from $4.2 million net income for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was due to an increase in net interest income and an increase in noninterest income, partially offset by an increase in noninterest expense and an increase in provision for loan losses.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income increased by $1.9 million, or 10.3%, to $20.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 from $18.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was due to a decrease of $4.5 million in interest expense, partially offset by a decrease of $2.6 million in interest and dividend income. A $41.5 million, or 6.2%, increase in the average balance of interest earning assets was partially offset by a $30.3 million, or 5.4%, increase in the average balance of interest bearing liabilities. Our interest rate spread increased 23 basis points to 2.75% for the year ended June 30, 2021 from 2.52% for the year ended June 30, 2020, and our net interest margin increased by 11 basis points to 2.86% for the year ended June 30, 2021 from 2.75% for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Interest and Dividend Income. Interest and dividend income decreased $2.6 million, or 9.7%, to $24.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 from $27.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The decrease in interest income was due to a $1.9 million decrease in interest income on loans, a $587,000 decrease in interest income on securities, and a $120,000 decrease in other interest income. Interest income on loans included about $702,000 and $74,000 in deferred PPP fees in years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. A decrease of $1.9 million, or 8.4%, in interest on loans resulted from a 49 basis point, or 10.7%, decrease in the average yield on loans to 4.07% from 4.56%, partially offset by a $13.1 million, or 2.6%, increase in the average balance of loans to $516.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The 1.0% rate on all PPP loans contributed to the decrease in the average yield on loans, and the PPP loan balance of $20.6 million at June 30, 2021 contributed to the increase in the average balance of loans. Interest on securities decreased $587,000, or 15.8%, due to a 62 basis point, or 24.5%, decrease in the average yield on securities to 1.92% for the year ended June 30, 2021 from 2.54% for the year ended June 30, 2020, partially offset by a $17.1 million increase in the average balance of securities to $163.8 million at June 30, 2021 from $146.7 million at June 30, 2020.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $4.5 million, or 51.9%, to $4.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 from $8.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower market rates of interest during the period ended June 30, 2021, partially offset by an increased average balance of interest-bearing liabilities.
Interest expense on interest-bearing deposits decreased $4.2 million, or 53.3%, to $3.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, from $7.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to an 86 basis point, or 56.6% decrease in the average cost of interest-bearing deposits to 0.66% from 1.52%, partially offset by an increase in the average balance of interest-bearing deposits to $559.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, from $521.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Interest expense on borrowings, including FHLB advances, our line of credit at CIBC Bank USA, and repurchase agreements, decreased $299,000, or 38.1%, to $485,000 for the year ended June 30, 2021 from $784,000 for the year ended June 30, 2020. This decrease was due to a 48 basis point decrease in the average cost of such borrowings to 1.34% for the year ended June 30, 2021 from 1.82% for the year ended June 30, 2020, and by a $6.9 million, or 16.1%, decrease in the average balance of borrowings to $36.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 from $43.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Provision for Loan Losses. We establish provisions for loan losses, which are charged to operations in order to maintain the allowance for loan losses at a level we consider necessary to absorb potential credit losses inherent in our loan portfolio. We recorded a provision for loan losses of $844,000 for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to a provision for loan losses of $128,000 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The allowance for loan losses was $6.6 million, or 1.27% of total loans, or 1.32% of total loans excluding PPP loans, at June 30, 2021, compared to $6.2 million, or 1.21% of total loans, or 1.27% of total loans excluding PPP loans, at June 30, 2020. Non-performing loans decreased during the year ended June 30, 2021, to $152,000, from $709,000 at June 30, 2020. During the year ended June 30, 2021, net charge-offs of $479,000 were recorded, while during the year ended June 30, 2020, $222,000 in net charge-offs were recorded.
The following table sets forth information regarding the allowance for loan losses and nonperforming assets at the dates indicated:
Noninterest Income. Noninterest income increased $1.4 million, or 30.1%, to $6.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 from $4.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in the gain on the sale of loans, an increase in mortgage banking income, net, an increase in the net realized gain on sale of available-for-sale securities, and an increase in bank-owned life insurance income, partially offset by a decrease in customer service fees. For the year ended June 30, 2021, gains on the sale of loans increased $772,000 to $1.6 million, mortgage banking income, net, increased $494,000 to $613,000, net realized gain on sale of available-for-sale securities increased $53,000 to $320,000, and bank-owned life insurance income increased $138,000 to $411,000, while customer service fees decreased $65,000 to $275,000. The increase in the gain on the sale of loans and the increase in mortgage banking income, net, resulted from an increase in the loans originated and sold through the FHLBC Mortgage Partnership Finance program and an increase in the value of our mortgage servicing rights in the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase in net realized gain on sale of available-for-sale securities was due to more securities sold for a gain in the year ended June 30, 2021, and the increase in bank-owned life insurance income was due to the receipt of death benefit proceeds in the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease in customer service fees was due to fewer customer services preformed and more customer fees waived, partially as a result of COVID-19, in the year ended June 30, 2021.
Noninterest Expense. Noninterest expense increased $1.1 million, or 6.6%, to $18.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 from $17.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The largest components of this increase were compensation and benefits, which increased $827,000, or 7.5%, equipment expense, which increased $166,000, or 10.6%, and federal deposit insurance fees which increased $157,000, or 747.6%. These increases were partially offset by decreases in stationary, printing and office expenses, which decreased $53,000, or 41.4% and advertising expense, which decreased $58,000, or 11.6%. Compensation and benefits increased due to normal salary increases, annual incentive plan increases, and increased medical costs, while equipment expense increased as a result of more technology upgrades in the year ended June 30, 2021. Our federal deposit insurance premium increased as a result of receiving an FDIC small bank assessment credit in the year ended June 30, 2020. Stationary, printing and office expenses decreased due to more supplies purchased in the year ended June 30, 2020, while advertising expense decreased as a result of less creative ad development work done in the year ended June 30, 2021.
Income Tax Expense. We recorded a provision for income tax of $2.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to a provision for income tax of $1.6 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, reflecting effective tax rates of 27.6% and 27.9%, respectively.
Asset Quality and Allowance for Loan Losses
For information regarding asset quality and allowance for loan loss activity, see “Item 1. Business-Non-performing and Problem Assets” and “Item 1. Business-Allowance for Loan Losses.”
Average Balances and Yields
The following tables set forth average balance sheets, average yields and costs, and certain other information for the periods indicated. Tax-equivalent yield adjustments have not been made for tax-exempt securities. All average balances are based on month-end balances, which management deems to be representative of the operations of Iroquois Federal. Non-accrual loans were included in the computation of average balances, but have been reflected in the table as loans carrying a zero yield. The yields set forth below include the effect of deferred fees, discounts and premiums that are amortized or accreted to interest income or expense.
(1) Includes home equity loans.
(2) Net interest rate spread represents the difference between the yield on average interest-earning assets and the cost of average interest-bearing liabilities.
(3) Net interest-earning assets represents total interest-earning assets less total interest-bearing liabilities.
(4) Net interest margin represents net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table presents the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income for the periods indicated. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The net column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated to the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume in proportion to the relationship of the absolute dollar amounts of change in each.
Management of Market Risk
General. Because the majority of our assets and liabilities are sensitive to changes in interest rates, our most significant form of market risk is interest rate risk. We are vulnerable to an increase in interest rates to the extent that our interest-bearing liabilities mature or reprice more quickly than our interest-earning assets. As a result, a principal part of our business strategy is to manage interest rate risk and limit the exposure of our net interest income to changes in market interest rates. Accordingly, our Board of Directors has established an Asset/Liability Management Committee pursuant to our Interest Rate Risk Management Policy that is responsible for evaluating the interest rate risk inherent in our assets and liabilities, for determining the level of risk that is appropriate, given our business strategy, operating environment, capital, liquidity and performance objectives, and for managing this risk consistent with the guidelines approved by the Board of Directors.
As part of our ongoing asset-liability management, we currently use the following strategies to manage our interest rate risk:
(i) sell the majority of our long-term, fixed-rate one- to four-family residential mortgage loans that we originate;
(ii) lengthen the weighted average maturity of our liabilities through retail deposit pricing strategies and through longer-term wholesale funding sources such as brokered certificates of deposit and fixed-rate advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago;
(iii) invest in shorter- to medium-term investment securities and interest-earning time deposits;
(iv) originate commercial mortgage loans, including multi-family loans and land loans, commercial loans and consumer loans, which tend to have shorter terms and higher interest rates than one- to four-family residential mortgage loans, and which generate customer relationships that can result in larger noninterest-bearing demand deposit accounts; and
(v) maintain adequate levels of capital.
We currently do not engage in hedging activities, such as futures, options or swap transactions, or investing in high-risk mortgage derivatives, such as collateralized mortgage obligations, residual interests, real estate mortgage investment conduit residual interests or stripped mortgage backed securities.
In addition, changes in interest rates can affect the fair values of our financial instruments. For additional information regarding the fair values of our assets and liabilities, see Note 18 to the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest Rate Risk Analysis
We also perform an interest rate risk analysis that assesses our earnings at risk and our value at risk (or net economic value of equity at risk). Earnings at risk represents the underlying threat to earnings associated with the continual repricing of a financial institution’s various assets and liabilities in differing amounts, at different times, at different interest rate levels, all within the context of a continually changing, global interest rate environment. Our analysis of our earnings at risk is completed monthly on our net interest income for periods extending twelve and twenty-four months forward. Simulations include a base line analysis with no change in the current interest rate environment and alternative interest rate possibilities including rising and falling interest rates of 100, 200, 300, and 400 basis points in interest rates under ramp, shock, static and dynamic rate environments to generate the estimated impact on net interest income. Value at risk represents the threat to the underlying value of a financial institution’s various assets and liabilities, and consequently its capital, given the potential for change in the interest rate structure in which these financial instruments might either reprice, or fail to reprice, in an environment of constantly changing interest rates. Our analysis of our value at risk is completed quarterly and the calculation measures the net effect on the market value of the bank’s equity position when quantifying the impact when interest rates rise and fall for the range of -400 basis points to +400 basis points. Details of our general ledger along with key data from each deposit, loan, investment, and borrowing are downloaded into our forecasting model, which takes into account both market and internal trends. Historical testing is done internally on a regular basis to confirm the validity of the model, while third-party testing is done periodically. Details of our interest rate risk analysis are reviewed by the Asset/Liability Management Committee and presented to the Board on a quarterly basis.
The tables below illustrate the simulated impact of rate shock scenarios up to 400 basis points over a two-year period on our earnings at risk for net interest income. The earnings at risk tables show net interest income decreasing in a rising rate environment. The net economic value of equity at risk table below sets forth our calculation of the estimated changes in our net economic value of equity at June 30, 2021 resulting from immediate rate shocks ranging from -400 basis points to +400 basis points..
Earnings at Risk
Net Economic Value of Equity (NEVE) at Risk
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability to meet current and future financial obligations of a short-term nature. Our primary sources of funds consist of deposit inflows, loan sales and repayments, advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago, and maturities of securities. We also utilize brokered certificates of deposit, internet funding, borrowings from the Federal Reserve, and sales of securities, when appropriate. While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans and securities are predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and mortgage prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions and competition. Our Asset/Liability Management Committee is responsible for establishing and monitoring our liquidity targets and strategies in order to ensure that sufficient liquidity exists for meeting the borrowing needs and deposit withdrawals of our customers as well as unanticipated contingencies. For the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, our liquidity ratio averaged 25.0% and 22.9% of our total assets, respectively. We believe that we have enough sources of liquidity to satisfy our short- and long-term liquidity needs as of June 30, 2021.
We regularly monitor and adjust our investments in liquid assets based upon our assessment of: (i) expected loan demand; (ii) expected deposit flows; (iii) yields available on interest-earning deposits and securities; and (iv) the objectives of our asset/liability management program. Excess liquid assets are invested generally in interest-earning deposits and short- and medium-term securities.
Our most liquid assets are cash and cash equivalents. The levels of these assets are affected by our operating, financing, lending and investing activities during any given period. At June 30, 2021, cash and cash equivalents totaled $62.7 million.
Our cash flows are derived from operating activities, investing activities and financing activities as reported in our Statements of Cash Flows included in our financial statements.
At June 30, 2021, we had $19.1 million in loan commitments outstanding, and $104.0 million in unused lines of credit to borrowers. Certificates of deposit due within one year of June 30, 2021 totaled $205.2 million, or 30.7% of total deposits. Depending on market conditions, we may be required to pay higher rates on such deposits or other borrowings than we currently pay on the certificates of deposit due on or before June 30, 2022. Additionally, it is our intention as we continue to grow our commercial real estate portfolio, to emphasize lower cost deposit relationships with these commercial loan customers and thereby replace the higher cost certificates with lower cost deposits. We have the ability to attract and retain deposits by adjusting the interest rates offered.
Our primary investing activity is originating loans. During the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, we originated $261.3 million and $283.1 million of loans, respectively.
Financing activities consist primarily of activity in deposit accounts and Federal Home Loan Bank advances. We had a net increase in total deposits of $65.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, and a net increase in total deposits of $5.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. Deposit flows are affected by the overall level of interest rates, the interest rates and products offered by us and our local competitors, and by other factors.
Liquidity management is both a daily and long-term function of business management. If we require funds beyond our ability to generate them internally, borrowing agreements exist with the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago, which provides an additional source of funds. Federal Home Loan Bank advances were $25.0 million at June 30, 2021. At June 30, 2021, we had the ability to borrow up to an additional $97.5 million from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago based on our collateral and had the ability to borrow an additional $30.8 million from the Federal Reserve based upon current collateral pledged.
Iroquois Federal is subject to various regulatory capital requirements, including a risk-based capital measure. The risk-based capital guidelines include both a definition of capital and a framework for calculating risk-weighted assets by assigning balance sheet assets and off-balance sheet items to broad risk categories. A community bank leverage ratio was established at 9% Tier 1 capital to total average assets, effective January 1, 2020. A “qualifying community bank” that exceeds this ratio will be deemed to be in compliance with all other capital and leverage requirements, including the capital requirements to be considered “well capitalized” under Prompt Corrective Action statutes. On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was enacted, which temporarily reduced the required Community Bank Leverage Ratio to 8% through the end of 2020, and to 8.5% throughout 2021, before returning to 9% on January 1, 2022. The Association “opted in” to elect the Community Bank Leverage Ratio, effective with the quarter ended March 31, 2020.
At June 30, 2021, Iroquois Federal exceeded all regulatory capital requirements. Iroquois Federal is considered “well capitalized” under regulatory guidelines. See Note 13 Regulatory Matters of the notes to the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations
Commitments. As a financial services provider, we routinely are a party to various financial instruments with off-balance-sheet risks, such as commitments to extend credit and unused lines of credit. While these contractual obligations represent our future cash requirements, a significant portion of commitments to extend credit may expire without being drawn upon. Such commitments are subject to the same credit policies and approval process accorded to loans we make. For additional information, see Note 20 Commitments and Credit Risk of the notes to the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations. In the ordinary course of our operations, we enter into certain contractual obligations. Such obligations include data processing services, operating leases for premises and equipment, agreements with respect to borrowed funds and deposit liabilities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of the impact of recent and future accounting pronouncements, see Note 1 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
Our financial statements and related notes have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. U.S. GAAP generally requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without consideration of changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The impact of inflation is reflected in the increased cost of our operations. Unlike industrial companies, our assets and liabilities are primarily monetary in nature. As a result, changes in market interest rates have a greater impact on our performance than the effects of inflation.