ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Except for the historical information contained herein, the matters discussed in this Form 10-K include certain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, which are intended to be covered by safe harbors. Those statements include, but are not limited to, all statements regarding our and management’s intent, belief and expectations, such as statements concerning our future and our operating and growth strategy. We generally use words such as "believe," "may," "could," "will," "intend," "expect," "anticipate," "plan," and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements for many reasons including our ability to implement our business plan, our ability to raise additional funds and manage consumer acceptance of our products, our ability to broaden our customer base, our ability to maintain a satisfactory relationship with our suppliers and other risks described in our reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including Item 1A of this Report on Form 10-K. Although we believe the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, they relate only to events as of the date on which the statements are made, and our future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements may not meet these expectations. Investors are cautioned that all forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties including, without limitation, the factors set forth under the Risk Factors section of this report. In light of the significant uncertainties inherent in the forward-looking statements included herein, the inclusion of such information should not be regarded as a representation by us or any other person that our objectives and plans will be achieved. All forward-looking statements made in this Form 10-K are based on information presently available to our management. We do not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements after the date of this document to conform these statements to actual results or to changes in our expectations, except as required by law.
Results of Operations
Comparison of results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in 000’s):
Revenues
Total revenue increased by $2,231,000, or 14%, to $18,526,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $16,295,000 in 2019. The increase is attributable to an increase in revenue in our Communications business.
Communications revenue increased $2,623,000, or 28%, to $11,870,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $9,247,000 during 2019. The increase in revenue is due to a combination of increased revenue from our webcasting, conference software and newswire products, as well as increased licenses of Platform id. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we benefited from our ability to pivot and enhance our products with virtual components, including virtual annual meetings, virtual conferences and enhanced webcasting features to allow banks to conduct virtual roadshows, analyst days and other types of events. Additionally, ACCESSWIRE revenue for the year increased 17% compared to the same period of the prior year due to an increase in customers and the implementation of our new e-commerce platform. Revenue from licenses of Platform id. increased as a result of the additional licenses signed during the year as we entered into 139 new licenses of Platform id. with annual contract value of $1,007,000. This brings our total subscriptions of Platform id. to 341 with annual contract value of $2,677,000 as of December 31, 2020, compared to 255 subscriptions with annual contract value of $2,033,000 as of December 31, 2019. Communications revenue increased to 64% of total revenue during the year, as compared to 57% during the same period of the prior year.
Compliance revenue decreased $392,000, or 6%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019. The decrease in revenue is due to continued customer attrition of our legacy ARS services as well as a decline in transfer agent services due to a combination of less corporate transactions and directives, as well as an increased shift from paper-based processing of transactions to electronic processing. These decreases were partially offset by increases in print and proxy fulfillment, due to increased projects associated with annual meetings, as a result of the increased demand for our virtual annual meeting product.
2020 Revenue Backlog
As of December 31, 2020, our deferred revenue balance was $2,212,000, a majority of which we expect to recognize over the next twelve months, compared to $1,812,000 at December 31, 2019, an increase of 22%. Deferred revenue primarily consists of advance billings for subscriptions of our cloud-based products and pre-paid packages of our news distribution product, as well as, advance billings for annual contracts for legacy ARS services.
Cost of Revenues
Communications cost of revenues consists primarily of direct labor costs, newswire distribution costs, teleconferencing costs and third-party licensing costs. Compliance and other costs of revenue consists primarily of direct labor costs, warehousing, logistics, print production materials, postage, and amortization of capitalized software costs related to our compliance software. Cost of revenues increased by $335,000, or 7%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period of 2019. Overall gross margin increased $1,896,000, or 17%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019. As a result, overall gross margin percentage increased to 71% during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 69% during the prior year. The increase in cost of sales is due partially to an increase labor costs associated with delivering our newswire and webcasting revenue, increase in distribution costs as we continue to expand our distribution capabilities as well as increase in teleconferencing costs. These increases were offset by decreases in amortization of capitalized software as well as decreases in postage and fulfillment costs associated with our legacy ARS business.
Gross margin percentage associated with our Communications revenue was 73% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 72% for 2019. The increase in gross margin percentage is primarily attributable to the addition of revenue associated with our virtual products, newswire and subscriptions of Platform id.
Gross margin percentage associated with our Compliance revenue was 66% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 65% for 2019.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, stock-based compensation, insurance, fees for professional services, general corporate expenses and facility and equipment expenses. General and administrative expenses were $5,029,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $57,000 or 1%, as compared to the prior year. This decrease is primarily due to a decrease in our bad debt provision of $449,000 offset by a one-time accrual of $350,000 recorded in 2020 regarding sales and use tax compliance. As a result of our growing customer base, transition from a service-based company to a cloud-based platform company and the complex economic nexus provisions of various states, we completed an assessment of our sales and use tax position during the year. As a result, we recorded a one-time estimate of our current and historical state sales and use tax liabilities of approximately $350,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The high bad debt provision in the prior year was primarily related to reserves on accounts receivable balances of two significant investment commentary newswire customers which were written off in 2019.
As a percentage of revenue, General and Administrative expenses were 27% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 31% for 2019.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, stock-based compensation, sales commissions, advertising expenses, tradeshow expenses and other marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses were $3,812,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $261,000, or 7%, as compared to the prior year. This increase is directly related to our investment in our sales and marketing initiatives with an increase in headcount and digital marketing.
As a percentage of revenue, sales and marketing expenses were 21% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 22% for 2019.
Product Development
Product development expenses consist primarily of salaries, stock-based compensation, bonuses and licenses to develop new products and technology to complement and/or enhance Platform id. Product development costs decreased $394,000, or 32%, to $825,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019. The decrease is due to a decrease in headcount within the development team and use of more specialized consultants. We anticipate product development expenses to begin to increase toward previous levels in future periods.
As a percentage of revenue, Product Development expenses were 4% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 7% for 2019.
Depreciation and Amortization
During the year ended December 31, 2020, depreciation and amortization expenses decreased by $134,000, or 15%, to $751,000, as compared to $885,000 during 2019. The decrease is primarily related to intangible assets associated with the acquisition of PIR that became fully amortized during the year.
Other income, net
Other income, net, primarily relates to an $80,000 gain on extinguishment of debt associated with the final anniversary payment related to the acquisition of Interwest Transfer Company (“Interwest”) in 2017 as well as interest income on deposit and money market accounts. These items are partially offset by the non-cash interest associated with the present value of the anniversary payments of the Interwest acquisition.
Income Taxes
We recorded income tax expense of $724,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $109,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in income tax expense is attributable to higher pre-tax income for the year ended December 31, 2020. The difference between the Company’s effective tax rate of 26% and the federal statutory rate of 21% is primarily due to state taxes for 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s effective tax rate was favorably impacted by the research and development tax credit, foreign tax credits as well as a benefit related to the exercise of stock-based compensation. The aforementioned reasons, as well as state taxes, foreign statutory tax rate differentials are the reasons for the variance between the Company’s effective tax rate and the statutory rate during 2019.
Net Income
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2,106,000 as compared to $686,000 in 2019. The increase in net income is primarily due to the growth of our Communications revenue and higher gross margin percentages. Additionally, we experienced lower operating expenses which were partially offset by a decline in interest income and higher income taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $19,556,000 in cash and cash equivalents and $2,514,000 in net accounts receivable. Current liabilities as of December 31, 2020, totaled $4,494,000 including our accounts payable, deferred revenue, accrued payroll liabilities, income taxes payable, current portion of lease liabilities and other accrued expenses. At December 31, 2020, our current assets exceeded our current liabilities by $17,789,000.
Effective October 3, 2019, the Company renewed its Line of Credit, which increased the term to two years, with all other provisions remaining the same. The amount of funds available for borrowing are $3,000,000 and the interest rate is LIBOR plus 1.75%. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate was 1.89% and the Company did not owe any amounts on the Line of Credit.
Disclosure about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any transactions, agreements or other contractual arrangements that constitute off-balance sheet arrangements.
Outlook
The following statements and certain statements made elsewhere in this document are based upon current expectations. These statements are forward looking and are subject to factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those suggested here, including, without limitation, demand for and acceptance of our services, new developments, competition and general economic or market conditions, particularly in the domestic and international capital markets. Refer also to the Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward Looking Statements included in this report.
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a "Public Health Emergency of International Concern" and on March 11, 2020, declared it to be a pandemic. Actions taken around the world to help mitigate the spread of COVID-19 include restrictions on travel, quarantines or “stay-at-home” restrictions in certain areas and forced closures for certain types of public places and businesses. COVID-19 and actions taken to mitigate it have had and are expected to continue to have an adverse impact on the economies and financial markets globally, including the geographical areas in which we operate. Although our offices were initially ordered temporarily closed for the safety of our employees, their families and our community, on June 1, 2020 we began slowly re-opening our offices, which are now open for all employees who voluntarily elect to return to the office.
While it is unknown how long these conditions will last, including whether a worldwide resurgence will occur, variants of the virus will become more impactful or vaccines will be effective, and what the complete financial impact will be to the Company, we could experience a material disruption of our employees and operations, a decline in revenue, a decline in value of our assets, deterioration of our customer base and the inability of our customers to pay for subscriptions or services provided. To date, we have seen both positive and negative impacts to our business. Several in-person conferences scheduled to occur in the first half of the year were either cancelled or delayed and we also experienced a delay in transactions processed by the Depository Trust Company and banks and brokers in our transfer agent business. However, our ability to pivot and enhance our product offering with our virtual products generated increased revenue during the last three quarters of the year. Despite the short-term increase in revenue, the concentrations of our customer base within middle, small and micro-cap public customers make it reasonably possible that we are vulnerable to the risk of a near-term negative impact related to the COVID-19 outbreak if a substantial portion of these customers are forced to scale back or cease operations. We are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business and are unable at this time to predict the continued impact that COVID-19 will have on our business, financial position, and operating results in future periods due to numerous uncertainties.
Overall, the demand for our platforms and services continues to be stable in a majority of the segments we serve. We are seeing increased demand for virtual events using both our conference software and webcasting products, as customers are opting to hold virtual meetings. During the first and second quarter of 2020, we were able to pivot portions of our platform to specifically address COVID-19 business limitations. This resulted in a new Virtual Annual Meeting product, which combines our webcasting and proxy voting technology together. Additionally, we also upgraded technology of our conference software product to allow conferences to go entirely virtual and hold one-on-one meetings with audio, video and sharing features.
We believe these developments will assist us in delivering best of breed solutions to the market, but also lead us into new opportunities during this changing and challenging environment. The extent to how long these shifts in demands will occur is uncertain at this time and could be longer than just 2020 and the early part of 2021. However, we cannot make any assurances at this time that our product upgrades will be accepted by customers and revenue will be significant enough to offset losses in other aspects of our business in the long-term.
The transition to a platform subscription model has been and will continue to be key for our long-term sustainable growth. We will also continue to focus on the following key strategic initiatives during 2021:
●
Continue to expand our Communications products and adapt to this changing environment,
●
Continue to grow through acquisitions in areas of strategic focus,
●
Continue to expand our Communications sales and marketing teams and digital marketing strategy,
●
Continue to expand customer base,
●
Continue to expand our newswire distribution,
●
Invest in technology advancements and upgrades,
●
Generate profitable sustainable growth
●
Generate cash flows from operations.
We believe there is significant demand for our products around the world among the middle, small and micro-cap markets, as well as private companies, as they seek to find better platforms and tools to disseminate and communicate their messages. Although this demand may decrease or shift in the near term as a result of COVID-19, we believe we have the product sets, platforms, capacity and ability to adapt during these changing times to meet their requirements.
We have invested and will continue to invest in our product sets, platforms and intellectual property development via internal development and acquisitions. Acquisitions remain a core part of our strategy and we believe acquisitions are key to enhancing our overall offerings in the market and necessary to keep our competitive advantages and facilitate the next round of growth that management believes it can achieve. If we are successful in this effort, we believe we can further increase our market share and revenues per user as we move forward.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries. Significant intercompany accounts and transactions are eliminated in consolidation.
Revenue Recognition
Substantially all the Company’s revenue comes from contracts with customers for subscriptions to its cloud-based products or contracts for communications and compliance products and services. Customers consist of corporate issuers and professional firms, such as investor relations and public relations firms. In the case of our news distribution and webcasting offerings, our customers also include private companies. The Company accounts for a contract with a customer when there is an enforceable contract between the Company and the customer, the rights of the parties are identified, the contract has economic substance, and collectability of the contract consideration is probable. The Company's revenues are measured based on consideration specified in the contract with each customer.
The Company's contracts include either a subscription to our entire platform or certain modules within our platform, or an agreement to perform services, or any combination thereof, and often contain multiple subscriptions and services. For these bundled contracts, the Company accounts for individual subscriptions and services as separate performance obligations if they are distinct, which is when a product or service is separately identifiable from other items in the bundled package, and a customer can benefit from it on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer. The Company separates revenue from its contracts into two revenue streams: i) Platform and Technology and ii) Services. Performance obligations of Platform and Technology contracts include providing subscriptions to certain modules or the entire Platform id. system, distributing press releases on a per release basis or conducting webcasts or virtual annual meetings on a per event basis. Performance obligations of Services contracts include obligations to deliver compliance services and annual report printing and distribution on either a stand ready obligation or on a per project or event basis. Set up fees for compliance services are considered a separate performance obligation and are satisfied upfront. Set up fees for our transfer agent module and investor relations content management module are immaterial. The Company’s subscription and service contracts are generally for one year, with automatic renewal clauses included in the contract until the contract is cancelled. The contracts do not contain any rights of returns, guarantees or warranties. Since contracts are generally for one year, all the revenue is expected to be recognized within one year from the contract start date. As such, the Company has elected the optional exemption that allows the Company not to disclose the transaction price allocated to performance obligations that are unsatisfied or partially satisfied at the end of each reporting period.
The Company recognizes revenue for subscriptions evenly over the contract period, upon distribution for per release contracts and upon event completion for webcasting and virtual annual meeting events. For service contracts that include stand ready obligations, revenue is recognized evenly over the contract period. For all other services delivered on a per project or event basis, the revenue is recognized at the completion of the event. The Company believes recognizing revenue for subscriptions and stand ready obligations using a time-based measure of progress, best reflects the Company’s performance in satisfying the obligations.
For bundled contracts, revenue is allocated to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. Standalone selling prices are based on observable prices at which the Company separately sells the subscription or services. If a standalone selling price is not directly observable, the Company uses the residual method to allocate any remaining price to that subscription or service. The Company reviews standalone selling prices, at least annually, and updates these estimates if necessary.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The Company monitors outstanding receivables based on factors surrounding the credit risk of specific customers, historical trends, and other information. Credit is granted on an unsecured basis. The allowance for doubtful accounts is estimated based on an assessment of the Company’s ability to collect on customer accounts receivable. There is judgment involved with estimating the allowance for doubtful accounts and if the financial condition of the Company’s customers were to deteriorate, resulting in their inability to make the required payments, the Company may be required to record additional allowances or charges against revenues. Given the current environment of the COVID-19 pandemic additional attention has been paid to the financial viability of our customers. The Company generally writes-off accounts receivable against the allowance when it determines a balance is uncollectible and no longer actively pursues its collection.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed for differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities that will result in future taxable or deductible amounts based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred income tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized. For any uncertain tax positions, we recognize the impact of a tax position, only if it is more likely than not of being sustained upon examination, based on the technical merits of the position. Our policy regarding the classification of interest and penalties is to classify them as income tax expense in our financial statements, if applicable.
Capitalized Software
Costs incurred to develop our cloud-based platform products are capitalized when the preliminary project phase is complete, management commits to fund the project and it is probable the project will be completed and used for its intended purposes. Once the software is substantially complete and ready for its intended use, the software is amortized over its estimated useful life, which is typically four years. Costs related to design or maintenance of the software are expensed as incurred.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
In accordance with the authoritative guidance for accounting for long-lived assets, assets such as property and equipment, trademarks, and intangible assets subject to amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset group may not be recoverable. Recoverability of asset groups to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset group to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset group. If the carrying amount of an asset group exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of an asset group exceeds fair value of the asset group.
Lease Accounting
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Our operating lease agreements are primarily for office space and are included within lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. ROU assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. Our variable lease payments consist of non-lease services related to the lease and payments under operating leases classified as short-term. Variable lease payments are excluded from the ROU assets and lease liabilities and are recognized in the period in which the obligation for those payments is incurred. As most of our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. ROU assets include any lease payments made and exclude lease incentives. Rental expense for lease payments related to operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.