Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties and should be read together with the "Risk Factors" section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a science-driven biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery and development of novel treatment options for retinal diseases with significant unmet medical needs. We are currently developing both therapeutic product candidates for age-related retinal diseases and gene therapy product candidates for orphan inherited retinal diseases, or IRDs. We believe that both therapeutics and gene therapy serve important roles in drug development and providing potential treatment options for patients suffering from retinal diseases.
Our therapeutics portfolio consists of our clinical stage product candidate Zimura® (avacincaptad pegol), a complement C5 inhibitor, and our preclinical product candidate IC-500, a High temperature requirement A serine peptidase 1 protein, or HtrA1, inhibitor. We are currently targeting the following diseases with Zimura:
•geographic atrophy, or GA, which is the advanced stage of age-related macular degeneration, or AMD, and is characterized by marked thinning or atrophy of retinal tissue, leading to irreversible loss of vision; and
•autosomal recessive Stargardt disease, or STGD1, which is an orphan inherited condition characterized by progressive damage to the central portion of the retina, or the macula, and other retinal tissue, leading to loss of vision.
We previously also evaluated Zimura in combination with Lucentis® (ranibizumab), an anti-vascular endothelial growth factor, or anti-VEGF, agent, for the treatment of wet AMD, for which we completed a Phase 2a clinical trial, referred to as the OPH2007 trial, during the fourth quarter of 2018. We are developing IC-500 for GA secondary to AMD and potentially other age-related retinal diseases.
Our gene therapy portfolio consists of two product candidates in preclinical development (IC-100 and IC-200) and several ongoing collaborative sponsored research programs, each of which uses adeno-associated virus, or AAV, for gene delivery. These AAV mediated gene therapy programs are targeting the following orphan IRDs:
•rhodopsin-mediated autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa, or RHO-adRP, which is characterized by progressive and severe bilateral loss of vision leading to blindness;
•IRDs associated with mutations in the BEST1 gene, including Best vitelliform macular dystrophy, or Best disease, which is generally characterized by bilateral egg yolk-like lesions in the macula, which, over time, progress to atrophy and loss of vision;
•Leber Congenital Amaurosis type 10, or LCA10, which is characterized by severe bilateral loss of vision at or soon after birth;
•autosomal recessive Stargardt disease; and
•IRDs associated with mutations in the USH2A gene, which include Usher syndrome type 2A, or Usher 2A, and USH2A-associated non-syndromic autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa.
We are developing IC-100 for RHO-adRP and IC-200 for BEST1-related IRDs.
Research and Development Pipeline
We have summarized the current status of our ongoing research and development programs in the table below.
*We have an option to exclusively in-license intellectual property resulting from ongoing sponsored research.
Therapeutic Development Programs
Zimura
Zimura, our complement C5 inhibitor, is a chemically-synthesized, pegylated RNA aptamer. Aptamers are short molecules made up of a single stranded nucleic acid sequence or amino acid sequence that binds molecular targets with high selectivity and specificity. In April 2020, we received fast track designation from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, for Zimura for the treatment of GA secondary to dry AMD. The following are brief descriptions of the status of the GATHER1 trial, which we completed in June 2020, and our ongoing clinical trials for Zimura and our manufacturing activities for Zimura.
GATHER1 (GA secondary to AMD - Completed)
GATHER1 is an international, randomized, double-masked, sham controlled, multi-center Phase 2/3 clinical trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of Zimura for the treatment of GA secondary to AMD. We enrolled 286 patients in this trial across multiple treatment groups, including various Zimura doses and sham control groups, and patients were treated and followed for 18 months. In October 2019, we announced positive 12-month data from this trial and in June 2020, we completed this trial and announced 18-month data from this trial, which supported the 12-month data. We believe that the GATHER1 trial qualifies as the first of two Phase 3 trials typically required by the FDA for marketing approval of a pharmaceutical product.
GATHER2 (GA secondary to AMD - Ongoing)
GATHER2 is an international, randomized, double-masked, sham controlled, multi-center Phase 3 clinical trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of Zimura for the treatment of GA secondary to AMD. In this trial, we plan to enroll approximately 400 patients, who will be randomized to receive either monthly administration of Zimura 2 mg or sham during the first 12 months of the trial, at which time the primary efficacy analysis of the mean rate of change of GA growth over 12 months, as measured by fundus autofluorescence based on readings at three time points: baseline, month 6 and month 12, calculated using the square root transformation of the GA area, which is the same primary efficacy endpoint we used for the GATHER1 trial, will be performed. At month 12, we plan to re-randomize patients in the Zimura 2 mg arm to receive either monthly or every other month administration of Zimura 2 mg. The final evaluation will take place at month 24.
In June 2020, we dosed the first patient in this trial. We are continuing to recruit and enroll patients and expect to complete patient enrollment during the third quarter of 2021. Meanwhile, we continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic closely and may need to slow down or stop patient enrollment in certain geographies depending on the local situation. We have
added sites to this trial due to the ongoing and variable nature of the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impact on patient recruitment and retention.
STAR (STGD1 - Ongoing)
STAR, also known as OPH2005, is an international, randomized, double-masked, sham controlled, multi-center clinical trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of Zimura for the treatment of STGD1. STAR, similar to GATHER1, was designed to be a Phase 2b screening trial, with the potential to demonstrate statistically significant results depending on the magnitude of the potential benefit observed. If the results are positive and statistically significant, we believe this trial could potentially serve as a clinical trial that can support an application for marketing approval. We initially enrolled 95 patients in the STAR trial. All of these initially enrolled patients had completed their scheduled visits as of September 2020.
In July 2020, we reopened enrollment in this trial in the United States. We plan to enroll approximately 25 additional patients, with the goal of enrolling a total of approximately 120 patients. Similar to GATHER2, we continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic closely and may need to slow down or stop patient enrollment in certain geographies depending on the local situation. Newly enrolled patients will be randomized on a 1:1 basis to be treated with either Zimura 4 mg or sham for 18 months. We have been and plan to remain masked to the treatment condition of all patients in the trial. In addition, we have not reviewed and do not plan to review or analyze efficacy data for any patients in the trial, until the 18-month data has been collected and analyzed for all patients enrolled in the trial.
Zimura Manufacturing
In early 2017, we completed the small scale manufacture of multiple batches of Zimura drug substance that we are using to support clinical drug supply for the GATHER2 trial and the expanded STAR trial. We have initiated activities in preparation for the scale-up and validation of the manufacturing process for Zimura drug substance with a new manufacturer, with the goal of assessing whether this manufacturer can produce Zimura drug substance at an adequate scale for future potential commercial use. If this manufacturer is successful, we intend for this manufacturer to be our primary supplier of Zimura drug substance. We also recently engaged our historical contract manufacturer for Zimura drug substance, Agilent Technologies, Inc., or Agilent, for scale-up and validation activities. Depending on the success of the scale-up activities by the new manufacturer, we may use either this new manufacturer, Agilent or both for future supply of Zimura drug substance. In addition, regardless of which manufacturer we use, we will need to demonstrate that the drug substance produced through the scaled-up process is analytically comparable to the drug substance we are currently using. We are continuing analytical method development and qualification with our contract manufacturers and laboratories.
In 2020, we engaged a contract manufacturer to provide us with additional supply of finished Zimura drug product to support our needs for the GATHER2 trial and the expanded STAR trial. We expect that this contract manufacturer will be able to supply sufficient finished Zimura drug product for these two clinical trials. In addition, we are planning to make a change to the existing vial used for Zimura drug product, which we believe may allow us to support a more efficient fill/finish operation at a commercial scale. We have been in discussions with our historical fill/finish manufacturer, Ajinomoto Bio-Pharma Services, or Ajinomoto, regarding its capacity to supply us with finished Zimura drug product with the new vial for potential commercial use.
We order the PEG starting material used to make Zimura drug substance from a sole source third-party manufacturer outside the United States. We currently procure the supply on a purchase order basis and are planning to enter into a long-term supply agreement with this manufacturer for the PEG starting material. We are assessing this supplier's capacity to supply the PEG at the scale that we expect we will need for commercial manufacturing.
IC-500: HtrA1 Inhibitor
We are pursuing the preclinical development of IC-500 for the treatment of GA secondary to AMD and potentially other age-related retinal diseases. We have selected IC-500, the lead compound from our HtrA1 inhibitor program, which includes a number of small molecule compounds that show high affinity and specificity for HtrA1 when tested in vitro.
In early 2021, we completed a review of our IC-500 development program, which we had previously designed to support monthly dosing in our planned first-in-human clinical trial. We believe that we may be able to establish, at an earlier stage of development, a dosing regimen for IC-500 with less frequent dosing than we had previously planned. As a result, we have revised our development plans and timelines for IC-500 with the goal of including both monthly dosing and a less frequent dosing regimen in our first-in-human clinical trial. Currently, we are planning to initiate a number of preclinical pharmacokinetic, tolerability and target engagement studies for IC-500. We are also conducting additional formulation
development activities and planning for cGMP manufacturing activities for IC-500. Based on current timelines and subject to successful preclinical development and cGMP manufacturing, we expect to file an IND for IC-500 during the second half of 2022.
Gene Therapy Research and Development Programs
IC-100: Product Candidate for RHO-adRP
We are pursuing the preclinical development of IC-100, our novel AAV gene therapy product candidate for the treatment of RHO-adRP. We and the University of Pennsylvania, or Penn, have conducted a number of preclinical studies of IC-100 and a natural history study of RHO-adRP patients. We are working with a gene therapy contract development and manufacturing organization, or CDMO, for preclinical and Phase 1/2 clinical supply of IC-100. We are completing manufacturing activities for a cGMP batch of IC-100 produced by our CDMO and completed toxicology studies of IC-100. We are planning for a Phase 1/2 clinical trial for IC-100, including site selection and other startup activities. We are planning to meet with the FDA to discuss our selected doses for a first-in-human clinical trial before we file an IND for IC-100. Based on current timelines and subject to feedback from the FDA, we plan to file an IND for IC-100 and subject to regulatory review, we expect to begin patient enrollment in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial in the second half of 2021.
IC-200: Product Candidate for BEST1-Related IRDs
We are pursuing the preclinical development of IC-200, our novel AAV gene therapy product candidate for the treatment of BEST1-related IRDs. We and Penn are conducting preclinical studies of IC-200 and natural history studies of patients with BEST1-related IRDs. We are working with a gene therapy CDMO for preclinical and Phase 1/2 clinical supply of IC-200. We are completing manufacturing activities for a cGMP batch of IC-200 produced by our CDMO. We are conducting other IND-enabling activities, including a toxicology study of IC-200. We are planning for a Phase 1/2 clinical trial for IC-200, including site selection and other startup activities. Based on current timelines and subject to successful completion of preclinical development, we plan to file an IND and subject to regulatory review, begin patient enrollment in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial for IC-200 in the second half of 2021.
Minigene Programs
AAV vectors are generally limited as a delivery vehicle by the size of their genetic cargo, which is restricted to approximately 4,700 base pairs of genetic code. The use of minigenes seeks to deliver a smaller but still functional form of a larger gene packaged into a standard-size AAV delivery vector. The goal of minigene therapy is to deliver a gene expressing a protein that, although smaller than the naturally occurring protein, is nonetheless functional for purposes of treating the associated disease.
We are funding several sponsored research programs at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, or UMMS, seeking to use a minigene approach to develop new gene therapies for several orphan IRDs. The following is a summary of these minigene programs and their status:
•miniCEP290 (LCA10): This program, which we refer to as the miniCEP290 program, is targeting LCA10, which is associated with mutations in the CEP290 gene. In July 2019, we entered into a license agreement with the University of Massachusetts, or UMass, for exclusive development and commercialization rights to this program. The sponsored research has yielded a number of minigene constructs that show encouraging results when tested in a mouse model. UMMS is conducting additional experiments to optimize constructs, which were delayed because of restrictions placed by UMMS on animal research activities as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We currently expect to identify a lead construct during the second quarter of 2021.
•miniABCA4 (STGD1): This program, which we refer to as the miniABCA4 program, is targeting STGD1, which is associated with mutations in the ABCA4 gene. UMMS generated and evaluated several ABCA4 minigene constructs in both in vitro and in vivo experiments, which yielded what we believe to be encouraging results. UMMS is conducting additional experiments to optimize the constructs. We expect to receive additional results from the miniABCA4 program during the first half of 2021.
•miniUSH2A (USH2A-related IRDs): This program, which we refer to as the miniUSH2A program, is targeting IRDs associated with mutations in the USH2A gene, including Usher 2A and USH2A-associated non-syndromic autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa. Some of the activities in this program were delayed as a result of the closure of UMMS
animal research laboratories due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect to receive preliminary results from this program during the first half of 2021.
In addition to the license agreement for the miniCEP290 program, UMMS has granted us an option to obtain an exclusive license to any patents or patent applications that result from any of these sponsored research programs.
Impact of COVID-19
Beginning in March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken to contain it have affected our business and operations in a number of ways. These include, but are not limited to, the following:
•In March 2020, we decided to delay the initiation of patient enrollment in our GATHER2 trial. Although we initiated patient enrollment in June 2020 and our clinical trial sites are continuing to enroll patients, we and our clinical trial sites are doing so cautiously in light of new health and safety practices put into place as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We are continuing to monitor the situation closely and may need to slow down or stop patient enrollment in certain geographies depending on the local situation. In addition, we have added sites to this trial because of the ongoing and variable nature of the pandemic and its potential impact on patient recruitment and retention. Health authorities and ethics committees in certain countries have reduced their staff and operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This reduction in operations has resulted in delays to the approval of our trial in certain countries outside the United States and delays in the activation process for a number of our planned clinical trial sites. We may face difficulties in recruiting or retaining patients or maintaining scheduled visits to the extent patients are affected by the virus or are fearful of visiting or traveling to our clinical trial sites because of the pandemic. We are aware that a number of patients initially enrolled in the STAR trial missed consecutive visits during the early months of the pandemic. We do not yet know whether the number of missed visits will increase or decrease among the newly enrolled patients in the STAR trial or how many missed visits will occur in the GATHER2 trial, or what the impact of missed visits may be on trial results, especially because we are masked to the treatment of patients during the conduct of the trials. At this time, we do not know whether there will be further impacts on the timing and progress of patient enrollment or on patient retention or maintenance of scheduled visits in any of our ongoing or planned clinical trials as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Although most of our clinical trial sites have reopened and are continuing to conduct patient visits for our clinical trials, they are doing so with fewer staff and other restrictions and many of them are focusing on more urgent matters rather than clinical trials. We are engaging with our clinical trial sites, with the goal of monitoring the health and well-being of our patients who remain in our trials and maintaining their scheduled visits and treatments. Where possible, we and our clinical investigators have instituted practices such as flexible scheduling of visits for patients and remote monitoring, and we have also provided patient travel services and personal protective equipment to support our sites and patients. Recently, a number of our clinical trial sites have been scaling back their operations because of recent surges in COVID-19 cases or new lockdown measures being imposed. We have been and will continue to monitor the situation closely.
•In some instances, our third-party contract manufacturers, academic research collaborators and contract research organizations have limited their operations and staff, which has resulted in delays to some of our manufacturing and research and development activities and limited our ability to be on site to oversee these activities. For example, the closure of animal research laboratories at the UMMS for several months during 2020 caused delays to the progress of, and to our timelines for receipt of data from, our collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs. Additionally, we were unable to perform person-in-plant (PIP) observations on a number of critical manufacturing activities at our CDMO for IC-100 and IC-200, which caused minor delays to our manufacturing timelines for both product candidates. Furthermore, because of the COVID-19 pandemic and restrictions on remote auditing due to privacy and other concerns, we have experienced difficulties and delays in performing audits on most of our clinical trial sites.
•Shortages, delays and governmental restrictions arising from the COVID-19 pandemic have disrupted and may continue to disrupt the ability of our contract manufacturers to procure items, such as raw materials, that are essential for the manufacture of our product candidates. For example, during 2020, our contract manufacturer for IC-500 experienced a shortage in obtaining one of the critical raw materials that was sourced from China, which was caused by the shutdown of local suppliers and the slowdown in trade due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This shortage delayed our process development activities for the drug substance for IC-500 by a number of months. Additionally, there is increased demand for the vials we are planning to use for the fill/finish of Zimura drug product, which governments
and other companies intend to use for COVID-19 vaccines and medicines. This increased demand may limit our ability to obtain these vials for our own needs.
•We instituted company-wide remote working starting in March 2020 and expect to continue working remotely for the foreseeable future. We have been relying on remote means of working and communication both internally and externally. We are continuing to monitor and support the health and well-being of our employees and their productivity as remote working continues.
We do not believe that the COVID-19 pandemic, and our actions in response and the costs of those actions, have had a material impact on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows for the three months or year ended December 31, 2020. The progression of the COVID-19 pandemic remains fluid and its impact on our business and operations remains uncertain. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain it or lessen its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets. If the delays and other disruptions due to the pandemic become prolonged or more extensive, then we may experience further delays or disruptions to our research and development programs and our financial position, results of operations or cash flows for future periods may be materially affected.
For further information on actual and potential impacts to us as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, see the other sections of this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Position and the Risk Factors contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Development and Financing Activities
Beginning in 2017, we pursued a business development strategy focused on evaluating various available technologies to treat ophthalmic diseases, particularly those in the back of the eye, and exploring opportunities to obtain rights to additional products and product candidates employing these technologies. Our efforts resulted in the expansion of our research and development pipeline, including the addition of IC-100, IC-200 and IC-500 and a number of collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs.
As we continue the development of our product candidates and programs and evaluate our overall strategic priorities, we will continue to pursue selective business development and financing opportunities that advance us toward our strategic goals. We continue to explore potential collaboration and out-licensing opportunities for the future development and potential commercialization of our product candidates. In addition, we plan to continue to evaluate, on a selective and targeted basis, opportunities to potentially obtain rights to additional product candidates and technologies for retinal diseases, including technologies that may complement our existing product candidates and other strategic lifecycle initiatives.
For information about our follow-on public offerings that we completed in December 2019 and June 2020, please see the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of Management' s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations set forth in this Item 7. We expect to continue to pursue capital raising transactions when they are available on terms favorable to us and if the opportunity advances our strategic goals.
Financial Matters
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and available for sale securities of $210.0 million. We estimate that our year-end 2021 cash, cash equivalents and available for sale securities will range between $130 million and $140 million. We also estimate that our cash, cash equivalents and available for sale securities will be sufficient to fund our planned capital expenditure requirements and operating expenses, excluding any potential approval or sales milestones payable to Archemix or any commercialization expenses for Zimura, into 2024. These estimates are based on our current business plan, which includes the continuation of our ongoing clinical development programs for Zimura, the progression of our IC-100 and IC-200 programs into the clinic, and the advancement of our IC-500 development program. These estimates also assume that we will enroll approximately 400 patients in the GATHER2 trial. These estimates do not reflect any additional expenditures related to potentially studying Zimura in other indications, or resulting from the potential in-licensing or acquisition of additional product candidates or technologies, commencement of any new sponsored research programs, or any associated development we may pursue. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Fovista
In December 2016 and August 2017, we received initial top-line data from our three pivotal clinical trials, referred to as OPH1002, OPH1003 and OPH1004, evaluating the anti-platelet derived growth factor, or anti-PDGF, aptamer Fovista® (pegpleranib) administered in combination with anti-VEGF agents for the treatment of wet AMD. These top-line data indicated that the trials failed to achieve their pre-specified primary endpoints. We terminated these trials, as well as several other smaller Fovista trials in wet AMD in 2017. We have no plans for the future development of Fovista.
Prior Novo Agreement
In May 2013, we entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement with Novo Holdings A/S (formerly Novo A/S and which we refer to as Novo), which we refer to as the Novo Agreement, pursuant to which we obtained financing in three tranches in an aggregate amount equal to $125.0 million in return for the sale to Novo of aggregate royalties of a mid-single-digit percentage on worldwide sales of Fovista, certain products related to Fovista, as specified in the Novo Agreement, or Fovista-Related Products, and certain other PDGF antagonists which we might develop, as specified in the Novo Agreement, or Other Products. The three tranches of financing closed in May 2013, January 2014 and November 2014. We recorded the aggregate $125.0 million in proceeds that we received under the Novo Agreement as a royalty purchase liability on our Balance Sheet in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 730, Research and Development, or ASC 730.
On December 31, 2018, we and Novo entered into a letter agreement, which we refer to as the Novo Termination Agreement, that terminated the Novo Agreement. As a result of the Novo Termination Agreement, Novo relinquished all rights to receive royalties based on net sales of Fovista, Fovista-Related Products and Other Products. In exchange, we agreed to forbear from any future filing, prosecution, maintenance or enforcement of any intellectual property rights related to Fovista, Fovista-Related Products or Other Products, and from granting any third party or affiliate any right or license in any such intellectual property rights or clinical study data generated by or on behalf of us, our affiliates, licensees or sublicensees, for the development, manufacture or commercialization of Fovista, Fovista-Related Products, Other Products or any other antagonists of PDGF. The foregoing restriction does not apply to gene therapies (so long as we do not grant any rights or licenses to intellectual property or clinical study data related to Fovista or Fovista-Related Products). We further agreed, until December 31, 2028, not to develop, manufacture, seek or obtain regulatory approval for or commercialize Fovista, Fovista-Related Products or Other Products without the prior written consent of Novo. The foregoing restriction does not apply to any gene therapies (so long as we do not utilize data related to Fovista or Fovista-Related Products).
Effective December 31, 2018, as a result of the Novo Termination Agreement, we extinguished the $125.0 million royalty purchase liability from our Balance Sheet as we no longer have any obligation to repay Novo the $125.0 million through future product royalties or any other development activities. In addition, we recognized a related gain of $125.0 million in our Statements of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2018. The extinguishment of the royalty purchase liability and the related gain did not impact our cash balance for that period as we had received the proceeds related to the royalty purchase liability in prior periods.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
As we have no products approved for sale, we do not expect to receive any revenue related to our product candidates until we obtain regulatory approval for and commercialize such products, or until we potentially enter into agreements with third parties for the development and commercialization of our product candidates. If our development efforts for any of our product candidates result in regulatory approval or if we enter into collaboration agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue from product sales or from such third parties.
Our ability to become and remain profitable depends on our ability to generate revenues in excess of our expenses. Our ability to generate revenues from product sales is dependent on our obtaining marketing approval for and commercializing our product candidates or any product candidates we may in-license or acquire. We may be unsuccessful in our efforts to develop and commercialize product candidates or in our efforts to in-license or acquire additional product candidates. Even if we succeed in developing and commercializing one or more of our product candidates, we may never achieve sufficient sales revenue to achieve or maintain profitability.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses primarily consist of costs associated with the manufacturing, development, and preclinical and clinical testing of our product candidates and costs associated with our gene therapy sponsored research programs. Our research and development expenses consist of:
•external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as academic research collaborators, contract research organizations, or CROs, and other vendors and CDMOs for the production and analysis of drug substance and drug product; and
•employee-related expenses for employees dedicated to research and development activities, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation expense.
Research and development expenses also include costs of acquired product licenses, in-process research and development, and related technology rights where there is no alternative future use, costs of prototypes used in research and development, consultant fees and amounts paid to collaborative partners.
All research and development expenses are charged to operations as incurred in accordance with ASC 730. We account for non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received, rather than when the payment is made. We do not currently utilize a formal time allocation system to capture expenses on a project-by-project basis because we record expenses by functional department. Accordingly, we do not allocate expenses to individual projects or product candidates, although we do allocate some portion of our research and development expenses by project area or product candidate, as shown below.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
As we continue our ongoing clinical trials and planned manufacturing activities for Zimura, we expect our research and development expenses for Zimura to increase. We also expect our research and development expenses for each of IC-100 and IC-200 to increase as we complete preclinical development and subject to regulatory review, begin clinical development for those product candidates. We expect our research and development expenses for IC-500 to increase as we continue preclinical development. We expect our research and development expenses for our other collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs to decrease as the sponsored research for those programs reaches completion. Our research and development expenses may also increase if we decide to pursue the development of Zimura in additional indications, we in-license or acquire any new product candidates, including from our collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs, or if we commence any new sponsored research programs.
Although the future development of our product candidates is highly uncertain, we expect the development of our product candidates will continue for at least the next several years. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the total remaining costs necessary to complete development, to complete process development and manufacturing scale-up and validation activities and to potentially seek marketing approval for any of our product candidates.
The successful development of our product candidates is subject to numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
•the scope, rate of progress and costs of our research and development activities, including manufacturing activities;
•the potential benefits of our product candidates over other therapies;
•preclinical development results and clinical trial results;
•the terms and timing of regulatory approvals;
•our ability to market, commercialize and achieve market acceptance for any of our product candidates; and
•our ability to successfully file, prosecute, defend and enforce patent claims and other intellectual property rights, together with associated expenses.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of our product candidates could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, we are conducting the GATHER2 trial, which is a Phase 3 clinical trial evaluating Zimura for GA, with the expectation that data collected from this trial, if positive, together with data from our GATHER1 trial, will be sufficient to seek marketing approval for this indication in the United States and the European Union. We may subsequently decide to, or be required by regulatory authorities to, enroll additional patients in the GATHER2 trial beyond our current expectations, conduct additional clinical trials for Zimura in GA or conduct additional non-clinical studies of Zimura in order to seek or maintain regulatory approval or qualify for reimbursement approval. As a result of any of the above, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of development of Zimura in GA.
See the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section of this Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our current and future financial resources and our expectations regarding our research and development expenses and funding requirements.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for personnel, including share-based compensation expense, in our executive, legal, finance, business development, human resources, investor relations and information technology functions. Other general and administrative expenses include facility costs and professional fees for legal, including patent-related, services and expenses, consulting and accounting services, and travel expenses.
Interest Income
We currently have invested our cash, cash equivalents and available for sale securities in money market funds, U.S. Treasury securities, asset-backed securities and investment-grade corporate debt securities, which generate a nominal amount of interest income.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued research and development expenses, revenue recognition, share-based compensation and income taxes described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on our limited historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Of those policies, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid our stockholders in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing quotations and contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our
estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses are related to expenses related to our academic research collaborators, CROs, CDMOs and other vendors in connection with research and development and manufacturing activities.
We base our expenses related to academic research collaborators, CROs and CDMOs on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotations and contracts with such vendors that conduct research and development and manufacturing activities on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the applicable research and development or manufacturing expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. There have been no material changes in estimates for the periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Share-Based Compensation
We account for all share-based compensation payments issued to employees, non-employee directors, and consultants by estimating the fair value of each equity award. Accordingly, share-based compensation expense is measured based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant, net of forfeitures. We recognize compensation expense for the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest over the period during which the recipient renders the required services to us on a straight-line basis. In accordance with authoritative guidance, we re-measure the fair value of consultant share-based awards as the awards vest, and recognize the resulting value, if any, as expense during the period when the related services are rendered.
We apply the fair value recognition provisions of ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. Determining the amount of share-based compensation to be recorded requires us to develop estimates of the fair value of stock options as of their grant date. We recognize share-based compensation expense ratably over the requisite service period, which in most cases is the vesting period of the award. For grants containing performance-based vesting provisions, expense is recognized over the estimated achievement period only when the performance-based milestone is deemed probable of achievement. If performance-based milestones are later determined not to be probable of achievement, then all previously recorded stock-based compensation expense associated with such options will be reversed during the period in which we make this determination. Calculating the fair value of share-based awards requires us to make highly subjective assumptions.
Prior to January 1, 2019, share-based compensation awarded to non-employees was subject to revaluation over the vesting term of each award. Subsequent to the adoption of ASU 2018-07, Improvements to Non-Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting, the value of non-employee share-based compensation is measured on the date of grant, similar to share-based compensation granted to employees.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value our stock option awards and the options to purchase shares under our employee stock purchase plan. Use of this valuation methodology requires that we make assumptions as to the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our stock options, and the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock options and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. We calculate expected volatility based on daily historical volatility during the time period that corresponds to the expected option term. We calculate the expected term of stock option grants to employees based on an analysis of actual option exercises. The risk-free interest rate used for each grant is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for instruments with a similar expected life. We utilize a dividend yield of zero based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and have no current intention to pay cash dividends. The weighted-average assumptions used to estimate grant date fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model were as follows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
We estimate the fair value of restricted stock units, or RSUs, granted to employees using the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant.
We also estimate forfeitures at the time of grant, and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from our estimates. We use historical data to estimate pre-vesting forfeitures and record share-based compensation expense only for those awards that are expected to vest. To the extent that actual forfeitures differ from our estimates, the difference is recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period when the estimates were revised.
Share-based compensation expense for equity grants to employees, non-employee directors and consultants was $8.3 million, $9.2 million and $11.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $23.2 million of total unrecognized share-based compensation expense, which we expect to recognize over a weighted-average remaining vesting period of approximately 3.4 years. We expect to grant additional stock options that will result in additional share-based compensation expense for our equity awards to employees, non-employee directors and consultants.
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we allocated share-based compensation as follows:
In October 2019, our board of directors adopted the 2019 Inducement Stock Incentive Plan, or the Inducement Plan, pursuant to which we may grant, subject to the terms of the Inducement Plan and the rules of The Nasdaq Global Select Market, or Nasdaq, nonstatutory stock options, restricted stock, RSUs, and other stock-based awards up to an aggregate of 1,000,000 shares of our common stock. In March 2020, our board of directors amended the Inducement Plan to reserve an additional 1,000,000 shares of our common stock for issuance under the plan and in February 2021, our board of directors further amended the Inducement Plan to reserve an additional 600,000 shares of our common stock for issuance under the plan. The Inducement Plan permits us to, subject to the approval of each grant by the compensation committee of our board of directors, use the stock-based awards available under the Inducement Plan to attract key employees for the growth of our business. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately 555,000 shares available for issuance under the Inducement Plan.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses were $62.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $23.1 million compared to $39.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a $15.1 million increase in costs associated with Zimura, a $6.6 million increase in personnel costs, a $3.1 million increase in costs associated with IC-200 and a $1.0 million increase in costs associated with IC-500 which were partially offset by a $0.8 million decrease in costs related to our prior Fovista manufacturing activities due to a sales tax refund, a $0.5 million decrease in costs associated with IC-100 and a $0.5 million decrease in costs associated with our collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs. The increased costs for Zimura were primarily due to the initiation of and commencement of patient enrollment for our GATHER2 trial, increased manufacturing activities and the payment of a $6.0 million milestone to Archemix. The increased costs for IC-200 and IC-500 primarily reflect increased manufacturing and preclinical development activities.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses were $26.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4.3 million, compared to $21.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to an increase in general consulting costs and professional fees.
Interest Income
Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.5 million compared to interest income of $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income earned during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the decrease in interest rate yields.
Income Tax Benefit
We recorded a benefit from income taxes of approximately $3.7 million and $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which primarily related to the settlement of local tax audits.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses were $39.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $2.1 million compared to $41.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a $6.4 million decrease in costs associated with our HtrA1 inhibitor program, a $3.9 million decrease in costs associated with our Zimura program and a $1.6 million decrease in professional services and consulting fees. The decreased costs for our HtrA1 inhibitor program related to the immediate expensing in 2018 of the in-process research and development costs of our HtrA1 inhibitor program acquired through our acquisition of Inception 4 in 2018. The decreased costs for our Zimura programs included lower costs related to a decrease in Zimura manufacturing
activities and lower clinical trial costs as a result of the completion of the OPH2007 trial during the fourth quarter of 2018 and the completion of patient recruitment for the OPH2003 trial during the fourth quarter of 2018 and the associated reduction in site initiation costs. The decreased costs for our Zimura programs were partially offset by increased costs associated with the continued progress of the OPH2005 trial. The overall decrease in research and development expenses was partially offset by a $9.4 million increase in costs resulting from the expansion of our gene therapy programs.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses were $21.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $2.0 million, compared to $23.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to a decrease of $1.6 million in personnel expenses and a decrease of $0.5 million in professional and consulting fees. The decrease in personnel expenses included a decrease of $1.2 million in share-based compensation expense as a result of a decrease in the fair value of our common stock.
Interest Income
Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $2.2 million compared to interest income of $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in interest income earned during the year ended December 31, 2019 was the result of a decrease in cash balances available for investment.
Gain on Extinguishment of Royalty Purchase Liability
On December 31, 2018 we entered into the Novo Termination Agreement, which terminated the Novo Agreement. As we no longer had an obligation to repay Novo the $125.0 million that it had provided us pursuant to the Novo Agreement, we extinguished the $125.0 million royalty purchase liability from our Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2018 and recognized a related gain of $125.0 million in our Statements of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2018. This gain on the extinguishment of the royalty purchase liability did not impact our cash balance during that period as we had received the proceeds related to the royalty purchase liability in prior periods.
Income Tax Benefit
We recorded a benefit from income taxes of approximately $0.1 million and $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, which primarily related to the settlement of local tax audits.
Although we had net income before income taxes during 2018, this income is primarily due to the Novo Termination Agreement. Payments received under the Novo Agreement had previously been recorded as revenue on our federal and state income tax returns during the periods in which the payments were received. The recognition of income for financial statement purposes resulted in the reduction of a deferred tax asset that was completely offset by a previously recorded valuation allowance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through private placements of our common stock and preferred stock, venture debt borrowings, funds received under the Novo Agreement, our initial public offering, which we closed in September 2013, funds we received under a prior agreement with Novartis Pharma AG relating to the licensing and commercialization of Fovista, funds we received in connection with our acquisition of Inception 4 in October 2018, and our follow-on public offerings, which we closed in February 2014, December 2019 and June 2020, including the sale of pre-funded warrants in December 2019 and June 2020. We do not have any committed external source of funds.
June 2020 Follow-on Public Offering and Concurrent Private Placement
In June 2020, we closed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 28,503,220 shares of our common stock, including the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares of our common stock, at a price to the public of $4.10 per share, and at a price to the underwriters of $3.854 per share. We also sold to certain investors in lieu of common stock, pre-funded warrants to purchase 1,914,280 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $4.099 per share underlying each pre-funded warrant, and at a price to the underwriters of $3.853 per share underlying each pre-funded warrant.
Concurrently with the June 2020 public offering, we completed a private placement exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, in which we sold 8,649,453 shares of our common stock to affiliates of Vivo Capital, LLC and Samsara BioCapital, LP, or the Private Placement Purchasers, at a purchase price equal to $4.10 per
share, the price to the public in the public offering. The shares in the private placement were issued pursuant to a stock purchase agreement entered into among us and the Private Placement Purchasers.
The net proceeds from the public offering and private placement, after deducting underwriting discounts, placement agent fees and other offering expenses of approximately $10.1 million, was approximately $150.1 million.
December 2019 Follow-on Public Offering
In December 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold approximately 7,750,000 shares of our common stock, which includes the underwriters' option to purchase additional shares of our common stock, at a public offering price of $4.00 per share, and at a price per share of $3.736 to the underwriters. We also sold to certain investors pre-funded warrants to purchase 3,750,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $3.999 per share underlying each warrant, and at a purchase price of $3.735 per share underlying each warrant to the underwriters.
The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $3.0 million and other offering expenses of $0.4 million, was approximately $42.6 million.
Cash Flows
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and available for sale securities totaling $210.0 million and no debt. We primarily invest our cash, cash equivalents and available for sale securities in money market funds, U.S. Treasury securities, asset-backed securities and certain investment-grade corporate debt securities.
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The net cash used in operating activities, which was $66.1 million and $48.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, relates primarily to net cash used to fund our Zimura clinical trials and manufacturing activities and to support the preclinical development activities of IC-100, IC-200 and IC-500.
See "-Funding Requirements" below for a description of how we expect to use our cash for operating activities in future periods.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $143.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily related to the purchase of available for sale securities. Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.2 million and related to the proceeds received from the sale of manufacturing and clinical equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $150.6 million and relates primarily to cash received from our June 2020 public offering of our common stock and concurrent private placement. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $42.8 million and relates primarily to cash received from our December 2019 public offering of our common stock.
Funding Requirements
Zimura is in clinical development, our gene therapy product candidates IC-100 and IC-200, and IC-500, the selected product candidate from our HtrA1 inhibitor program, are each in preclinical development, and we are funding multiple ongoing collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs. We expect our research and development expenses to increase as we
pursue these programs as currently planned. We could incur additional research and development expenses if we modify or further expand the scope of our clinical trials, including if we develop Zimura for additional indications, preclinical development programs or collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs, or if we in-license or acquire, and undertake development of, additional product candidates and technologies, including any promising product candidates that emerge from our collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs. We could also incur additional research and development expenses if, for example, we are required by the FDA, the EMA, or regulatory authorities in other jurisdictions to perform clinical trials and nonclinical or other studies in addition to those we currently expect to conduct. If we experience delays or disruptions to our research and development programs, including delays in patient enrollment or issues with patient retention or patients missing scheduled visits and treatments, if we experience issues with our preclinical development programs, such as unfavorable toxicology or other preclinical data, if we experience issues with the manufacture and supply of product candidates for our development programs, including issues with process development or manufacturing scale-up activities, whether such delays or disruptions are due to the COVID-19 pandemic or other reasons, we could incur additional and unexpected expenses as a result of such delays or disruptions and our business and financial results may be materially impacted. Furthermore, if we successfully develop and expect to obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, distribution and manufacturing. We are party to agreements with Archemix Corp., or Archemix, with respect to Zimura, the University of Florida Research Foundation, Incorporated, or UFRF, and Penn with respect to IC-100 and IC-200, UMass with respect to any potential product candidates from our miniCEP290 program, and the former equityholders of Inception 4 with respect to IC-500, in each case, that impose significant milestone payment obligations on us if we achieve specified clinical, regulatory and commercial milestones with respect to these product candidates, as well as certain royalties on net sales with respect to IC-100, IC-200 and any product candidates we choose to develop from our miniCEP290 program. It is likely that any future in-licensing or acquisition agreements that we enter into with respect to additional product candidates or technologies would include similar obligations.
We expect that we will continue to incur significant expenses as we:
•continue the development of Zimura in GA, STGD1 and potentially other indications;
•expand our outsourced manufacturing activities or establish commercial operations or sales, marketing and distribution capabilities, if we receive, or expect to receive, marketing approval for any of our product candidates;
•continue the development of IC-100, IC-200 and IC-500 and pursue our collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs;
•in-license or acquire the rights to, and pursue the development of, other product candidates or technologies;
•seek marketing approval for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•hire additional clinical, commercial, medical affairs, regulatory, manufacturing, quality control, quality assurance and scientific personnel; and
•expand our general and administrative functions to support our future growth.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and available for sale securities of $210.0 million. We estimate that our year-end 2021 cash, cash equivalents and available for sale securities will range between $130 million and $140 million. We also estimate that our cash, cash equivalents and available for sale securities will be sufficient to fund our planned capital expenditure requirements and operating expenses, excluding any potential approval or sales milestones payable to Archemix or any commercialization expenses for Zimura, into 2024. These estimates are based on our current business plan, which includes the continuation of our ongoing clinical development programs for Zimura, the progression of our IC-100 and IC-200 programs into the clinic, and the advancement of our IC-500 development program. These estimates also assume that we will enroll approximately 400 patients in the GATHER2 trial. These estimates do not reflect any additional expenditures related to potentially studying Zimura in other indications, or resulting from the potential in-licensing or acquisition of additional product candidates or technologies, commencement of any new sponsored research programs, or any associated development we may pursue. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
We expect we will require substantial, additional funding in order to complete the activities necessary to develop and commercialize one or more of our product candidates. Although the future development of our product candidates is highly uncertain, we expect the development of our product candidates will continue for at least the next several years. At this time, we
cannot reasonably estimate the total remaining costs necessary to complete development, to complete process development and manufacturing scale-up and validation activities and to potentially seek marketing approval for any of our product candidates.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the scope, progress, costs and results of our current and any future Zimura clinical programs and any further development we may undertake to enable us to file a new drug application, or NDA, for Zimura in one or more indications;
•the scope, costs, progress, and results of process development, manufacturing scale-up and validation activities, analytical method development and qualification, and stability studies associated with Zimura and our other product candidates;
•the scope, progress, costs and results of our efforts to develop IC-100, IC-200 and IC-500, including activities to establish manufacturing capabilities and other preclinical development activities to enable us to file INDs for these product candidates;
•the scope, progress, costs and results from our collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs, including costs related to the in-license and future development of any promising product candidates and technologies that emerge from these programs;
•our ability to establish collaborations on favorable terms, if at all, if we choose to do so, including any collaboration for the further development and potential commercialization of any of our product candidates;
•the timing and extent of delays or disruptions to our research and development programs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire rights to, and undertake research or development of, additional product candidates or technologies;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory filings and reviews of our product candidates;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•the timing, scope and cost of commercialization activities for any of our product candidates if we receive, or expect to receive, marketing approval for a product candidate; and
•subject to receipt of marketing approval, net revenue received from commercial sales of any of our product candidates, after milestone payments and royalty payments that we would be obligated to make.
We may require additional funding beyond what we currently expect due to unforeseen or other reasons. Our costs may exceed our expectations if we experience an issue in our clinical trials, such as issues with patient enrollment, the retention of enrolled patients, enrolled patients maintaining scheduled visits and receiving scheduled treatments, or the availability of drug supply, if we experience an issue in our preclinical development programs, such as unfavorable toxicology or other preclinical data, if we experience issues with manufacturing, or if we modify or further expand the scope of our clinical trials, preclinical development programs or collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs. For example, we have decided to enroll approximately 25 additional patients in our ongoing STAR trial, with the goal of enrolling a total of approximately 120 patients, which will extend the duration of that trial and increase our costs of conducting that trial. Our costs may also exceed our expectations for other reasons, for example, if we are required by the FDA, the EMA, or regulatory authorities in other jurisdictions to perform clinical trials or nonclinical or other studies in addition to those we currently expect to conduct, if we experience issues with process development, establishing or scaling-up of manufacturing activities or activities to enable and qualify second source suppliers, or if we decide to increase preclinical and clinical research and development activities, build internal research capabilities or pursue internal research efforts. For example, we are conducting the GATHER2 trial with the expectation that data collected from such trial, if it is positive, together with data from our GATHER1 trial, will be sufficient to support an application for marketing approval in the United States and the European Union and we may subsequently decide to, or be required by regulatory authorities to, enroll additional patients in the GATHER2 trial beyond our current expectations, conduct additional clinical trials for Zimura in GA or conduct additional non-clinical studies of Zimura in order to seek or maintain marketing approval or qualify for reimbursement approval. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic may result in
disruptions to the progress of the GATHER2 trial or the STAR trial, including slowing patient enrollment or causing enrolled patients to miss their scheduled visits or drop out in greater numbers than we expect, or disruptions to our other research and development programs, which could cause us to continue to expend our cash resources while not progressing our research and development programs as expeditiously as we would have had the pandemic not occurred or persisted. We may experience difficulty in enrolling or retaining patients or maintaining scheduled visits and treatments due to patients' fears of visiting clinical trial sites or ongoing restrictive measures requiring social distancing or limiting travel. For example, we are aware that, in the STAR trial, a number of patients initially enrolled in the trial missed consecutive visits during the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic. We do not know yet whether the number of missed visits will increase or decrease among the newly enrolled patients in the STAR trial or how many missed visits will occur in the GATHER2 trial, and whether and to what extent missed visits may impact the results of any of the trials. As a result of any of the above, we may need or may seek to obtain additional funding for our continuing operations sooner or in greater amounts than expected.
We do not have any committed external source of funds. Our ability to raise adequate additional financing when needed, and on terms acceptable to us, will depend on many factors. These factors include investors' perceptions of the potential success of our ongoing business, including the development of our product candidates and other programs, and the potential future growth of our business. Additionally, these factors include general market conditions that also affect other companies. For example, the COVID-19 pandemic and governmental responses to the pandemic have caused volatility and uncertainty in the financial markets as well as additional volatility in the price of our stock, which may result in prospective investors being less likely to invest new capital. These factors may make raising capital difficult, and may result in us accepting terms that are unfavorable to us, especially if we are in need of financing at the particular time. Although we were able to raise approximately $150 million in net proceeds through our June 2020 public offering and concurrent private placement, we may not be able to successfully raise additional capital. The size of our company and our status as a company listed on The Nasdaq Global Select Market, or Nasdaq, may also limit our ability to raise financing. For example, our ability to raise adequate financing through a public offering may be limited by market conditions and SEC rules based on our current market capitalization. Nasdaq listing rules also generally limit the number of shares we may issue in a private placement to a number less than 20% of the number of shares of our common stock outstanding immediately prior to the transaction, unless we issue such shares at a premium, which investors may be unwilling to accept, or unless we obtain shareholder approval, which can be expensive and time-consuming and can add risk to our ability to complete the financing transaction. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate the development of one or more of our product candidates, our collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs, or our future commercialization efforts.
Until such time, if ever, when we can generate substantial product revenues, we may need or may seek to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements. In addition, we may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations, even if we believe that we have sufficient funds for our current or future operating plans. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our existing stockholders' ownership interests would be diluted, and the terms of these new securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our existing stockholders' rights as common stockholders. The dilutive effect of future equity issuances may be substantial, depending on the price of our common stock at the time of such capital raise, with a lower stock price translating to greater dilution for existing stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures, declaring dividends or entering into certain investments or transactions. In addition, we have issued, and may in the future issue additional, equity securities as consideration for business development transactions, which may also dilute our existing stockholders' ownership interests.
If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, products or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we choose to pursue a collaboration for any of our product candidates, we may be required to relinquish certain valuable rights depending on the terms of such a transaction. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to grant rights to develop and market products or product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Our need for additional financing may continue even if we are able to successfully develop one or more of our product candidates. Our future commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of such product candidates, which may not be available for at least several years following completion of successful product development, if at all. In addition, if approved, our product candidates may not achieve commercial success. Even if those products are successful and we do achieve profitability, we may not be able to sustain or increase profitability on a quarterly or annual basis. Under most, if not all, of the foregoing circumstances, we may need to obtain substantial additional financing to achieve our business objectives.
Archemix C5 License Agreement
In September 2011, we entered into the C5 License Agreement with Archemix relating to anti-C5 aptamers. In connection with the C5 License Agreement, as amended, we paid Archemix an upfront licensing fee of $1.0 million and issued to Archemix an aggregate of 2,000,000 shares of our series A-1 preferred stock and 500,000 shares of our series B-1 preferred stock. We have paid Archemix an aggregate of $9.0 million in fees based on our achievement of specified clinical milestone events under the C5 License Agreement, including two milestone payments of $1.0 million and $6.0 million triggered by the positive 12-month data from, and by completion of, the GATHER1 trial, which we paid in March 2020 and October 2020, respectively.
Under the C5 License Agreement, for each anti-C5 aptamer product that we may develop under the agreement, including Zimura, we are obligated to make additional payments to Archemix of up to an aggregate of $50.5 million if we achieve specified development, clinical and regulatory milestones, with $24.5 million of such payments relating to a first indication, $23.5 million of such payments relating to second and third indications and $2.5 million of such payments relating to sustained delivery applications. Under the C5 License Agreement, we are also obligated to make additional payments to Archemix of up to an aggregate of $22.5 million if we achieve specified commercial milestones based on net product sales of all anti-C5 products licensed under the agreement. We are also obligated to pay Archemix a double-digit percentage of specified non-royalty payments we may receive from any sublicensee of our rights under the C5 License Agreement. We are not obligated to pay Archemix a running royalty based on net product sales in connection with the C5 License Agreement.
For more information about the C5 License Agreement, please see the section entitled "Licensing and Other Arrangements-Zimura - Archemix C5 License Agreement" in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Inception 4 Merger Agreement
In October 2018, we and Inception 4 entered into the Inception 4 Merger Agreement, pursuant to which we acquired IC-500 and our other HtrA1 inhibitors through a merger transaction. As part of the transaction, we received approximately $6.1 million in cash.
In addition, pursuant to the Inception 4 Merger Agreement, the former equityholders of Inception 4 will be entitled to receive contingent future payments from us based on the achievement of certain clinical and regulatory milestones of up to an aggregate maximum amount of $105 million, with $45 million of such potential payments relating to GA and $60 million of such potential payments relating to wet AMD. These future milestone payments will be payable in the form of shares of our common stock, calculated based on the price of our common stock over a five-trading day period preceding the achievement of the relevant milestone, unless and until the issuance of such shares would, together with all other shares issued in connection with the Inception 4 Merger, exceed an overall maximum limit of approximately 7.2 million shares, which is equal to 19.9% of the number of issued and outstanding shares of our common stock as of the close of business on the business day prior to the closing date of the Inception 4 Merger, and will be payable in cash thereafter.
For more information about the Inception 4 Merger Agreement, please see the section entitled "Licensing and Other Arrangements-IC-500 - Inception 4 Merger Agreement" in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
RHO-adRP Gene Therapy Agreements with UFRF and Penn
RHO-adRP License Agreement
In June 2018, we paid a $0.5 million upfront license issuance fee to UFRF, on behalf of UFRF and Penn, in connection with entry into the RHO-adRP License Agreement, which was recorded as a research and development expense, as well as accrued patent prosecution expenses of approximately $30 thousand, which was recorded as a general and administrative expense. Under the agreement, we agreed to pay an annual license maintenance fee in the low double-digit thousands of dollars, which will be payable on an annual basis until the first commercial sale of a licensed product. In addition, we agreed to reimburse UFRF for the costs and expenses of patent prosecution and maintenance related to the licensed patent rights.
We further agreed to pay UFRF, on behalf of both licensors, up to an aggregate of $23.5 million if we achieve specified clinical, marketing approval and reimbursement approval milestones with respect to a licensed product and additionally, up to an aggregate of $70.0 million if we achieve specified commercial sales milestones with respect to a licensed product.
We are also obligated to pay UFRF, on behalf of both licensors, royalties at a low single-digit percentage of net sales of licensed products. Such royalties are subject to customary reductions for lack of patent coverage and loss of regulatory exclusivity. In addition, such royalties with respect to any licensed product in any country may be offset by a specified portion of any royalty payments actually paid by us with respect to such licensed product in such country under third-party licenses for
patent rights or other intellectual property rights that are necessary to manufacture, develop and commercialize the licensed product in such country. Our obligation to pay royalties under the RHO-adRP License Agreement will continue on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis until the latest of:
•the expiration of the last-to-expire licensed patent rights covering a licensed product in the country of sale;
•the expiration of regulatory exclusivity covering a licensed product in the country of sale; and
•ten years from the first commercial sale of the applicable licensed product in the country of sale.
Beginning on the earlier of the calendar year following the first commercial sale of a licensed product and the first business day of 2031, we are also obligated to pay certain minimum royalties, not to exceed an amount in the low hundreds of thousands of dollars on an annual basis, which minimum royalties are creditable against our royalty obligation with respect to net sales of licensed products due for the year in which the minimum royalty is paid.
If we or an affiliate sublicenses any of the licensed patent rights to a third party, we will be obligated to pay UFRF, on behalf of both licensors, a low double-digit percentage of the consideration received in exchange for such sublicense, with the applicable percentage based upon the stage of development of the sublicensed product at the time we or the applicable affiliate enters into the sublicense.
If we receive a rare pediatric disease priority review voucher from the FDA in connection with obtaining marketing approval for a licensed product and we subsequently use such priority review voucher in connection with a different product candidate, we will be obligated to pay UFRF, on behalf of both licensors, aggregate payments in the low double-digit millions of dollars based on certain marketing approval and commercial sales milestones with respect to such other product candidate. In addition, if we sell such a priority review voucher to a third party, we will be obligated to pay UFRF, on behalf of both licensors, a low double-digit percentage of any consideration received from such third party in connection with such sale.
For more information about the RHO-adRP License Agreement, please see the section entitled "Licensing and Other Arrangements-License Agreement with UFRF and Penn for IC-100" in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
RHO-adRP Master Sponsored Research Agreement
In June 2018, we also entered into a Master Sponsored Research Agreement, or the RHO-adRP Master SRA, with Penn. Under the RHO-adRP Master SRA, Penn has agreed to perform, on a project basis, certain sponsored research and to provide the results of such research to us. The scope of each project and certain associated terms, including financial terms, are to be specified in a statement of work for each project.
Under the RHO-adRP Master SRA, Penn has granted us an exclusive first option to obtain, for no additional consideration and pursuant to the terms of the RHO-adRP License Agreement, an exclusive license to any patents or patent applications resulting from the sponsored research that is fully-funded by us and that relate to the patent rights licensed under the RHO-adRP License Agreement. In addition, under the RHO-adRP Master SRA, Penn has granted us an exclusive first option to negotiate to acquire an exclusive license, on commercially reasonable terms, to any patents or patent applications resulting from the sponsored research that is not fully funded by us or do not relate to the patent rights licensed under the RHO-adRP License Agreement.
The initial term of the RHO-adRP Master SRA expires on June 6, 2021, provided that in the event of a termination of the RHO-adRP Master SRA, any statements of work in effect at the time of such termination shall continue in effect, subject to the terms of the RHO-adRP Master SRA, until expiration or termination of the applicable statement of work. Either party may terminate the RHO-adRP Master SRA or a statement of work if the other party breaches any of the terms or conditions of the RHO-adRP Master SRA or statement of work, as applicable, and does not cure such breach within a specified cure period. In addition, either party may terminate an applicable statement of work if the services of the applicable principal investigator are no longer available to Penn and an acceptable substitute is not appointed within an agreed-upon period. The RHO-adRP Master SRA contains indemnification and dispute resolution provisions that are customary for agreements of its kind.
We and Penn have entered into a series of statements of work under the RHO-adRP Master SRA pursuant to which Penn has conducted preclinical studies of IC-100 as well as a natural history study of RHO-adRP patients. The total amount of funding for the sponsored research covered by these statements of work that we have committed to date and are expecting to commit to is in the low single-digit millions of dollars.
BEST1 Gene Therapy Agreements with Penn and UFRF
BEST1 License Agreement
In May 2019, we paid Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, a $0.2 million upfront license issuance fee in connection with entry into the BEST1 License Agreement, which was recorded as a research and development expense, and we paid UFRF accrued patent prosecution expenses of approximately $18 thousand, which was recorded as a general and administrative expense. We have also agreed to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, an annual license maintenance fee in the low double-digit thousands of dollars, which fee will be payable on an annual basis until the first commercial sale of a licensed product. In addition, we have agreed to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, a one-time patent grant fee in the low triple-digit thousands of dollars, upon the issuance of a U.S. patent that claims inventions disclosed in the licensed patent rights or know-how or inventions generated under certain related sponsored research agreements with Penn or UFRF, and that is exclusively licensed to us. Furthermore, we have agreed to reimburse Penn and UFRF for the costs and expenses of patent prosecution and maintenance related to the licensed patent rights.
We have further agreed to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, up to an aggregate of $15.7 million if we achieve specified clinical, marketing approval and reimbursement approval milestones with respect to one licensed product, and up to an aggregate of an additional $3.1 million if we achieve these same milestones with respect to a different licensed product. In addition, we have agreed to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, up to an aggregate of $48.0 million if we achieve specified commercial sales milestones with respect to one licensed product, and up to an aggregate of an additional $9.6 million if we achieve these same milestones with respect to a different licensed product.
We are also obligated to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, royalties at a low single-digit percentage of net sales of licensed products. Such royalties are subject to customary deductions, credits, and reductions for lack of patent coverage and loss of regulatory exclusivity. In addition, such royalties with respect to any licensed product in any country may be offset by a specified portion of any royalty payments actually paid by us with respect to such licensed product in such country under third-party licenses to patent rights or other intellectual property rights that are necessary to research, develop, manufacture and commercialize the licensed product in such country. Our obligation to pay royalties under the BEST1 License Agreement will continue on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis until the latest of:
•the expiration of the last-to-expire licensed patent rights covering the sale of the applicable licensed product in the country of sale;
•the expiration of regulatory exclusivity covering the applicable licensed product in the country of sale; and
•10 years from the first commercial sale of the applicable licensed product in the country of sale.
Beginning on the earlier of the calendar year following the first commercial sale of a licensed product and calendar year 2032, we are also obligated to pay certain minimum royalties, not to exceed an amount in the mid tens of thousands of dollars on an annual basis, which minimum royalties are creditable against our royalty obligation with respect to net sales of licensed products due in the year the minimum royalty is paid.
If we or any of our affiliates sublicense any of the licensed patent rights to a third party, we will be obligated to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, a high single-digit to a mid ten's percentage of the consideration received in exchange for such sublicense, with the applicable percentage based upon the stage of development of the sublicensed product at the time we or the applicable affiliate enters into the sublicense.
If we receive a rare pediatric disease priority review voucher from the FDA in connection with obtaining marketing approval for a licensed product and we subsequently use such priority review voucher in connection with a different product candidate outside the scope of the BEST1 License Agreement, we will be obligated to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, aggregate payments in the low double-digit millions of dollars based on certain approval and commercial sales milestones with respect to such other product candidate. In addition, if we sell such a priority review voucher to a third party, we will be obligated to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, a high single-digit percentage of any consideration received from such third party in connection with such sale.
For more information about the BEST1 License Agreement, please see the section entitled "Licensing and Other Arrangements-License Agreement with Penn and UFRF for IC-200" in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
BEST1 Master Sponsored Research Agreement
In October 2018, we entered into a master sponsored research agreement with Penn, which we refer to as the BEST1 Master SRA. Under the BEST1 Master SRA, Penn agreed to perform, on a project basis, certain sponsored research and to
provide the results of such research to us. The scope of each project and certain associated terms, including financial terms, are specified in a statement of work for each project.
Under the BEST1 Master SRA, Penn has granted us an exclusive first option to obtain, for no additional consideration and pursuant to the terms of the BEST1 License Agreement, an exclusive license to any patents or patent applications resulting from the sponsored research that is fully funded by us. In addition, under the BEST1 Master SRA, Penn has granted us an exclusive first option to negotiate to acquire an exclusive license, on commercially reasonable terms, to any patents or patent applications resulting from the sponsored research that is not fully funded by us.
The initial term of the BEST1 Master SRA expires on October 30, 2021, provided that in the event of a termination of the BEST1 Master SRA, any statements of work in effect at the time of such termination shall continue in effect, subject to the terms of the BEST1 Master SRA, until expiration or termination of the applicable statement of work. Either party may terminate the BEST1 Master SRA or a statement of work if the other party breaches any of the terms or conditions of the BEST1 Master SRA or statement of work, as applicable, and does not cure such breach within a specified cure period. In addition, either party may terminate an applicable statement of work if the services of the applicable principal investigator are no longer available to Penn and an acceptable substitute is not appointed within an agreed-upon period. The BEST1 Master SRA contains indemnification and dispute resolution provisions that are customary for agreements of this kind.
We and Penn have entered into a series of statements of work under the BEST1 Master SRA pursuant to which Penn is conducting preclinical studies of IC-200, as well as natural history studies of patients with BEST1-related IRDs. The total amount of funding for the sponsored research covered by these statements of work that we have committed to date and expect to commit to is in the low single-digit millions of dollars.
miniCEP290 License Agreement with UMass
In July 2019, we issued to UMass 75,000 shares of our common stock following execution of the miniCEP290 License Agreement pursuant to an exemption from registration afforded by Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act. In September 2019, we paid UMass a $0.4 million upfront license fee, which was recorded as a research and development expense, and we paid UMass accrued patent prosecution expenses of approximately $18 thousand, which was recorded as a general and administrative expense.
We have also agreed to pay UMass an annual license maintenance fee in the low double-digit thousands of dollars, which fee will be payable on an annual basis until the expiration of the royalty term for the licensed products. Furthermore, we have agreed to reimburse UMass for the costs and expenses of patent prosecution and maintenance related to the licensed patent rights.
We have further agreed to pay UMass up to an aggregate of $14.75 million in cash and issue up to 75,000 shares of our common stock if we achieve specified clinical and regulatory milestones with respect to a licensed product. In addition, we have agreed to pay UMass up to an aggregate of $48.0 million if we achieve specified commercial sales milestones with respect to a licensed product.
We are also obligated to pay UMass royalties at a low single-digit percentage of net sales of licensed products. Our obligation to pay royalties under the miniCEP290 License Agreement will continue on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis until the later of: (a) the expiration of the last-to-expire licensed patent rights covering the sale of the applicable licensed product in the country of sale, or (b) 10 years from the first commercial sale of the applicable licensed product in the country of sale. Beginning with the calendar year following receipt of marketing approval for a licensed product, we are also obligated to pay certain minimum royalties, not to exceed an amount in the mid-double-digit thousands of dollars on an annual basis, which minimum royalties are creditable against our royalty obligation with respect to net sales of licensed products due in the year the minimum royalty is paid.
If we or any of our affiliates sublicenses any of the licensed patent rights or know-how to a third party, we will be obligated to pay UMass a high single-digit to a mid-tens percentage of the consideration received in exchange for such sublicense, with the applicable percentage based upon the stage of development of the licensed products at the time we or the applicable affiliate enters into the sublicense.
If we receive a rare pediatric disease priority review voucher, or a priority review voucher, from the FDA in connection with obtaining marketing approval for a licensed product, and we subsequently use such priority review voucher in connection with a different product candidate outside the scope of the miniCEP290 License Agreement, we will be obligated to pay UMass a low-tens percentage of the fair market value of the priority review voucher at the time of approval of such product
candidate and a low-twenties percentage of the fair market value of the priority review voucher at the time of achievement of a specified commercial sales milestone for such other product candidate. In addition, if we sell such a priority review voucher to a third party, we will be obligated to pay UMass a low-thirties percentage of any consideration received from such third party in connection with such sale.
For more information about the minicCEP290 License Agreement, please see the section entitled "Licensing and Other Arrangements-License Agreement with UMass for miniCEP290 Program" in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)This item includes our contracted obligations under our sponsored research agreements.
(2)This item includes our contractual commitments under certain of our manufacturing and supply agreements.
(3)This table does not include:
•any milestone payments which may become payable to third parties under license or acquisition agreements as the timing and likelihood of such payments are not known with certainty;
•any royalty payments to third parties as the amounts, timing and likelihood of such payments are not known;
•anticipated expenditures under supply agreements for periods for which we are not yet bound under binding purchase orders; or
•contracts that are entered into in the ordinary course of business that are not material in the aggregate in any period presented above.
In addition to the amounts set forth in the table above, we may be required, under the agreements under which we acquired rights to Zimura, IC-100, IC-200, IC-500 and our miniCEP290 program, to make milestone payments and/or pay royalties. These payments are described in further detail in the descriptions of the applicable agreements set forth in this section.
We also have letter agreements with certain employees that require the funding of a specific level of payments, if certain events, such as a termination of employment in connection with a change in control or termination of employment by the employee for good reason or by us without cause, occur. For a description of these obligations, see our definitive proxy statement on Schedule 14A for our 2020 annual meeting of stockholders, as filed with the SEC on April 28, 2020.
In addition, in the course of normal business operations, we have agreements with contract service providers to assist in the performance of our research and development and manufacturing activities. Expenditures to CROs and CDMOs represent significant costs in preclinical and clinical development. Subject to required notice periods and our obligations under binding purchase orders and any cancellation fees that we may be obligated to pay, we can elect to discontinue the work under these agreements at any time. We may also enter into additional collaborative research, contract research, manufacturing, and supplier agreements in the future, which may require upfront payments and/or long-term commitments of cash.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.