Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on July 31, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, or the initial business combination. We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth companies.
Index to Financial Statements
As of December 31, 2020, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from July 31, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 relates to our formation and our IPO. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the consummation of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the IPO. We have selected December 31 as our fiscal year end.
Our sponsor is Thayer Ventures Acquisition Holdings LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for our IPO was declared effective on December 10, 2020. On December 15, 2020, we closed the IPO and issued 17,250,000 units, which included 2,250,000 additional units to cover an over-allotment option we granted to the underwriters, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $172.5 million, and incurring offering costs of $9.2 million, inclusive of $6.9 million in deferred underwriting commissions and net of reimbursement from underwriters of $1.7 million. We refer to the shares of Class A common stock included in the units as the public shares.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated a private placement of 7,175,000 warrants, at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, to our sponsor, generating proceeds of $7.2 million.
Upon the closing of the IPO and the private placement, $176.0 million ($10.20 per unit) of the net proceeds of the IPO and certain of the proceeds from the private placement were placed in a trust account located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, which will be invested only in U.S. government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
If we are unable to complete a business combination before June 15, 2022, which is 18 months from the closing of our IPO, and our stockholders have not amended our certificate of incorporation to extend such date, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case, to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 15, 2020 was related to our formation and IPO. Since the IPO, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial business combination target. We will not generate any operating revenues until the consummation of our initial business combination. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from July 31, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $192,000, which consisted of $109,000 in general and administrative expenses, $84,000 in franchise tax expense, offset by $325 in interest and investment income in the Trust Account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.2 million outside of the trust account and $1.4 million of working capital, excluding amount of franchise tax payable.
Index to Financial Statements
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our sponsor to cover certain on our IPO in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, and loan proceeds from the sponsor of $400,000 under a promissory note. We repaid the promissory note in full on December 15, 2020, concurrent with the closing of our IPO. Subsequent to the closing of the IPO, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through the net proceeds from the IPO and the private placement that are held outside of the trust account.
Based on the foregoing, we believe that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our sponsor, or an affiliate of our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors, to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Over this time period, we intend to use these funds to pay existing accounts payable, identify and evaluate prospective initial business combination candidates, perform due diligence on prospective target businesses, pay for travel expenditures, select a target business to merge with or acquire, and structure, negotiate and consummate the initial business combination.
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization, or WHO, announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus (COVID-19). In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related advisories and restrictions. These developments and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the financial markets and the overall economy are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the financial markets and/or the overall economy are impacted for an extended period, our results of operations, financial position and cash flows may be materially adversely affected. Additionally, our ability to complete an initial business combination, may be adversely affected due to significant governmental measures being implemented to contain the COVID-19 pandemic or treat its impact, including travel restrictions, the shutdown of businesses and quarantines, among others, which may limit our ability to have meetings with potential investors or affect the ability of a potential target company’s personnel, vendors and service providers to negotiate and consummate an initial business combination in a timely manner. Our ability to consummate an initial business combination may also depend on our ability to raise additional equity and debt financing, which may be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration Rights
The holders of the founder shares and private placement warrants are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement we entered into in connection with our IPO. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands that we register such securities, subject to specified conditions. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the consummation of the business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not be required to effect or permit any registration or cause any registration statement to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $3.45 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the IPO. The underwriters also made a payment to us in an amount equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $1.7 million in the aggregate to reimburse certain of our expenses.
An additional fee of $0.40 per unit, or $6.9 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete our initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Index to Financial Statements
Deferred Consulting Fees
In September 2020, we entered into an engagement letter with a consultant to obtain advisory services in connection with our search for a business combination target, pursuant to which we agreed to pay a $10,000 initial fee upon execution and a deferred success fee of $50,000 upon the consummation of our initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Investments Held in Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in trust is comprised solely of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. Our investments held in the trust account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these investments are included in net gain from investments held in trust account in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the trust account are determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including shares of Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, assuming the payment of deferred underwriting commissions of $6.9 million and the closing of our initial business combination, 16,210,906 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption at the redemption amount were presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the IPO and the private placement to purchase an aggregate of 15,800,000 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted earnings per common share is the same as basic earnings per common share for the period presented.
Our statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. Net loss per common stock, basic and diluted for Class A common stock is calculated by dividing the net gain on investments held in the Trust Account of approximately $325, net of applicable income and franchise taxes of approximately $325 for the period from July 31, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, respectively, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock outstanding for the periods. Net loss per common stock, basic and diluted for Class B common stock for the period from July 31, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 is calculated by dividing the net loss of approximately $192,000, less net income attributable to Class A common stock of approximately $0, resulting in a net loss of approximately $192,000, by the weighted average number of Class B common stock outstanding for the period.
Index to Financial Statements
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We have elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (1) the last day of the fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our shares of Class A common stock that is held by non-affiliates equals or exceeds $700 million as of the prior June 30th, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.