ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations are based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent liabilities. On an on-going basis, management evaluates past estimates and judgments, including those related to bad debts, inventories, accrued liabilities, derivative liabilities, and contingencies. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The Company believes the following critical accounting policies affect its more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue based on the five-step model for revenue recognition as prescribed by ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, as follows: (1) identify the contract with the customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the prices to the performance obligations; and (5) recognize revenue. The Company has some agreements that contain general commercial terms and product prices but do not contain an obligation to provide goods to the customer. Our performance obligation, which is established when the customer submits a purchase order and the Company accepts the order, is to deliver the product based on the purchase order received. The Company typically recognizes revenue at the time of shipment, at which time the title passes to the customer, and there are no further performance obligations.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company measures and recognizes expense for all share-based payments at fair value. The Company uses the Black-Scholes option valuation model to estimate fair value for all stock options on the date of grant. For stock options that vest over time, the Company recognizes compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for the entire award. The Company recognizes forfeitures as they occur.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs, including salaries, benefits, and share-based compensation, research materials, facility overhead, lab supplies, depreciation, administrative expenses and contractor fees, are charged to operations as incurred.
Legal Contingencies
The Company may, in the ordinary course of business, be involved in legal proceedings involving securities, contractual and employment relationships, product liability claims, patent rights, environmental matters, and a variety of other matters, the outcomes of which are not within the Company’s complete control and may not be known for extended periods of time. Legal costs associated with defending these matters are expensed as incurred.
The Company records a liability in its consolidated financial statements for damages and/or costs related to claims, settlements, and judgments where the Company has assessed that the loss is probable and an amount can be reasonably estimated.
Results of Operations
Financial presentation
The following sets forth a discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal years ended 2021, 2020, and 2019. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Item 1A - Risk Factors,” beginning on page 25 of this Report. (In thousands)
(a) Expressed as a percentage of sales, net
Sales
Fiscal 2021 sales, net increased 4% compared to fiscal 2020. The main driver of this growth was a 68% increase in other sales primarily due to increased treatments for brain cancer, including GammaTile™. In addition, part of the sales growth was due to moderate price increases that were implemented in January 2020. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in prostate cancer treatments that we believe was due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic from stay-at-home orders in various states as well as hospitals' focus on treating COVID-19 patients.
Fiscal 2020 sales, net increased 32% compared to fiscal 2019. The Company’s sales personnel continued to bring on new accounts while also working with existing customers to increase their order volumes. GammaTile™ and the Blu Build™ loader, while in a limited market release during part of the fiscal year, also helped to increase revenues during fiscal 2020. In addition, part of the sales growth was due to moderate price increases that were implemented during the middle of fiscal year 2020.
(a) Expressed as a percentage of sales, net
Prostate Brachytherapy.
Prostate sales were down approximately 6% in fiscal 2021. We believe that due to stay-at-home orders in various states and hospitals' focus on COVID-19, patients' brachytherapy procedures were either delayed or cancelled. This led to a decrease in sales for prostate treatments during fiscal year 2021 when compared to fiscal year 2020. The decrease in sales volume was partially offset by a price increase that occurred in January 2020.
Management believes continued growth in prostate brachytherapy revenues will be the result of physicians, payors, and patients increasingly considering overall treatment advantages including costs compared with non-brachytherapy treatments, better treatment outcomes and improvement in the quality of life for patients. The American Cancer Society estimates that nearly 250,000 new prostate cancer cases will be diagnosed in calendar year 2021, which represents an increase of approximately 30% over the calendar year 2020 estimate (American Cancer Society, 2021). This increase is due to patients being unable to access treatment or putting treatment off due to the COVID pandemic, but there is no assurance that this will occur and if it occurs that it will have a positive impact on the Company's performance. We believe the trend to use brachytherapy in lieu of other options is starting to improve our performance but there is no assurance as to how long this trend will continue.
Management believes increased pressure to deliver effective healthcare in both terms of outcome and cost drove treatment options in fiscal 2021 with prostate brachytherapy receiving more consideration than in previous years.
Other Sales.
Other sales include but is not limited to brain, lung, head/neck, gynecological, pelvic treatments, and services. Other sales grew by approximately 68% in fiscal 2021. The main driver of this growth was increased treatments for brain cancer including GammaTile™. Initial applications for these other brachytherapy treatments are primarily used in recurrent cancer treatments or salvage cases that are generally difficult to treat aggressive cancers where other treatment options are either ineffective or unavailable.
Other brachytherapy treatments are subject to the influence of a small pool of innovative physicians who are the early adopters of the technology who also tend to be faculty at teaching hospitals training the next generation of physicians. This causes the revenue created by these types of treatment applications to be more volatile and varies significantly from year to year. Additionally, with other brachytherapy surgical procedures there remains inconsistency and uncertainty regarding reimbursement for the procedures. This unreliable reimbursement for these new procedures will remain until specific coding and coverage policies are established, which could take years. Individual centers weigh the value of the procedure with their other treatment priorities on a patient by patient basis. Isoray believes that additional clinical data will begin to build a compelling argument to support reimbursement and increased adoption of the procedures; however, any growth will be inconsistent in the near term.
GammaTile™.
For several years the Company has focused on many different applications of its Cesium-131 brachytherapy seeds in the cranial cavity to target many forms of brain cancer. Most recently, the Company has focused on using braided strand configurations and on a collaboration with GammaTile, LLC, now known as GT Medical Technologies, Inc. (GT Med Tech), which has a technology which use biodegradable “tiles” to deliver the Cesium-131 brachytherapy seeds into contact with cancerous tumors in the brain.
GammaTile™ Therapy was in a limited market release beginning in January 2019 and in a full market release beginning in January 2020. Total revenues from sales to GT Med Tech in fiscal 2021 were slightly more than ten percent of total revenues. While GT Med Tech continues to assure Isoray that its sales and marketing efforts will show steady improvements in sales there is no assurance this will occur.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales consisted primarily of the costs of manufacturing and distributing the Company’s products. The fiscal 2021 increase was primarily the result of increased labor and materials costs. Labor expenses increased by $156,000 due to additional headcount as well as annual merit increases. Materials isotope costs increased by $126,000. Higher freight costs for isotope resulted from the use of cargo flights rather than passenger flights to transport isotope from Russia to our facility due to the COVID-19 pandemic's impact on passenger flights. In addition, due to lower than anticipated sales volumes, we had excess isotope on hand which went unused. Non-isotope materials costs increased $63,000 due to increased ordering of some items in an effort to mitigate any potential supply chain issues due to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as price increases from some of our suppliers.
The fiscal 2020 increase was primarily due to higher sales volumes that led to increased labor expenses and non-isotope materials costs offset by decreased isotope costs. Labor expenses increased by $168,000 as the Company had more production volume due to higher sales. Non-isotope materials costs also increased by $270,000 due to increased sales volume and an increase in the ratio of preloaded seeds (stranded, Blu Build™, etc.) compared to loose seeds sold. Beginning in the first fiscal quarter of 2019, the Company reduced the amount of Cesium-131 provided by the MURR reactor by approximately thirty-five percent. After a thorough review of the capacity and quality of production at the MURR facility, the Company determined to terminate its supply agreement with MURR and the last shipment of isotope from MURR was received in January 2019. These changes led to a $165,000 decrease in isotope cost during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 despite increased sales volumes.
During both fiscal 2020 and 2021, the Company purchased isotope in excess of known customer orders to provide enough isotope to fill anticipated orders which may or may not materialize. The excess isotope is utilized in the production of upcoming orders where possible considering the decay rates of Cesuim-131. Any loss of isotope to decay is also included as a cost of production during the current period.
Management anticipates an increase in costs of goods sold for the six-month period ended December 31, 2021 resulting from an increased volume of isotope purchases related to its initial set up of a second nuclear reactor associated with its consignment of enriched barium and purchase of enriched barium carbonate needed for Cesium-131 production at the RIAR facility.
Research and development expenses
Research and development consisted primarily of the costs related to employee and third-party research and development activities. The fiscal 2021 increase was due mainly to increases in protocol, payroll, and consulting expenses. The Company conducted new research which contributed to a $122,000 increase in protocol expenses. Payroll expenses increased by $184,000 due to the expansion of our research and development team through reallocating existing resources and adding additional headcount as well as annual merit increases. Consulting expenses relating to market research increased by $124,000.
The decrease in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was mainly due to reduced expenses related to developmental costs for the Blu Build™ loader and decrease in protocol expenses as existing protocols were completed and new ones had not yet started. These factors led to a decrease of $415,000 in fiscal 2020. This decrease was offset by an increase in payroll costs as the company shifted some internal resources to spend more time on research and development activities.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of the costs related to the internal and external activities of the Company’s sales, marketing and customer service division. The fiscal 2021 decrease was due to reduced payroll of $334,000 resulting from lower sales growth when compared to fiscal 2020 and the reversal of share based compensation expense upon separation of our former Executive Vice President of Sales and Marketing, as well as reduced travel of $132,000 and conventions and tradeshow expense of $28,000 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The fiscal 2020 increase was due to increased payroll of $423,000 due to incentive compensation related to the increase in sales. This increase was offset by a reduction of $130,000 in travel due to reduced travel as a result of the COVID-19 global health pandemic.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of the costs related to the executive, quality assurance and regulatory affairs (QA/RA), finance, human resources and information technology functions of the Company. The increase in fiscal 2021 is due to a payroll increase of $145,000 resulting from increased headcount and annual merit increases, increased insurance premiums primarily relating to D&O insurance of $74,000, increased consulting expenses primarily from information technology consulting of $56,000, employment hiring expense increased by $45,000, and software costs increased by $27,000. These were partially offset by decreased public company related expenses of $109,000, reduced legal fees of $56,000, and fewer travel expenses of $56,000 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the majority of annual employee and director stock grants have historically been granted in the fiscal fourth quarter, however this year’s awards were granted in July 2021, subsequent to the close of the fiscal fourth quarter 2021, thus reducing share-based stock compensation expense in the full-year fiscal year-end 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year.
The increase in fiscal 2020 is primarily the result of higher payroll of $458,000 due to incentive compensation and promotions, increased insurance premiums of $68,000 primarily relating to D&O insurance (which increased industry-wide), other expense of $50,000 primarily related to employee relations and hiring expense, and public company expense of $50,000 mostly relating to the at the market offering, and overhead recovery of $38,000 due to no shared costs with GT Medical Technologies. These were partially offset by decreased legal fees of $107,000, materials of $92,000, and travel of $64,000.
Impact of COVID-19
From the onset of the COVID-19 global health pandemic we have been proactive in implementing plans to ensure the health and well-being of our employees, while remaining focused on providing uninterrupted product flow to the physicians and patients who count on us. We seamlessly transitioned many employees to work from home and made other adjustments to ensure the continuity of our business through this time. At the beginning of the pandemic, we moved quickly to ensure that our inventory of non-isotope supplies were appropriate in case our supply chain was disrupted. In addition, we set in motion our strategy to maintain a continuous and uninterrupted supply of isotope from our suppliers in Russia including the review of alternative freight services due to the cancellation of many international flights.
As COVID-19 spread, many states implemented new guidelines in an attempt to mitigate the spread of the virus and to conserve certain medical supplies. Those guidelines led to the cancellation or postponement of elective and non-emergency surgical procedures, including prostate brachytherapy procedures. During fiscal year 2021, our sales revenues increased 4% compared to the fiscal year 2020, but we were still below the average monthly prostate revenues attained in our third quarter of fiscal year 2020 prior to the onset of COVID-19's impact on our operations. We believe this is due to stay-at-home orders and hospitals’ focus on COVID-19, resulting in a delay or cancellation of patients scheduled to be seen by physicians. This resulted in fewer or delayed urology referrals for prostate brachytherapy treatment.
As more states gradually lift restrictions on non-essential surgeries and other activities, we have received customer feedback of anticipated increases in implant volumes as patients begin returning from quarantines for office visits and consultations but there is no assurance this will occur or be sustained or what impact variants such as the Delta variant might cause to our operations. In the meantime, we continue to tightly manage our expenses and make fluid adjustments to isotope orders to meet potential increased treatment demands.
Liquidity and capital resources
The Company assesses its liquidity in terms of its ability to generate cash to fund its operating, investing and financing activities. The Company has historically financed its operations through selling equity to investors. During fiscal 2021, the Company raised approximately $56,375,000 pursuant to two underwritten offerings, approximately $7,784,000 pursuant to the exercise of warrants to purchase common stock, and approximately $534,000 pursuant to the exercise of options to purchase common stock. Some of these funds were used in fiscal 2021 and existing cash reserves from prior capital raises were used to fund the Company's operations and capital expenditures during fiscal 2021 and 2020 respectively.
Our cash flows for fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019 respectively, are summarized as follows (in thousands):
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash used by operating activities in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to a net loss of $3.39 million net of approximately $617,000 in adjustments for non-cash activity such as depreciation and amortization expense, the accretion of asset retirement obligation, and share-based compensation. Changes in operating assets and liabilities contributed approximately $67,000 to the cash used by operating activities.
Net cash used by operating activities in fiscal 2020 was primarily due to a net loss of $3.45 million net of approximately $640,000 in adjustments for non-cash activity such as depreciation and amortization expense, the accretion of asset retirement obligation, and share-based compensation. Changes in operating assets and liabilities contributed approximately $835,000 to the cash used by operating activities.
Net cash used by operating activities in fiscal 2019 was primarily due to a net loss of $5.14 million net of approximately $613,000 in adjustments for non-cash activity such as depreciation and amortization expense, the accretion of asset retirement obligation, and share-based compensation. Changes in operating assets and liabilities contributed approximately $518,000 to the cash used by operating activities.
Cash flows from investing activities
Investing activities for all years are presented by primary transaction category. Investing activities consisted of transactions related to the purchase of fixed assets as well as the purchase and subsequent maturity of certificates of deposit or US Treasury Bills. Management will continue to invest in technology and machinery that improves and streamlines production processes and to invest and reinvest maturing certificates of deposit and US Treasury Bills in low-risk investment opportunities that safeguard assets and provide greater assurance those resources will be liquid and available for business needs as they arise.
Cash flows from financing activities
Financing activities for all years are presented by primary transaction category. Financing activities in fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019 were primarily due to sales of common stock through an underwritten offering, net, a registered direct offering, net, at the market offerings, net, and warrant and option exercises each net of preferred dividends paid. Financing activities were significantly increased in fiscal 2021 compared to 2020 and 2019 due to the underwritten offerings, net.
Projected FY 2022 Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating activities
Management forecasts that fiscal 2022 cash requirements will be similar to previous years and that current cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet projected operating cash needs for the next twelve months. Monthly operating expenses are budgeted to increase for sales and marketing, research and development and general and administrative expenses in fiscal 2022 as management works to implement its strategy. Assuming no extraordinary expenses occur (whether operating or capital), if management is successful at implementing its strategy to focus on renewed emphasis to drive the consumer to the prostate market and meets or exceeds its growth targets of twenty-five percent increase in revenue in fiscal 2022 and this annual growth continues, the Company anticipates reaching cashflow break-even in three to four years. These assumptions do assume that GammaTile™ will contribute to total revenue but do not incorporate any significant growth in the other non-prostate applications as they generate nominal revenues today but if they show significant improvement, cashflow break-even could occur sooner. There is no assurance that the targeted sales growth will materialize but management is encouraged by the depth and experience of its sales team and its track record of growth during the last three fiscal years.
Capital expenditures
Management has completed the design of a future production and administration facility. If suitable construction financing is obtained and the facility constructed, it is believed that the new facility will have non-cash depreciation cost equal to or greater than the monthly rental cost of the current facility.
Management is reviewing all aspects of production operations (including process automation), research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative functions to evaluate the most efficient deployment of capital to ensure that the appropriate materials, systems, and personnel are available to support and drive sales.
During fiscal 2021, the Company made only nominal investment in the automation of production processes. Beginning in fiscal 2017 and continuing through fiscal 2021, the Company has invested approximately $1,064,000 in the automation of five production processes. The equipment developed for all five processes have been placed in service as of the end of fiscal 2021. This investment was implemented to allow the Company to significantly increase the output of Cesium-131 brachytherapy seeds, while allowing the Company to decrease the labor costs related to seed production and also improving the overall safety of our operations.
Financing activities
On January 23, 2020, the Company filed a Form S-3 registration statement which became effective on February 4, 2020, with the potential to register up to $80 million of equity securities. On March 31, 2020, the Company entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Oppenheimer & Co., Inc. (“Oppenheimer”). The common stock sold pursuant to the Agreement was distributed at the market prices prevailing at the time of sale. The Agreement provided that Oppenheimer would be entitled to compensation for its services at a commission rate of 3.0% of the gross sales price per share of common stock sold plus reimbursement of certain expenses. As of June 30, 2020, the Company had sold an aggregate of 1,247,232 shares under the Agreement at an average price of approximately $0.738 per common share for gross proceeds of approximately $920,000 and net proceeds of approximately $874,000. No shares were sold under this Agreement during fiscal year 2021. On October 19, 2020, the Company terminated the Agreement, effective on the same date.
On October 22, 2020, the Company sold 18,269,230 shares of its common stock at a price of $0.52 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $9,500,000, pursuant to the registration statement on Form S-3 that became effective on February 4, 2020. The net proceeds from the offering were approximately $8,471,000. Additionally, the Company issued to the purchasers warrants to purchase up to 9,134,615 shares of common stock. The warrants have an exercise price of $0.57 per share of common stock, are exercisable immediately, and expire five years from the date of issuance. If exercised for cash, future exercises of these warrants will provide additional capital to the Company.
On February 8, 2021, the Company sold 36,000,000 shares of its common stock at a price of $1.25 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $45,000,000, pursuant to the registration statement on Form S-3 that became effective on February 4, 2020. Additionally, the Company granted the underwriters an option to purchase an additional 5,400,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $1.25 per share for the purpose of covering overallotments, which was exercised on February 8, 2021 and generated gross proceeds of approximately $6,750,000. Total gross proceeds from the offering were approximately $51,750,000 and total net proceeds were approximately $47,904,000.
During fiscal 2021, the Company received approximately $7.8 million as a result of the exercise of 12,318,877 warrants to purchase common stock and $0.5 million as a result of the exercise of 970,315 options to purchase common stock.
When it does require capital in the future, the Company expects to finance its cash needs through sales of equity, possible strategic collaborations, debt financing or through other sources that may be dilutive to existing stockholders, Management anticipates that if it raises additional financing that it will be at a discount to the market price and it will be dilutive to stockholders.
Other Commitments and Contingencies
The Company’s purchase commitments and obligations include all open purchase orders and contractual obligations entered into in the ordinary course of business, including commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers, for which we have not received the goods or services and acquisition and licensing of intellectual property. Although open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and/or adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. Non-cancellable purchase commitments and obligations that will exist beyond fiscal 2022 and that are not separately presented as a liability on the balance sheet are listed below (in thousands):
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Impact of Inflation
Inflation had minimal impact on our net sales and revenues or on loss from continuing operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Accounting Standards Updates Adopted
In November 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-18, Collaborative Arrangements (Topic 808): Clarifying the Interaction Between Topic 808 and Topic 606, which, among other things, provides guidance on how to assess whether certain collaborative arrangement transactions should be accounted for under Topic 606. The amendments in this ASU are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019, with early adoption permitted. The standard was adopted on July 1, 2020 and had no effect on the consolidated financial statements.
Accounting Standards Updates to Become Effective in Future Periods
Other accounting standards that have been issued or proposed by FASB that do not require adoption until a future date are not expected to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements upon adoption. The Company does not discuss recent pronouncements that are not anticipated to have an impact on or are unrelated to its financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or disclosures.