Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of the financial condition and results of our operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes to those statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the Risk Factors set forth in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, clinical development and commercialization of innovative, small molecule drugs that address underserved medical needs primarily in neuropsychiatric and neurological disorders by targeting intracellular signaling mechanisms within the central nervous system, or CNS. In December 2019 CAPLYTA (lumateperone) was approved by the FDA for the treatment of schizophrenia in adults (42mg/day) and we initiated the commercial launch of CAPLYTA in late March 2020. In support of our commercialization efforts, we employ a national sales force consisting of approximately 240 sales representatives. As used in this report, “CAPLYTA” refers to lumateperone approved by the FDA for the treatment of schizophrenia in adults, and “lumateperone” refers to, where applicable, CAPLYTA as well as lumateperone for the treatment of indications beyond schizophrenia.
Lumateperone is also in Phase 3 clinical development as a novel treatment for bipolar depression. Our lumateperone bipolar depression clinical program consists of three monotherapy studies and one adjunctive study. In September 2020, we announced positive topline results from Study 402, conducted globally, evaluating lumateperone as adjunctive therapy to lithium or valproate in the treatment of major depressive episodes associated with Bipolar I or Bipolar II disorder. In Study 402, once daily lumateperone 42 mg met the primary endpoint for improvement in depression as measured by change from baseline versus placebo on the Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale, or MADRS, total score (p=0.0206; effect size = 0.27). Lumateperone 42 mg also met the key secondary endpoint, the Clinical Global Impression Scale for Bipolar for Severity of Illness, or CGI-BP-S,
Depression Score (p=0.0082; effect size = 0.31). The lower lumateperone dose, 28 mg, showed a trend for a dose-related improvement in symptoms of depression but the results did not reach statistical significance. In the first quarter of 2020, we initiated our third monotherapy Phase 3 study, Study 403, evaluating lumateperone as monotherapy in the treatment of major depressive episodes associated with Bipolar I or Bipolar II disorder. Following the positive results in Study 402, we amended Study 403 to evaluate major depressive episodes with mixed features in bipolar disorder in patients with Bipolar I or Bipolar II disorder and mixed features in patients with major depressive disorder, or MDD. We expect to complete Study 403 in the second half of 2022 and following completion we intend to discuss the results with the FDA to determine whether Study 403, as amended, will provide supportive data for a potential future regulatory filing for this indication.
In July 2019, we announced topline results from our first monotherapy study, Study 401, conducted in the United States, and our second monotherapy study, Study 404, conducted globally, evaluating lumateperone as monotherapy in the treatment of major depressive episodes associated with Bipolar I or Bipolar II disorder. In Study 404, lumateperone 42 mg met the primary endpoint for improvement in depression as measured by change from baseline versus placebo on the MADRS total score (p<0.0001; effect size = 0.56). These benefits were statistically significant in both Bipolar I and Bipolar II patients. Study 404 also met its key secondary endpoint, Clinical Global Impression Scale for Bipolar for Severity of Illness (CGI-BP-S)
Total Score (p<0.001; effect size = 0.46). Study 401 tested two doses of lumateperone, 42 mg and 28mg along with placebo. In this trial, neither dose of lumateperone met the primary endpoint of statistical separation from placebo as measured by change
from baseline on the MADRS total score. There was a high placebo response in this trial. Lumateperone was generally well-tolerated in all three bipolar depression studies, with a favorable safety profile.
In addition, while our Phase 3 bipolar depression trials were powered for the overall patient population and not powered for subpopulation analyses, statistically significant benefit versus placebo was seen in the subgroup of patients with Bipolar I and Bipolar II disorder in Study 404 and in patients with Bipolar I disorder in Study 402, but the Bipolar II subgroup was not statistically significant in Study 402. In February 2021, we submitted supplemental new drug applications, or sNDAs, to the FDA for potential regulatory approval of lumateperone for the treatment of bipolar depression in patients with Bipolar I or II disorder as monotherapy and adjunctive therapy. Assuming the sNDA submissions are accepted by the FDA, we anticipate an FDA target action date for the sNDAs in the second half of 2021.
We are also pursuing clinical development of lumateperone for the treatment of additional CNS diseases and disorders. At a dose of 42 mg, lumateperone has been shown effective in treating the symptoms associated with schizophrenia, and we believe lumateperone may represent a potential treatment for mood disorders including MDD, post-traumatic stress disorder and intermittent explosive disorder. We have commenced our program of lumateperone in MDD evaluating lumateperone as an adjunctive therapy to antidepressants for the treatment of MDD and we expect to initiate clinical conduct in two Phase 3 trials in 2021.
Within the lumateperone portfolio, we are also developing a long-acting injectable formulation to provide more treatment options to patients suffering from mental illness. We have completed the preclinical development of a long-acting injectable formulation and in December 2020 we initiated a Phase 1 single ascending dose study of lumateperone LAI, a formulation of lumateperone designed to be administered subcutaneously and to maintain therapeutic levels of lumateperone for at least one month. This study will evaluate the pharmacokinetics, safety and tolerability of lumateperone LAI in patients with stable symptoms of schizophrenia. We anticipate topline results from this study will be available in the second half of 2021. Results from this study will inform the dosing strategy for future studies. Given the encouraging tolerability data to date with oral lumateperone, we believe that a long-acting injectable option, in particular, may lend itself to being an important formulation choice for certain patients.
We hold exclusive, worldwide commercialization rights to lumateperone and a family of compounds from Bristol-Myers Squibb Company pursuant to an exclusive license.
We are developing ITI-1284 for the treatment of behavioral disturbances in patients with dementia, the treatment of dementia-related psychosis and for the treatment of certain depressive disorders in the elderly. ITI-1284 is a deuterated form of lumateperone, a new molecular entity formulated as an oral disintegrating tabl et for sublingual administration. ITI-1284 is formulated as an oral solid dosage form that dissolves almost instantly when placed under the tongue, allowing for ease of use in the elderly and may be particularly beneficial for patients who have difficulty swallowing conventional tablets. Phase 1 single and multiple ascending dose studies in healthy volunteers and healthy elderly volunteers (> than 65 years of age) evaluated the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of ITI-1284. In these studies, there were no reported serious adverse events in either age group. In the elderly cohort, reported adverse events were infrequent with the most common adverse event being transient dry mouth (mild). Based on these studies, we plan to initiate Phase 2 studies evaluating ITI-1284 for the treatment of behavioral disturbances in dementia, dementia-related psychosis, and certain depressive disorders in the elderly.
We have another major program called ITI-002
that has yielded a portfolio of compounds that selectively inhibit the enzyme phosphodiesterase type 1, or PDE1. PDE1 enzymes are highly active in multiple disease states and our PDE1 inhibitors are designed to reestablish normal function in these disease states. Abnormal PDE1 activity is associated with cellular proliferation and activation of inflammatory cells. Our PDE1 inhibitors ameliorate both of these effects in animal models. We intend to pursue the development of our phosphodiesterase, or PDE, program, for the treatment aberrant immune system activation in several CNS and non-CNS
conditions with a focus on diseases where excessive PDE1 activity has been demonstrated and increased inflammation is an important contributor to disease pathogenesis. Our potential disease targets include
heart failure, immune system regulation, neurodegenerative diseases, cancers and other non-CNS
disorders. ITI-214
is our lead compound in this program. We believe ITI-214
is the first compound in its class to successfully advance into Phase 1 clinical trials. Following the favorable safety and tolerability results in our Phase 1 program, we initiated our development program for ITI-214
for Parkinson’s disease and commenced patient enrollment in the third quarter of 2017 in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of ITI-214
in patients with Parkinson’s disease to evaluate safety and tolerability in this patient population, as well as motor and non-motor
exploratory endpoints. In the fourth quarter of 2018, we announced that the Phase 1/2 clinical trial of ITI-214
has been completed and topline results demonstrated ITI-214
was generally well-tolerated with a favorable safety profile and clinical signs consistent with improvements in motor symptoms and dyskinesias. We plan to initiate a Phase 2 clinical trial with ITI-214 for Parkinson’s disease in 2021. In addition, in the second quarter of 2020, we announced topline results from Study ITI-214-104,
a Phase 1/2 translational study of single ascending doses of ITI-214
in patients with chronic systolic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. In this study, ITI-214
improved cardiac output by increasing heart contractility and decreasing vascular resistance. Agents that both increase heart contractility (inotropism) and decrease vascular resistance (vasodilation) are called inodilators. Inodilators in current clinical use are associated with the development of arrhythmias, which are abnormal heart rhythms that when serious can impair heart function and lead to mortality. ITI-214,
which acts through a novel mechanism of action, was not associated with arrhythmias in this study and was generally well-tolerated in all patients.
We also have a development program with our ITI-333
compound as a potential treatment for substance use disorders, pain and psychiatric comorbidities including depression and anxiety. There is a pressing need to develop new drugs to treat opioid addiction and safe, effective, non-addictive
treatments to manage pain. ITI-333
is a novel compound that uniquely combines activity as an antagonist at serotonin 5-HT2A
receptors and a partial agonist at µ-opioid receptors. These combined actions support the potential utility of ITI-333
in the treatment of opioid use disorder and associated comorbidities (e.g., depression, anxiety, sleep disorders) without opioid-like safety and tolerability concerns. In December 2020, we initiated a Phase 1 single ascending dose study evaluating the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of ITI-333
in healthy volunteers. We have received a grant from the National Institute on Drug Abuse under the Helping to End Addiction Long-term Initiative, or NIH HEAL Initiative, that we expect will fund a significant portion of the early stage clinical development costs associated with this program.
We have assembled a management team with significant industry experience to lead the discovery, development and potential commercialization of our product candidates. We complement our management team with a group of scientific and clinical advisors that includes recognized experts in the fields of schizophrenia and other CNS disorders.
COVID-19
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2,
which causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19),
surfaced in Wuhan, China. Since then, SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 have spread to multiple countries, including the United States. The COVID-19 pandemic is evolving, and to date has led to the implementation of various responses, including government-imposed quarantines, travel restrictions and other public health safety measures. In response to the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19, we have instructed the majority of our office-based employees to work from home. In connection with our commercial launch of CAPLYTA, which is approved by FDA for the treatment of schizophrenia in adults, our commercial organization and sales force and medical organization are having significantly reduced personal interactions with physicians and customers and increasingly conduct promotional activities virtually, and elected to cease in-person interactions with physicians and customers entirely for some period of time in the interest of employee and community safety. Even though certain of our sales force and medical organization have begun to have personal interactions with physicians and customers, we may have to cease such personal interactions depending on the COVID-19 situation. In addition, the COVID-19 situation has resulted in a decrease in the number of patient visits to healthcare providers. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, or similar pandemics, we may experience disruptions that could severely impact our business, including our ability to successfully
commercialize our only commercial product, CAPLYTA, in the United States, and these disruptions could negatively impact our sales of CAPLYTA. Business interruptions from the current or future pandemics may also adversely impact the third parties we rely on to sufficiently manufacture CAPLYTA and to produce our product candidates in quantities we require, which may impair the commercialization and our research and development activities.
We are currently conducting clinical trials for our product candidates in many countries, including the United States, Europe and Russia and may expand to other geographies. Timely enrollment of, completion of and reporting on our clinical trials is dependent upon these global clinical trial sites which are, or in the future may be, adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic
or other pandemics. Some factors from the COVID-19
pandemic that have or may adversely affect the timing and conduct of our clinical trials and adversely impact our business generally, include but are not limited to delays or difficulties in clinical site initiation, patient enrollment, diversion of healthcare resources away from clinical trials to pandemic concerns, limitations on travel, regulatory delays and supply chain disruptions.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
on March 10, 2020, the FDA announced its intention to temporarily postpone most inspections of foreign manufacturing facilities and products. On March 18, 2020, the FDA announced its intention to temporarily postpone routine surveillance inspections of domestic manufacturing facilities and provided guidance regarding the conduct of clinical trials, which has since been further updated. As of June 23, 2020, the FDA noted it was continuing to ensure timely reviews of applications for medical products during the COVID-19 pandemic
in line with its user fee performance goals and conducting mission critical domestic and foreign inspections to ensure compliance of manufacturing facilities with FDA quality standards. As of July 2020, utilizing a rating system to assist in determining when and where it is safest to conduct such inspections based on data about the virus’ trajectory in a given state and locality and the rules and guidelines that are put in place by state and local governments, FDA is either continuing to, on a case-by-case basis,
conduct only mission critical inspections, or, where possible to do so safely, resuming prioritized domestic inspections, which generally include pre-approval inspections.
Foreign pre-approval inspections
that are not deemed mission-critical remain postponed, while those deemed mission-critical will be considered for inspection on a case-by-case basis.
FDA will use similar data to inform resumption of prioritized operations abroad as it becomes feasible and advisable to do so. The FDA may not be able to maintain this pace and delays or setbacks are possible in the future. Should FDA determine that an inspection is necessary for approval and an inspection cannot be completed during the review cycle due to restrictions on travel, FDA has stated that it generally intends to issue a complete response letter. Further, if there is inadequate information to make a determination on the acceptability of a facility, FDA may defer action on the application until an inspection can be completed. Additionally, regulatory authorities outside the United States may adopt similar restrictions or other policy measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
If global health concerns continue to prevent the FDA or other regulatory authorities from conducting their regular inspections, reviews, or other regulatory activities, it could significantly impact the ability of the FDA to timely review and process our regulatory submissions, which could have a material adverse effect on our business.
The COVID-19 pandemic
continues to rapidly evolve, and the severity and duration of the pandemic remain uncertain. The extent to which the pandemic impacts our business, including our commercial results, clinical trials, and preclinical studies will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain.
Results of Operations
The following discussion summarizes the key factors our management believes are necessary for an understanding of our financial statements.
Revenues
Net revenues from product sales consist of sales of CAPLYTA, which was approved by the FDA on December 2019. We initiated the commercial launch of CAPLYTA in late March 2020 and generated
approximately $22.5 million in net revenue from product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. During this product launch year, 2020 net sales increased steadily from approximately $883,000 in the first quarter of 2020 to approximately $12.4 million in the fourth quarter. In addition, we had approximately $0.3 million of grant revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $0.06 million of grant revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. We have received and may continue to receive grants from U.S. government agencies and foundations.
We do not expect any revenues that we may generate in the next several years to be significant enough to completely fund our operations.
Expenses
The process of researching, developing and commercializing drugs for human use is lengthy, unpredictable and subject to many risks. We are unable with certainty to estimate either the costs or the timelines in which those costs will be incurred. The costs associated with the commercialization of CAPLYTA will be substantial and will be incurred prior to our generating sufficient revenue to offset these costs. Costs for the clinical development of lumateperone for the treatment of bipolar depression consumes and, together with our anticipated clinical development programs for depressive disorders and ITI-214,
will continue to consume a large portion of our current, as well as projected, resources. We intend to pursue other disease indications that lumateperone may address, but there are significant costs associated with pursuing FDA approval for those indications, which would include the cost of additional clinical trials.
Our ITI-002
program has a compound, ITI-214,
in Phase 1/2 development. We intend to pursue the development of our PDE program, including ITI-214
for the treatment of several CNS and non-CNS
conditions, including cardiovascular disease. We have ongoing development programs for ITI-214
for Parkinson’s disease and for the treatment of heart failure. Our other projects are still in the preclinical stages, and will require extensive funding not only to complete preclinical testing, but to commence and complete clinical trials. Expenditures that we incur on these projects will be subject to availability of funding in addition to the funding required for the advancement of lumateperone. Any failure or delay in the advancement of lumateperone could require us to re-allocate
resources from our other projects to the advancement of lumateperone, which could have a material adverse impact on the advancement of these other projects and on our results of operations. Our operating expenses are comprised of (i) costs of product sales; (ii) research and development expenses; (iii) general and administrative expenses and (iv) selling expenses.
Costs of product sales are comprised of:
•
Direct costs of formulating, manufacturing and packaging drug product;
•
Overhead costs consisting of labor, customs, share-based compensation, shipping, outside inventory management and other miscellaneous operating costs; and
•
Royalty payments on product sales.
Our research and development costs are comprised of:
•
internal recurring costs, such as costs relating to labor and fringe benefits, materials, supplies, facilities and maintenance; and
•
fees paid to external parties who provide us with contract services, such as pre-clinical
testing, manufacturing and related testing, clinical trial activities and license milestone payments.
Selling expenses are incurred in three major categories:
•
salaries and related benefit costs of a dedicated sales force;
•
sales operation costs; and
•
marketing and promotion expenses.
General and administrative expenses are incurred in three major categories:
•
salaries and related benefit costs;
•
patent, legal, and professional costs; and
•
office and facilities overhead.
Product sold through December 31, 2020 generally consisted of drug product that was previously charged to research and development expense prior to FDA approval of CAPLYTA. Because the Company previously expensed drug product, the cost of drug product sold is lower than it would have been and has a positive impact on our cost of product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company’s reported cost of product sales as a percentage of product sales, net was 8.4% or approximately $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, of which more than half related to royalty payments accrued to BMS.
We will expect to continue to have this favorable impact on cost of product sales and related product gross margins until our sales of CAPLYTA include drug product that is manufactured after the FDA approval. We are currently unable to estimate how long it will be until we begin selling product manufactured post FDA approval.
We expect that research and development expenses will increase as we proceed with our clinical trials of lumateperone for the treatment of bipolar depression and depressive disorders, other clinical trials, increased manufacturing of drug product for clinical trials and pre-clinical
development activities. We also expect that our selling, general and administrative costs will increase from prior periods primarily due to costs associated with building and maintaining infrastructure and promotional activities to support the commercial sales of CAPLYTA, which will include hiring additional personnel and increasing technological capabilities. On September 28, 2018, we signed a lease with a related party to acquire 15,534 square feet of additional office space in our current headquarters facility. We granted options to purchase 1,833,102 shares of our common stock in 2019 and have granted options to purchase 800,200 shares of our common stock in 2020. We also granted time based restricted stock units, or RSUs, for 950,449 shares of our common stock in 2019 and time based RSUs for 1,007,402 shares of our common stock in 2020. We will recognize expense associated with these RSUs and options over three years in research and development expenses, selling, general and administrative expenses, and inventoriable manufacturing expenses. In the first quarter of 2017, we also granted performance based RSUs, which vest based on the achievement of certain milestones that include (i) the submission of an NDA with the FDA, (ii) the approval of the NDA by the FDA, or the Milestone RSUs, and (iii) the achievement of certain comparative shareholder returns against our peers, or the TSR RSUs. The Milestone RSUs were valued at the closing price on March 8, 2017. The RSUs related to the NDA submission were amortized through December 31, 2018 based on the probable vesting date. The NDA submission milestone was achieved in the third quarter of 2018. The Milestone RSUs related to the NDA submission vested on December 31, 2018. The NDA approval milestone was achieved in the fourth quarter of 2019. The Milestone RSUs related to the NDA approval vested on December 31, 2019. The TSR RSUs were valued using the Monte Carlo simulation method and were amortized over the life of the RSU’s which vested on January 24, 2020. In the first quarter of 2020, we also granted performance based RSUs, which vest based on the achievement of certain milestones that include (i) the approval of a planned NDA by the FDA, or the 2020 Milestone RSUs, and (ii) the achievement of certain comparative shareholder returns against our peers, or the 2020 TSR RSUs. The 2020 Milestone RSUs were valued at the closing price of our common stock on February 18, 2020. The 2020 TSR RSUs were valued using the Monte Carlo simulation method. We expect to continue to grant stock options and other share-based awards in the future, which with our growing employee base will increase our share-based compensation expense in future periods.
The following table sets forth our revenues, operating expenses, interest income, net and income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Total Revenues, Net
Total revenues, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $22.8 million compared to $61,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net product sales were approximately $22.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and were comprised of sales of CAPLYTA, which was approved by the FDA on December 20, 2019 and became available to wholesalers in March 2020. No similar net product sales were recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition, revenue from a government grant was approximately $282,000 and $61,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cost of Product Sales
Cost of product sales was approximately $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of product sales consisted primarily of product royalty fees, overhead and minimal direct costs. Product sold during the year ended December 31, 2020 generally consisted of drug product that was previously charged to research and development expense prior to FDA approval of CAPLYTA. This minimal cost drug product had a positive impact on our cost of product sales and related product gross margins for the year ended December 31, 2020. No similar cost of product sales was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019.
We will continue to have a lower cost of product sales that excludes the cost of the drug product that was incurred prior to FDA approval until our sales of CAPLYTA include drug product that is manufactured after the FDA approval. We expect that this will be the case for the near-term and as a result, our cost of product sales will be less than we anticipate it will be in future periods.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses decreased to $65.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $89.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of approximately $23.3 million, or 26%. This decrease is due primarily to a decrease of approximately $15.1 million in manufacturing expense, which is due to expensing manufacturing costs related to CAPLYTA prior to FDA approval in prior years and capitalizing a significant portion as inventory in the current year, a decrease of approximately $4.2 million of lumateperone clinical and non-clinical
expenses, a decrease of approximately $3.0 million relating to other projects and overhead, and a decrease of approximately $1.0 million of share-based compensation expense. Internal costs decreased by approximately $3.0 million for the period due to lower labor related expenses, stock compensation expense, travel and other operating costs.
As development of lumateperone progresses, we anticipate costs for lumateperone to increase due primarily to ongoing and planned clinical trials relating to our lumateperone programs in the next several years as we conduct Phase 3 and other clinical trials. We are also required to complete non-clinical
testing to obtain FDA approval and manufacture material needed for clinical trial use, which includes non-clinical
testing of the drug product and the creation of an inventory of drug product in anticipation of possible FDA approval. We received FDA approval on December 20, 2019 for CAPLYTA (lumateperone) for the treatment for schizophrenia in adults. There was no lumateperone inventory purchased, received, or produced from the date of approval through December 31, 2019 and therefore no inventory costs are reflected on our balance sheet through December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, we employed 43 full time personnel in our research and development group as compared to 56 full time personnel in our research and development group at December 31, 2019. The decrease is due primarily to personnel transitioning from research-related activities to commercial efforts in 2020. We expect to hire additional staff as we increase our development efforts and grow our business in the upcoming years.
We currently have several projects, in addition to lumateperone, that are in the research and development stages, including in the areas of cognitive dysfunction and the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases, including AD, among others. We have used internal resources and incurred expenses not only in relation to the development of lumateperone, but also in connection with these additional projects as well, including our PDE program. We have not, however, reported these costs on a project by project basis, as these costs are broadly spread among these projects. The external costs for these projects have been modest and are reflected in the amounts discussed in this section “-Research and Development Expenses.”
The research and development process necessary to develop a pharmaceutical product for commercialization is subject to extensive regulation by numerous governmental authorities in the United States and other countries. This process typically takes years to complete and requires the expenditure of substantial resources. The steps required before a drug may be marketed in the United States generally include the following:
•
completion of extensive pre-clinical
laboratory tests, animal studies, and formulation studies in accordance with the FDA’s Good Laboratory Practice, or GLP, regulations;
•
submission to the FDA of an Investigational New Drug application, or IND, for human clinical testing, which must become effective before human clinical trials may begin;
•
performance of adequate and well-controlled human clinical trials to establish the safety and efficacy of the drug for each proposed indication;
•
submission to the FDA of a New Drug Application, or NDA, after completion of all clinical trials;
•
satisfactory completion of an FDA pre-approval
inspection of the manufacturing facility or facilities at which the active pharmaceutical ingredient, or API, and finished drug product are produced and tested to assess compliance with current Good Manufacturing Practices, or cGMPs;
•
satisfactory completion of FDA inspections of clinical trial sites to assure that data supporting the safety and effectiveness of product candidates has been generated in compliance with Good Clinical Practices; and
•
FDA review and approval of the NDA prior to any commercial marketing or sale of the drug in the United States.
The successful development of our product candidates and the approval process requires substantial time, effort and financial resources, and is uncertain and subject to a number of risks. We cannot be certain that any of our product candidates will prove to be safe and effective, will meet all of the applicable regulatory requirements needed to receive and maintain marketing approval, or will be granted marketing approval on a timely basis, if at all. Data from pre-clinical
studies and clinical trials are susceptible to varying interpretations that could delay, limit or prevent regulatory approval or could result in label warnings related to or recalls of approved products. We, the FDA, or other regulatory authorities may suspend clinical trials at any time if we or they believe that the subjects participating in such trials are being exposed to unacceptable risks or if such regulatory agencies find deficiencies in the conduct of the trials or other problems with our product candidates. Other risks associated with our product candidates are described in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $186.4 million as compared to $64.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, which represents an increase of 187%.
Selling costs were $132.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to pre-commercialization
costs of $32.5 million in the same period in 2019, or an increase of 307%. This increase is primarily due to an increase in sales related labor costs of $55.2 million and commercialization costs of $41.5 million. Salaries, bonuses and related benefit costs for our sales and marketing functions for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 constituted approximately 46% and 17%, respectively, of our selling costs.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $53.9 million in 2020 as compared to $32.4 million for the same period in 2019, an increase of 66%. This increase is due to increases in professional and consulting fees of $7.0 million, information technology services of $5.1 million, stock compensation expense of $4.3 million, labor and related expenses of $3.8 million, and the remainder consisting of insurance, lease expense, and other administrative expenses. Salaries, bonuses and related benefit costs for our general and administrative functions for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 constituted approximately 63% and 53%, respectively, of our general and administrative costs.
We expect selling, general and administrative costs to increase in 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We are expanding post approval marketing, including increased efforts to educate physicians due to the limitations related to the COVID-19
virus pandemic and market access efforts as well as our administrative infrastructure.
Interest Income
Interest income has decreased to approximately $4.2 million from $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is primarily a result of lower interest rates during 2020, in addition to decreases in cash balances from 2019 to 2020.
Income Taxes
In September 2016, the Company licensed certain intellectual property rights to its wholly-owned subsidiary, ITI Limited, which was formed in the third quarter of 2016. Although the license of intellectual property rights did not result in any gain or loss in the consolidated statements of operations, the transaction generated taxable net income in the United States in 2016. We utilized a portion of our available federal and state net operating loss carryforwards to offset the majority of this net income but incurred approximately $1.1 million of AMT related to intercompany transactions that were treated as tax expense in our consolidated statement of operations in 2016. On December 22, 2017, the “Tax Cuts and Jobs Act,” or TCJA granted a refund of the AMT or a reduction of taxes in future periods. The Company has therefore recognized a benefit of approximately $1.1 million for these taxes in 2017. The Company received approximately $529,000 in 2019 and the remainder in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Through December 31, 2020, we provided funds for our operations by obtaining a total of approximately $1.6 billion of cash primarily through public and private offerings of our common stock and other securities, grants from government agencies and foundations and payments received under a terminated license and collaboration agreement. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we have collected approximately $16.8 million from product sales, which we believe will increase going forward. We do not believe that grant revenue will be a significant source of funding in the near future.
On January 10, 2020, we completed a public offering of 10,000,000 shares of our common stock. All of the shares in the offering were sold by the Company, with gross proceeds to the Company of $295.0 million and net proceeds of approximately $277.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
In June 2020, we sold 230,000 shares of common stock under our at-the-market equity
program generating $5.6 million in net proceeds which was received in July 2020. In the third quarter of 2020, we sold an additional 512,791 shares of common stock utilizing our at-the-market program
and received $12.3 million of net proceeds.
In September 2020 we completed a public offering of common stock in which we sold 12,666,667 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $30.00 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of $380.0 million. After deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses, the net proceeds to the Company were approximately $357.8 million.
As of December 31, 2020, we had a total of approximately $658.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and available-for-sale
investment securities, including $1.4 million in restricted cash, and approximately $36.9 million of short-term liabilities consisting entirely of liabilities from operations, including approximately $5.5 million of short-term lease obligations. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we spent approximately $251.4 million in cash for operations and equipment. We have sources of cash which included $4.2 million of interest income and $16.8 million of collected product sales, resulting in net cash used in operations of $230.3 million. The use of cash was primarily for selling and marketing costs in connection with our commercial launch of CAPLYTA, conducting clinical trials and non-clinical
testing, product manufacturing, and funding recurring operating expenses.
Based on our current operating plans, we expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months from the filing date of this Annual Report. During that time, we expect that our expenses will increase substantially due primarily to our commercialization activities and related infrastructure expansion in connection with the commercialization of CAPLYTA for the treatment of schizophrenia; the development of lumateperone in our late stage clinical programs; the development of our other product candidates, including ITI-214;
the continuation of manufacturing activities for anticipated future sales of product and in connection with the development of lumateperone; and general operations.
For 2021, we expect to spend up to $395 million primarily related to the marketing and commercialization of CAPLYTA, lumateperone clinical development including clinical trial conduct, regulatory activities, manufacturing and inventory production, expansion of our administrative infrastructure and other development activities. This spending does not include projected receipts from sales of CAPLYTA or revenue generated from grants. Our other development activities will include efforts related to our ITI-1284,
ITI-214
and ITI-333
programs, among others. However, the COVID-19
pandemic may negatively impact our commercialization of CAPLYTA, our ability to complete our ongoing or planned preclinical and clinical trials, our ability to obtain approval of any product candidates from the FDA or other regulatory authorities, and our workforce and therefore our research, development and commercialization activities. This may ultimately have a material adverse effect on our liquidity, although we are unable to make any prediction with certainty given the rapidly changing nature of the pandemic and governmental and other responses to it.
We will require significant additional financing in the future to continue to fund our operations. We believe that we have the funding in place to commercialize CAPLYTA in patients with schizophrenia. With our existing cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale
investment securities, we believe that we have the funds to complete the development of lumateperone for bipolar depression through potential FDA approval for this indication. We also plan to fund additional clinical trials of lumateperone for the treatment of depressive disorders and other CNS disorders; preclinical and clinical development of our ITI-007
long acting injectable development program; additional clinical trials of lumateperone; clinical development of ITI-1284,
continued clinical development of our PDE product candidates, including ITI-214;
research and preclinical development of our other product candidates; and the continuation of manufacturing activities in connection with the development of lumateperone. We anticipate requiring additional funds for further development of lumateperone in patients with depressive disorders and other indications, and for development of our other product candidates. We have incurred losses in every year since inception with the exception of 2011, when we received an up-front
fee and a milestone payment related to a license agreement that has been terminated. These losses have resulted in significant cash used in operations. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we spent approximately $251.4 million in cash for operations and equipment. We have sources of cash which included $4.2 million of interest income and $16.8 million of collected product sales, resulting in net cash used in operations of $230.3 million. While we have several research and development programs underway, the lumateperone program has advanced the furthest and will continue to consume increasing amounts of cash for conducting clinical trials and the testing and manufacturing of product material. As we continue to conduct the activities necessary to pursue FDA approval of lumateperone beyond schizophrenia and our other product candidates, as well as commercialization efforts, we expect the amount of cash to be used to fund operations to increase over the next several years.
We seek to balance the level of cash, cash equivalents and investments on hand with our projected needs and to allow us to withstand periods of uncertainty relative to the availability of funding on favorable terms. Until we can generate significant revenues from operations, we will need to satisfy our future cash needs through public or private sales of our equity securities, sales of debt securities, incurrence of debt from commercial lenders, strategic collaborations, licensing a portion or all of our product candidates and technology and, to a lesser extent, grant funding. On August 30, 2019, we filed a universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3,
which was declared effective by the SEC on September 12, 2019, on which we registered for sale up to $350 million of any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and/or units from time to time and at prices and on terms that we may determine, which included up to $75 million of common stock that we could issue and sell from time to time, through SVB Leerink LLC acting as our sales agent, pursuant to the sale agreement that we entered into with SVB Leerink on August 29, 2019 for our “at-the-market”
equity program. In the quarter ended June 30, 2020, we sold 230,000 shares of common stock under our “at-the-market”
equity program which resulted in our receiving net proceeds of $5.6 million in July 2020. In the quarter ended September 30, 2020, we issued an additional 512,791 shares of common stock under our “at-the-market”
equity program and received approximately $12.3 million of net proceeds. On September 10, 2020, we terminated the “at-the-market”
equity program agreement with SVB Leerink LLC.
In addition, on January 6, 2020, we filed an automatic shelf registration statement on Form S-3
with the SEC, which became effective upon filing, on which we registered for sale an unlimited amount of any combination of its common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights, and/or units from time to time and at prices and on terms that we may determine, so long as we continue to satisfy the requirements of a “well-known seasoned issuer” under SEC rules. These registration statements will remain in effect for up to three years from the respective dates they became effective.
We cannot be sure that future funding will be available to us when we need it on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all. We sell securities and incur debt when the terms of such transactions are deemed favorable to us and as necessary to fund our current and projected cash needs. The amount of funding we raise through sales of our common stock or other securities depends on many factors, including, but not limited to, the magnitude of sales of CAPLYTA, the status and progress of our product development programs, projected cash needs, availability of funding from other sources, our stock price and the status of the capital markets. Due to the volatile nature of the financial markets, equity and debt financing may be difficult to obtain. Additionally, the continued spread of COVID-19
and uncertain market conditions may limit our ability to access any financing. In addition, any unfavorable results in the commercialization of CAPLYTA and unfavorable development or delay in the progress of our lumateperone program could have a material adverse impact on our ability to raise additional capital.
In addition, following the closing of our September 2020 underwritten public offering of common stock, we have a limited number of authorized shares of common stock available for future issuance that are not already issued or reserved for issuance. We have 100.0 million authorized shares of common stock. As of December 31, 2020, we had 80.5 million shares of common stock outstanding, 7.2 million shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of outstanding stock options or the vesting of outstanding restricted stock units, and 7.5 million shares of common stock reserved for future issuance under our equity compensation plans. As a result, as of December 31, 2020, we had approximately 4.9 million authorized shares of common stock available for issuance. We will remain limited by the number of additional shares available for future capital raising transactions or strategic transactions unless we obtain stockholder approval to amend our restated certificate of incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of common stock. This may cause a delay in our future capital raising, collaboration, partnership or other strategic transactions, and may have a material adverse effect on our business and financial condition.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through government or other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
If adequate funds are not available to us on a timely basis, we may be required to: (1) delay, limit, reduce or terminate pre-clinical
studies, clinical trials or other clinical development activities for one or more of our product candidates, including our lead product candidate lumateperone, ITI-214,
and our other product candidates; (2) delay, limit, reduce or terminate our discovery research or pre-clinical
development activities; or (3) enter into licenses or other arrangements with third parties on terms that may be unfavorable to us or sell, license or relinquish rights to develop or commercialize our product candidates, technologies or intellectual property at an earlier stage of development and on less favorable terms than we would otherwise agree.
Our cash is maintained in checking accounts, money market accounts, money market mutual funds, U.S. government agency securities, certificates of deposit, commercial paper, corporate notes and corporate bonds at
major financial institutions. Due to the current low interest rates available for these instruments, we are earning limited interest income. We do not expect interest income to be a significant source of funding over the next several quarters. In addition, our investment portfolio historically has not been adversely impacted by problems in the credit markets, but there can be no assurance that our investment portfolio will not be adversely affected in the future.
In 2014, we entered into a long-term lease with a related party which, as amended, provided for a lease of 16,753 square feet of useable laboratory and office space located at 430 East 29th Street, New York, New York 10016. Concurrent with this lease, we entered into a license agreement to occupy certain vivarium related space in the same facility for the same term, rent and escalation provisions as the lease. This license has the primary characteristics of a lease and is characterized as a lease in accordance with ASU 2016-02
for accounting purposes. In September 2018, we further amended the lease to obtain an additional 15,534 square feet of office space beginning October 1, 2018 and to extend the term of the lease for previously acquired space. The lease, as amended, has a term of 14.3 years ending in May 2029. In February 2019, we entered into a long-term lease for 3,164 square feet of office space in Towson, Maryland beginning March 1, 2019. The lease has a term of 3.2 years ending in April 2022. On May 17, 2019, we entered into a vehicle fleet lease with a company to acquire motor vehicles for certain employees. The vehicle fleet lease provides for individual leases for the vehicles, which at each lease commencement was determined to qualify for operating lease treatment. We began leasing vehicles under the vehicle fleet lease in March 2020. Restricted cash of $1.4 million on our consolidated balance sheet relates to a letter of credit issued as part of the vehicle fleet lease.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the balance sheet and reported amounts of revenues and expenses for the periods presented. Judgments must also be made about the disclosure of contingent liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Management makes estimates and exercises judgment in research and development, including clinical trial accruals. Actual results may differ from those estimates and under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the following critical accounting policy affects management’s more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Research and Development, Including Clinical Trial Expenses
Except for payments made in advance of services, we expense our research and development costs as incurred. For payments made in advance, we recognize research and development expense as the services are rendered. Research and development costs primarily consist of salaries and related expenses for personnel and resources and the costs of clinical trials. Other research and development expenses include preclinical analytical testing, manufacturing of drug product, outside services, providers, materials and consulting fees.
Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as subject enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors with respect to their actual costs incurred. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in the financial statements as prepaid or accrued research and development expense, as the case may be.
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate expenses resulting from the obligations under contracts with vendors, clinical research organizations and consultants and under clinical site agreements in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations, which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts. Our objective is to reflect the appropriate clinical trial expenses in our financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services are performed and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the clinical trial as measured by subject progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial. We determine accrual estimates through financial models taking into account various clinical information provided by vendors and discussion with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of consummation of trials, or the services completed. During the course of a clinical trial, we adjust our clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Our clinical trial accruals are dependent upon the timely and accurate reporting of contract research organizations, clinical sites and other third-party vendors. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any particular period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had no material change in estimates which related to the prior year estimates of accrued expenses for clinical trials. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a change in estimate of approximately $5.3 million related to the prior year estimates of accrued expenses for clinical trials that resulted in a reduction of research and development expenses.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
We review new accounting standards to determine the expected financial impact, if any, that the adoption of each such standard will have.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13,
“Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments” (“ASU 2016-13”).
This guidance applies to all entities and impacts how entities account for credit losses for most financial assets and other instruments. For available-for-sale
debt securities, entities will be required to recognize an allowance for credit losses rather than a reduction to the carrying value of the asset. For trade receivables, loans and held-to-maturity
debt securities, entities will be required to estimate lifetime expected credit losses. We adopted this standard on January 1, 2020 and evaluated the implications of the new standard, inclusive of the applicable financial statement disclosures required, as well as to its internal controls, business processes, and accounting policies, noting there was no significant impact to the financial statements as of January 1, 2020 and for the year ended December 31, 2020.