ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this report and the "Risk Factors" section in Part I, Item 1A, as well as the other cautionary statements and risks described elsewhere in this report before deciding to purchase, hold or sell our common stock.
Overview
General
We are a provider of smart mobility infrastructure management solutions. Our solutions enable public transportation agencies, municipalities, commercial entities and other transportation infrastructure providers to monitor, visualize, and optimize mobility infrastructure to help ensure roads are safe, travel is efficient, and communities thrive.
Recent Developments
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic (the “Pandemic”) continues to have an unprecedented impact on the U.S. economy as federal, state and local governments react to this public health crisis with travel restrictions, quarantines and "stay-at-home" orders. The Pandemic has materially adversely impacted global economic conditions and the uncertainties caused by these events and actions include, but are not limited to, the adverse effect of the Pandemic on the economy, our vendors, our employees and customers and customer sentiment in general. While there has been no material impact, nor any facility closures during Fiscal 2021, we did experience some work delays due to the Pandemic. Should such delays become protracted or worsen the impacts of the Pandemic could impact our business, results of operations and financial condition. The extent of the impact of the Pandemic on our business and financial results, and the volatility of our stock price will depend largely on future developments, including the duration of the spread of the outbreak, the impact on capital and financial markets, the distribution, rate of adoption and efficacy of vaccines, and the related impact on the financial circumstances of our customers, all of which are highly uncertain and cannot be reasonably estimated as of the date of this report.
Given the uncertainties surrounding the impacts of the Pandemic on the Company's future financial condition and results of operations, the Company has taken certain actions to preserve its liquidity, manage cash flow and strengthen its financial flexibility. Such actions include, but are not limited to, reducing our discretionary spending, reducing capital expenditures, implementing restructuring activities that will lead to approximately $1.2 million to $1.3 million in annualized savings, and reducing payroll costs, including employee furloughs, pay freezes and pay cuts.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act") was signed into law in the United States. The CARES Act provides relief to U.S. corporations through financial assistance programs and modifications to certain income tax provisions. The Company is applying certain beneficial provisions of the CARES Act, including the payroll tax deferral and the alternative minimum tax acceleration. For more information, refer to Note 6, Income Taxes, to the Consolidated Financial Statements, including in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
The Pandemic has had an impact on the Company’s human capital. While our main Santa Ana facility has remained open as our business is considered essential under the criteria specified by the State of California, “stay-at-home” orders and Pandemic restrictions imposed by local and state authorities have forced the majority of our employees to work remotely. The Company’s information technology infrastructure has proven sufficiently flexible to minimize disruptions in required duties and responsibilities. We believe that our system of internal control over financial reporting has not been fundamentally altered and that the effectiveness of the design and operation of internal controls remained materially consistent during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. Additionally, we have been able to timely file financial reports. We believe we have the right infrastructure to efficiently work remotely for the balance of the Pandemic. We do not expect to incur significant costs to safely reopen our facilities to all our employees.
Despite the Pandemic, we believe that the smart mobility infrastructure management industry in the U.S. should continue to provide new opportunities for the Company although, in the near term, the pace of new opportunities emerging may be restrained and the start dates of awarded projects may be delayed. We believe that our expectations are valid and that our plans for the future continue to be based on reasonable assumptions.
Acquisition of the Assets of TrafficCast International, Inc.
On December 6, 2020, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “TrafficCast Purchase Agreement”) with TrafficCast International, Inc. (“TrafficCast”), a privately held company headquartered in Madison, Wisconsin that provides travel information technology, applications and content to customers throughout North America in the media, mobile technology, automotive and public sectors. Under the TrafficCast Purchase Agreement, the Company agreed to purchase from TrafficCast substantially all of its assets, composed of its travel information technology, applications and content (the “TrafficCast Business”). The transaction closed on December 7, 2020.
Under the TrafficCast Purchase Agreement, Iteris purchased from TrafficCast substantially all of the assets used in the conduct of the TrafficCast Business and assumed certain specified liabilities of the TrafficCast Business in exchange for a total purchase price of up to $17.7 million, with $15.0 million paid in cash on the closing date, $1.0 million held back as security for certain post-closing adjustments and post-closing indemnity obligations of TrafficCast, $1.1 million acquisition-related liability,
and a $1.0 million earn out, fair valued at $0.6 million as of March 31, 2021, that if earned, will be paid over two years based on the TrafficCast Business’ achievement of certain revenue targets. The TrafficCast Purchase Agreement also provides for customary post-closing adjustments to the purchase price tied to working capital balances of the TrafficCast Business at closing (see Note 12, Acquisitions, to the Consolidated Financial Statements).
The parties also entered into certain ancillary agreements that will provide Iteris with ongoing access to mapping and monitoring services that the TrafficCast Business uses to support its real-time and predictive travel data and associated content.
Sale of Agriculture and Weather Analytics Segment
On May 5, 2020, the Company completed the sale of substantially all of our assets used in connection with our Agriculture and Weather Analytics segment to DTN, LLC (“DTN”), an operating company of TBG AG, a Swiss-based holding company, pursuant to the Purchase Agreement signed on May 2, 2020, in exchange for a total purchase consideration of $12.0 million in cash, subject to working capital adjustments. Upon closing on May 5, 2020, the Company received $10.5 million in cash and $1.5 million of deferred payment, of which $1.45 million has been paid by DTN at the 12-month anniversary of the closing date, and $0.05 million will be paid by DTN at the 18-month anniversary of the closing date, subject to satisfactions of the conditions set forth in the Purchase Agreement relating to the transition of certain customers to DTN and the collection of certain receivables by DTN. The AWA Purchase Agreement also provides for customary post-closing adjustments to the purchase price related to working capital at closing. The parties also entered into certain ancillary agreements at the closing of the transaction that will provide Iteris with ongoing access to weather and pavement data that it integrates into its transportation software products, and a joint development agreement under which the parties agreed to pursue future joint opportunities in the global transportation market.
The sale of the Agriculture and Weather Analytics segment was a result of the Company’s shift in strategy to focus on its mobility infrastructure management solutions and to capitalize on the potential for a future partnership upon the sale of this business component to DTN. We have determined that the Agriculture and Weather Analytics segment, which constituted one of our operating segments, qualifies as a discontinued operation in accordance with the criteria set forth in ASC 205-20, Presentation of Financial Statements - Discontinued Operations.
On May 5, 2020, the Company also entered into a transition services agreement (“TSA”) with DTN, pursuant to which the Company agreed to support the information technology function of the Agriculture and Weather Analytics segment for a period up to 12 months and DTN agreed to provide the contract administration/account management services for certain contracts of the Company and other transition services. Either party may make any reasonable request to extend the period of time the other party shall provide a transition service beyond the initial service period or access to additional services that are necessary for the transition of the business operations. The Company earned $0.2 million in income and incurred $0.1 million in costs associated with the TSA for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, which was included in loss from discontinued operations before gain on sale, net of tax on the consolidated statement of operations (see Note 3, Discontinued Operations, to the Consolidated Financial Statements).
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted income (loss) from continuing operations before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation expense, restructuring charges, acquisition costs, non-recurring executive severance and transition costs, and fair value adjustment related to TrafficCast's opening balance inventory (“Adjusted EBITDA”) was approximately $7.5 million, $4.2 million and $0.5 million for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
When viewed with our financial results prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”) and accompanying reconciliations, we believe Adjusted EBITDA provides additional useful information to clarify and enhance the understanding of the factors and trends affecting our past performance and future prospects. We define these measures, explain how they are calculated and provide reconciliations of these measures to the most comparable GAAP measure in the table below. Adjusted EBITDA and the related financial ratios, as presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Form 10-K”), are supplemental measures of our performance that are not required by or presented in accordance with GAAP. They are not a measurement of our financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as alternatives to net income or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP, or as an alternative to net cash provided by operating activities as measures of our liquidity. The presentation of these measures should not be interpreted to mean that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or nonrecurring items.
We use Adjusted EBITDA non-GAAP operating performance measures internally as complementary financial measures to evaluate the performance and trends of our businesses. We present Adjusted EBITDA and the related financial ratios, as
applicable, because we believe that measures such as these provide useful information with respect to our ability to meet our operating commitments.
Adjusted EBITDA and the related financial ratios have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations include:
•They do not reflect our cash expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•They do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
•They are not adjusted for all non-cash income or expense items that are reflected in our statements of cash flows;
•They do not reflect the impact on earnings of charges resulting from matters unrelated to our ongoing operations; and
•Other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, whereby limiting its usefulness as comparative measures.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA and the related financial ratios should not be considered as measures of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business or as a measure of cash that will be available to us to meet our obligations. You should compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA only as supplemental information. See our audited consolidated financial statements contained in this Form 10-K. However, in spite of the above limitations, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA and the related financial ratios are useful to an investor in evaluating our results of operations because these measures:
•Are widely used by investors to measure a company’s operating performance without regard to items excluded from the calculation of such terms, which can vary substantially from company to company depending upon accounting methods and book value of assets, capital structure and the method by which assets were acquired, among other factors;
•Help investors to evaluate and compare the results of our operations from period to period by removing the effect of our capital structure from our operating performance; and
•Are used by our management team for various other purposes in presentations to our Board of Directors as a basis for strategic planning and forecasting.
The following financial items have been added back to or subtracted from our net income (loss) when calculating Adjusted EBITDA:
•Interest expense. Iteris excludes interest expense because it does not believe this item is reflective of ongoing business and operating results. This amount may be useful to investors for determining current cash flow;
•Income tax. This amount may be useful to investors because it represents the taxes which may be payable for the period and the change in deferred taxes during the period, and may reduce cash flow available for use in our business;
•Depreciation expense. Iteris excludes depreciation expense primarily because it is a non-cash expense. These amounts may be useful to investors because it generally represents the wear and tear on our property and equipment used in our operations;
•Amortization. Iteris incurs amortization of intangible assets in connection with acquisitions. Iteris also incurs amortization related to capitalized software development costs. Iteris excludes these items because it does not believe that these expenses are reflective of ongoing operating results in the period incurred. These amounts may be useful to investors because it represents the estimated attrition of our acquired customer base and the diminishing value of product rights;
•Stock-based compensation. These expenses consist primarily of expenses from employee and director equity based compensation plans Iteris excludes stock-based compensation primarily because they are non-cash expenses and Iteris believes that it is useful to investors to understand the impact of stock-based compensation to its results of operations and current cash flow;
•Restructuring charges. These expenses consist primarily of employee separation expenses, facility termination costs, and other expenses associated with Company restructuring activities. Iteris excludes these expenses as it does not believe that these expenses are reflective of ongoing operating results in the period incurred. These amounts may be useful to our investors in evaluating our core operating performance;
•Acquisition costs. In connection with its business combinations, Iteris incurs professional service fees, changes to the fair value of contingent consideration, and other direct expenses. Iteris excludes such items as they are related to acquisitions and have no direct correlation to the operation of Iteris’ business. These amounts may be useful to our investors in evaluating our core operating performance.
•Executive severance and transition costs. Iteris excludes executive severance and transition costs because it does not believe that these expenses are reflective of ongoing operating results in the period incurred. These amounts may be useful to our investors in evaluating our core operating performance;
•Fair value adjustment related to acquired opening balance inventories. Iteris excludes fair value adjustment related to the opening inventory balance acquired as part of its business combination because it does not believe that these costs are reflective of operating results in the period incurred. These amounts may be useful to our investors in evaluating our core operating performance.
Reconciliations of net income (loss) from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA and the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of total revenues were as follows:
Business Segments
Our reportable segments consist of: Roadway Sensors and Transportation Systems.
The Roadway Sensors segment provides advanced detection sensors and systems for traffic intersection management that collectively comprise our family of Vantage sensors, as well as communication systems and roadway traffic data collection applications that complement our Vantage sensor products. The Vantage product line uses advanced image processing technology and other techniques to capture and analyze sensor data through sophisticated algorithms, enabling vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian detection, as well as the transmission of both video images and data using various communication technologies. The Roadway Sensors segment also includes the public sector operations of TrafficCast beginning December 7, 2020 (see Note 12, Acquisitions, to the Consolidated Financial Statements).
The Transportation Systems segment provides engineering and specialized consulting services, cloud-enabled managed services, performance measurement and traffic analytics solutions, as well as the development of transportation management and traveler information systems for the smart mobility infrastructure management industry. The Transportation Systems segment also includes the operations of AGI beginning July 2, 2019 and the commercial operations of TrafficCast beginning December 7, 2020 (see Note 12, Acquisitions, to the Consolidated Financial Statements).
With the company’s adoption of the ClearMobility platform we have started aligning our portfolio of solutions under a common branding structure called ClearMobility. We believe this alignment to the ClearMobility Platform will drive internal synergies in our development and sales efforts, as well as increase our market recognition across our entire suite of solutions. As a result of this alignment, the Company’s chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) is evaluating our management and operating structure and as a result of this evaluation we anticipate that we will report as a single operating segment starting with our fiscal year 2022.
In the fourth quarter of the 2021 fiscal year, Iteris launched the ClearMobility Cloud, our open-architecture cloud framework for smart mobility infrastructure management. The ClearMobility Cloud’s mobility data management engine, application programming interface ("API") framework and microservices ecosystem provide standardized data ingestion, cleansing and analytics, as well as authentication and security for each component of the ClearMobility Platform. The ClearMobility Cloud sets the foundation for horizontally scalable data processing, third-party extensibility, and secure, policy-based access to public transportation agencies and commercial entities throughout the United States and internationally.
See Note 13, Business Segments, Significant Customer and Geographic Information, to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this report for further details on our reporting segments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
"Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" is based on our consolidated financial statements included herein, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In preparing our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, we make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates, assumptions and judgments on historical experience and other factors that we believe are reasonable. We evaluate our estimates, assumptions and judgments on a regular basis and apply our accounting policies on a consistent basis. We believe that the estimates, assumptions and judgments involved in the accounting for revenue recognition, goodwill, and income taxes have the most potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Historically, our estimates, assumptions and judgments relative to our critical accounting policies have not differed materially from actual results.
The following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition. Our revenue arrangements are complex in nature and require significant judgement in determining the performance obligation structure. Each contract is unique in nature and therefore is assessed individually for appropriate accounting treatment. When applicable, we estimate variable considerations at the most likely amount to which we expect to be entitled and in certain cases based on the expected value, which requires judgment. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of our anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available to us. We review and update these estimates on a quarterly basis.
Goodwill. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired in a business combination. We test goodwill for impairment in accordance with the provisions of ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, (“ASC 350”). Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually at the reporting unit level or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. ASC 350 provides that an entity has the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, an entity determines it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then additional impairment testing is not required. However, if an entity concludes otherwise, then it is required to perform an impairment test. The impairment test involves comparing the estimated fair value of a reporting unit with its book value, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value exceeds book value, goodwill is considered not to be impaired. If, however, the fair value of the reporting unit is less than book value, then an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the amount that the book value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
The estimates of fair value of the reporting units are computed using either an income approach, a market approach, or a combination of both. Under the income approach, we utilize the discounted cash flow method to estimate the fair value of the reporting units. Significant assumptions inherent in estimating the fair values include the estimated future cash flows, growth assumptions for future revenues (including future gross margin rates, expense rates, capital expenditures and other estimates), and a rate used to discount estimated future cash flow projections to their present value (or estimated fair value) based on estimated weighted average cost of capital (i.e., the selected discount rate). We select assumptions used in the financial forecasts by using historical data, supplemented by current and anticipated market conditions, estimated growth rates, and management’s plans. Under the market approach, fair value is derived from metrics of publicly traded companies or historically completed transactions of comparable businesses (i.e. guideline companies). The selection of comparable businesses is based on the markets in which the reporting units operate giving consideration to risk profiles, size, geography, and diversity of products and services.
Income Taxes. Significant judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the realizability of our deferred tax assets, we review all available positive and negative evidence, including reversal of deferred tax liabilities, potential carrybacks, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial performance. As the Company has sustained a cumulative pre-tax loss over the trailing three years, we considered it appropriate to maintain valuation allowances of $12.3 million and $14.2 million against our deferred tax assets at March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We intend to continue maintaining a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets until there is sufficient evidence to support the reversal of all or some portion of these allowances. However, given our current earnings and anticipated future earnings, we believe that there is a reasonable possibility that within the next 12 months, sufficient positive evidence may become available to allow us to reach a conclusion that a significant portion of the valuation allowance will no longer be needed. Release of the valuation allowance would result in the recognition of certain deferred tax assets and a decrease to income tax expense for the period the release is recorded. However, the exact timing and amount of the valuation allowance release are subject to change on the basis of the level of profitability that we are able to actually achieve
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1, Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this report for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Analysis of Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020 Results of Operations
For a comparison of the 2020 to 2019 fiscal years, see Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of the Company's Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. Note that the filings of the 2020 and 2019 fiscal years do not reflect results of discontinued operation related activities, which are reflected in this report.
Total Revenues. Total revenues are comprised of sales from our Roadway Sensors and Transportation Systems segments. The following tables present details of total revenues for Fiscal 2021 as compared to Fiscal 2020:
Product revenues primarily consist of Roadway Sensors product sales, but also include OEM products for the traffic signal markets, Transportation Systems third-party product sales for installation under certain construction-type contracts and sales from TrafficCast's public sector business. Product revenues for Fiscal 2021 increased approximately 14.4% to $62.9 million, compared to $55.0 million in Fiscal 2020, primarily due to an increase in sales of our core Roadway Sensors video detection products of approximately $6.8 million, an increase of approximately $1.3 million from Transportation Systems third-party product sales for installation under certain construction-type contracts and an addition of TrafficCast's public sector business of approximately $1.4 million, offset by a decrease of approximately $1.0 million from our distribution in Texas of certain OEM products for the traffic intersection market.
Service revenues primarily consist of Transportation Systems engineering services, but also includes service revenues generated by our Roadway Sensors segment and the TrafficCast's commercial business. Service revenues for Fiscal 2021 increased approximately 3.5% to $54.2 million, compared to $52.4 million in Fiscal 2020, primarily due to approximately $2.7 million of revenues from the operations of TrafficCast's commercial business, and offset by reduction in subcontractor revenue in our Transportation Systems segment. This reduction was primarily due to supply chain and logistic issues attributable to the Pandemic, experienced by a group of third-party subcontractors.
Roadway Sensors revenues in Fiscal 2021 included approximately $55.8 million in product revenues and approximately $0.8 million of service revenues, reflecting an increase in total revenues of approximately $7.2 million or 14.5%, compared to Fiscal 2020, primarily due to higher sales from our core video detection products of $6.6 million, an addition of approximately $1.4 million from TrafficCast public sector business, offset by a decrease of approximately $1.0 million from our distribution in Texas of certain OEM products for the traffic intersection market. While OEM products generally have lower gross margins than our core video detection products, we believe the offering of OEM products can benefit sales of our core products in Texas by providing a more comprehensive suite of traffic solutions for our customers. Roadway Sensors added approximately $57.4 million of new bookings, or potential revenue under binding agreements, during Fiscal 2021. Roadway Sensors backlog
increased to approximately $11.6 million as of March 31, 2021, compared to approximately $8.7 million as of March 31, 2020. Going forward, we plan to grow revenues by focusing on our core domestic traffic intersection market, and refine and deliver products that address the needs of this market, primarily our Vantage processors and camera systems and our Vantage Vector video/radar hybrid sensor, as well as our SmartCycle, Velocity, PedTrax and SmartSpan products.
Transportation Systems revenues in Fiscal 2021 included approximately $53.3 million of service revenues including approximately $2.7 million of revenues from the operations of TrafficCast's commercial business, and approximately $7.3 million of sales of third-party products purchased for installation under certain construction-type contracts, reflecting an increase in total revenues of approximately $2.6 million or 4.4%, compared to Fiscal 2020, primarily due to the addition of TrafficCast's commercial business. Transportation Systems added approximately $64.4 million of new backlog during Fiscal 2021. Transportation Systems backlog increased to approximately $66.5 million as of March 31, 2021, compared to approximately $53.4 million as of March 31, 2020.
We plan to continue to focus on securing new contracts and to extend and/or continue our existing relationships with key agencies related to projects in their final project phases. While we believe our ability to obtain additional large contracts will contribute to overall revenue growth, the mix of subcontractor revenue and third-party product sales will likely affect the related total gross profit from period to period, as total revenues derived from subcontractors and third-party product sales generally have lower gross margins than revenues generated by our professional services.
Backlog is an operational measure representing future unearned revenue amounts believed to be firm that are to be earned under our existing agreements and are not included in deferred revenue on our consolidated balance sheets. Backlog includes new bookings but does not include announced orders for which definitive contracts have not been executed. We believe backlog is a useful metric for investors, given its relevance to total orders, but there can be no assurances we will recognize revenue from bookings or backlog timely or ever.
Gross Profit. The following tables present details of our gross profit for Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020:
Our product gross margin as a percentage of product revenues for Fiscal 2021 decreased approximately 60 basis points compared to Fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase in third-party product sales and additions of TrafficCast's public sector business, which typically yield lower gross margins.
Our service gross margin as a percentage of service revenues for Fiscal 2021 decreased 110 basis points compared to Fiscal 2020 primarily due to the completion of previously awarded contracts, the timing of certain extension contracts, the contract mix and an increase in the amount of subcontractors of such contracts. Subcontractors generally result in lower gross margins than our direct labor.
Our total gross margin as a percentage of total revenues for Fiscal 2021 decreased 60 basis points compared to Fiscal 2020 primarily as a result of the revenue mix within our Roadway Sensors and Transportation Systems segments.
Roadway Sensors gross profit can fluctuate in any specific quarter or year based on, among other factors, customer and product mix between core products and third party OEM products, competitive pricing requirements, product warranty costs and provisions for our excess and obsolete inventories, as well as shifts of engineering resources from development activities to sustaining activities, which we record as cost of goods sold.
We recognize a portion of our Transportation Systems revenues and related gross profit over time using the costs incurred input method, where revenue is recognized based on our efforts or inputs toward satisfying a performance obligation, and the underlying mix of contract activity affects the related gross profit recognized in any given period. For the Transportation Systems segment, we expect to experience gross profit variability in future periods due to our contract mix and the amount of
related sub-consulting content of such contracts, as well as factors such as our ability to efficiently utilize our internal workforce, which could cause fluctuations in our margins from period to period.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administration expense for Fiscal 2021 decreased approximately 4% to $39.2 million, compared to $40.7 million in Fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in bid and proposal activities in the Transportations Systems segment driven by the timing and size of certain opportunities in the current year compared with the prior year.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense for Fiscal 2021 increased approximately 19% to $5.1 million, compared to $4.3 million in Fiscal 2020. The overall increase was primarily due to continued investment in research and development activities largely focused on improving our existing software related product offerings.
We plan to continue to invest in the development of further enhancements and functionality of our Iteris ClearMobility Platform which includes among other things the software offerings in our Transportation Systems segment, as well as our Vantage products family in our Roadway Sensors segment.
Certain development costs were capitalized into intangible assets in the consolidated balance sheets in both the current and prior year periods; however, certain costs did not meet the criteria for capitalization under GAAP and are included in research and development expense. Going forward, we expect to continue to invest in our software solutions. This continued investment may result in increases in research and development costs, as well as additional capitalized software in future periods.
Impairment of Goodwill
Based on our goodwill impairment testing for Fiscal 2021 and 2020, we believe the carrying value of our goodwill was not impaired, as the estimated fair values of our reporting units exceeded their carrying values at the end of Fiscal 2021 and 2020. If our actual financial results, or the plans and estimates used in future goodwill impairment analyses, are lower than our original estimates used to assess impairment of our goodwill, we could incur goodwill impairment charges in the future.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization expense for intangible assets subject to amortization was approximately $2.0 million and $1.3 million for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively. Approximately $0.5 million and $0.5 million of the intangible asset amortization was recorded to cost of revenues, and approximately $1.5 million and $0.8 million was recorded to amortization expense for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively, in the consolidated statements of operations. The increase in amortization was primarily due to amortization expenses related to intangible assets acquired as part of the TrafficCast acquisition.
Interest Income, Net
Net interest income was approximately $0.1 million and $0.2 million in Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively. The decrease in net interest income in the current year was primarily due to the decrease in interest earned on investments purchased and held during the current fiscal year.
Income Taxes
The following table presents our (benefit) provision for income taxes for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020:
Year Ended
March 31,
(In thousands,
except percentage)
Provision (benefit) for income taxes $ 115 $ 160
Effective tax rate 1.8 % (3.1) %
For Fiscal 2021 and 2020, the difference between the statutory and the effective tax rate was primarily attributable to the valuation allowance recorded against our deferred tax assets.
In assessing the realizability of our deferred tax assets, we review all available positive and negative evidence, including reversal of deferred tax liabilities, potential carrybacks, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial performance. As the Company has sustained a cumulative pre-tax loss over the trailing three fiscal years, we considered it appropriate to maintain valuation allowances of $12.3 million and $14.2 million against our deferred tax assets at March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We will continue to reassess the appropriateness of maintaining a valuation allowance.
As we update our estimates in future periods, adjustments to our deferred tax asset and valuation allowance may be necessary. We anticipate this will cause our future overall effective tax rate in any given period to fluctuate from prior effective tax rates and statutory tax rates. We utilize the liability method of accounting for income taxes. We record net deferred tax assets to the extent that we believe these assets will more likely than not be realized.
At March 31, 2021, we had $7.7 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards that do not expire as a result of recent tax law changes. We also had $5.9 million of state net operating loss carryforwards that begin to expire in 2031. Although the impact cannot be precisely determined at this time, we believe that our net operating loss carryforwards will provide reductions in our future income tax payments, that would otherwise be higher using statutory tax rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For a comparison of the 2020 to 2019 fiscal years, see Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of the Company's Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020.
Cash Flows
We have historically financed our operations with a combination of cash flows from operations and the sale of equity securities. We expect to continue to rely on cash flows from operations and our cash reserves to fund our operations, which we believe to be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months. However, we may need or choose to raise additional capital to fund potential future acquisitions and our future growth. We may raise such funds by selling equity or debt securities to the public or to selected investors or by borrowing money from financial institutions. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity or convertible debt securities, our existing stockholders may experience significant dilution, and any equity securities that may be issued may have rights senior to our existing stockholders. There is no assurance that we will be able to secure additional funding on a timely basis, on terms acceptable to us, or at all.
At March 31, 2021, we had $36.7 million in working capital, which included $25.5 million in cash and cash equivalents and $3.1 million in short-term investments. This compares to working capital of $33.9 million at March 31, 2020, which included $14.4 million in cash and cash equivalents and $11.6 million in short-term investments.
The following table summarizes our cash flows from continuing operations for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020:
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities of our continuing operations for Fiscal 2021 of $8.9 million was primarily the result of $7.8 million in non-cash items, primarily for noncash lease expense, depreciation expenses, stock-based compensation, and amortization coupled with our net income from continuing operations of approximately $0.5 million, as well as approximately $0.6 million from increase in working capital. Net cash used in operating activities from discontinued operations was $2.4 million.
Net cash used by operating activities of our continuing operations for Fiscal 2020 was primarily the result of our net loss of approximately $1.8 million, coupled with approximately $4.5 million from changes in working capital, offset by approximately $5.8 million in noncash items for noncash lease expense, depreciation, stock-based compensation, and amortization. Net cash used in operating activities from discontinued operations was $3.4 million.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities of our continuing operations during Fiscal 2021 was primarily the result of purchases of approximately $23.7 million of short-term investments, approximately $15.0 million in cash paid for
the TrafficCast acquisition, approximately $0.6 million of property and equipment purchases, and approximately $0.8 million of capitalized software development costs, primarily in the Roadway Sensors and Transportation Systems business segments related to VantageLive! and ClearGuide, respectively. These investments were partially offset by approximately $32.0 million in proceeds from the sale and maturity of short-term investments. Net cash provided by investing activities from discontinued operations was $9.7 million.
Net cash used in investing activities of our continuing operations during Fiscal 2020 was primarily the result of approximately $33.8 million purchases of short-term investments, approximately $0.4 million of property and equipment purchases and $5.6 million in net cash paid for the AGI acquisition, coupled with approximately $0.6 million of capitalized software development costs, primarily in the Roadway Sensors and Transportation Systems business segments related to VantageLive! and ClearGuide, respectively. These investments were partially offset by approximately $24.2 million in proceeds from the sale and maturity of short-term investments.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities of our continuing operations during Fiscal 2021 was primarily the result of approximately $2.6 million and $0.4 million of cash proceeds from the exercise of stock options and purchases of Employee Stock Purchase Plan ("ESPP") shares,, respectively.
Net cash provided by financing activities of our continuing operations during Fiscal 2020 was primarily the result of approximately $26.8 million of net proceeds from issuance of common stock in connection with the public offering. In addition, there was $0.3 million and $0.4 million of cash proceeds received from the exercise of stock options and purchases of ESPP shares.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any other material off-balance sheet arrangements at March 31, 2021.
Seasonality
We have historically experienced seasonality, particularly with respect to our Roadway Sensors segment, which adversely affects such sales in our third and fourth fiscal quarters due to a reduction in intersection construction and repairs during the winter months due to inclement weather conditions, with the third fiscal quarter generally impacted the most by inclement weather. We have also experienced seasonality, particularly with respect to our Transportation Systems segment, which adversely impacts our third fiscal quarter due to the increased number of holidays, causing a reduction in available billable hours.