Item 7: Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis compares the change in the consolidated financial statements for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 and should be read in conjunction with Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. For comparisons of fiscal years 2019 and 2018, see our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Part II, Item 7 of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) on February 27, 2020, and incorporated herein by reference.
The objective of Management’s Discussion and Analysis is to provide our assessment of the financial condition and results of operations including an evaluation of our liquidity and capital resources along with material events occurring during the year. The discussion and analysis focuses on material events and uncertainties known to management that are reasonably likely to cause reported financial information not to be necessarily indicative of future operating results or of future financial condition. In addition, we address matters that are reasonably likely based on management’s assessment to have a material impact on future operations. We expect that the analysis will enhance a reader’s understanding of our financial condition, cash flows, and other changes in financial condition and results of operations.
Overview
We are a technology and service company, and we are a leader in the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). We offer solutions that enable utilities and municipalities to safely, securely and reliably operate their critical infrastructure. Our solutions include the deployment of smart networks, software, services, devices, sensors, and data analytics that allow our customers to manage assets, secure revenue, lower operational costs, improve customer service, improve safety, and enable efficient management of valuable resources. Our comprehensive solutions and data analytics address the unique challenges facing the energy, water, and municipality sectors, including increasing demand on resources, non-technical loss, leak detection, environmental and regulatory compliance, and improved operational reliability.
We operate under the Itron brand worldwide and manage and report under three operating segments: Device Solutions, Networked Solutions, and Outcomes. The product and operating definitions of the three segments are as follows:
Device Solutions - This segment primarily includes hardware products used for measurement, control, or sensing that do not have communications capability embedded for use with our broader Itron systems, i.e., hardware-based products not part of a complete "end-to-end" solution. Examples from the Device Solutions portfolio include: standard endpoints that are shipped without Itron communications, such as our standard gas, electricity, and water meters for a variety of global markets and adhering to regulations and standards within those markets, as well as our heat and allocation products; communicating meters that are not a part of an Itron end-to-end solution such as Smart Spec meters; and the implementation and installation of non-communicating devices, such as gas regulators.
Networked Solutions - This segment primarily includes a combination of communicating devices (e.g., smart meters, modules, endpoints, and sensors), network infrastructure, and associated application software designed and sold as a complete solution for acquiring and transporting robust application-specific data. Networked Solutions includes products and software for the implementation, installation, and management of communicating devices and data networks. Examples from the Networked Solutions portfolio include: communicating measurement, control, or sensing endpoints such as our Itron® and OpenWay® Riva meters, Itron traditional ERT® technology, Intelis smart gas or water meters, 500G gas communication modules, 500W water communication modules; GenX networking products, network modules and interface cards; and specific network control and management software applications. The IIoT solutions supported by this segment include automated meter reading (AMR), advanced metering infrastructure (AMI), smart grid and distribution automation, smart street lighting and an ever-growing set of smart city applications such as traffic management, smart parking, air quality monitoring, electric vehicle charging, customer engagement, digital signage, acoustic (e.g., gunshot) detection, and leak detection and mitigation for both gas and water systems. Our IIoT platform allows all of these industry and smart city applications to be run and managed on a single, multi-purpose network.
Outcomes - This segment primarily includes our value-added, enhanced software and services in which we manage, organize, analyze, and interpret data to improve decision making, maximize operational profitability, drive resource efficiency, and deliver results for consumers, utilities, and smart cities. Outcomes places an emphasis on delivering to Itron customers high-value, turn-key, digital experiences by leveraging the footprint of our Device Solutions and Networked Solutions segments. The revenues from these offerings are primarily recurring in nature and would include any direct management of Device Solutions, Networked Solutions, and other products on behalf of our end customers. Examples from the Outcomes portfolio include: our meter data management and analytics offerings; our managed service solutions including network-as-a-service (NaaS) and platform-as-a-service, forecasting software and services; our Distributed Intelligence suite of applications and services; and any
consulting-based engagement. Within the Outcomes segment, we also identify new business models, including performance-based contracting, to drive broader portfolio offerings across utilities and cities.
We have three measures of segment performance: revenues, gross profit (margin), and operating income (margin). Intersegment revenues are minimal. Certain operating expenses are allocated to the operating segments based upon internally established allocation methodologies. Interest income, interest expense, other income (expense), the income tax provision (benefit), and certain corporate operating expenses are neither allocated to the segments nor included in the measures of segment performance.
Non-GAAP Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP), we use certain adjusted or non-GAAP financial measures, including non-GAAP operating expense, non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP net income, non-GAAP diluted earnings per share (EPS), adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, constant currency, and free cash flow. We provide these non-GAAP financial measures because we believe they provide greater transparency and represent supplemental information used by management in its financial and operational decision making. We exclude certain costs in our non-GAAP financial measures as we believe the net result is a measure of our core business. We believe these measures facilitate operating performance comparisons from period to period by eliminating potential differences caused by the existence and timing of certain expense items that would not otherwise be apparent on a GAAP basis. Non-GAAP performance measures should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, results prepared in accordance with GAAP. We strongly encourage investors and shareholders to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure. Our non-GAAP financial measures may be different from those reported by other companies.
In our discussions of the operating results below, we sometimes refer to the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which are references to the differences between the foreign currency exchange rates we use to convert operating results from local currencies into U.S. dollars for reporting purposes. We also use the term "constant currency", which represents results adjusted to exclude foreign currency exchange rate impacts. We calculate the constant currency change as the difference between the current period results translated using the current period currency exchange rates and the comparable prior period's results restated using current period currency exchange rates. We believe the reconciliations of changes in constant currency provide useful supplementary information to investors in light of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
Refer to the Non-GAAP Measures section below on pages 42-44 for information about these non-GAAP measures and the detailed reconciliation of items that impacted free cash flow, non-GAAP operating expense, non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP net income, adjusted EBITDA, and non-GAAP diluted EPS in the presented periods.
Total Company Highlights
Highlights and significant developments for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the year ended December 31, 2019
•Revenues were $2.2 billion compared with $2.5 billion last year, a decrease of $329.1 million, or 13%
•Gross margin was 27.7% compared with 30.1% last year
•Operating expenses decreased $7.1 million, or 1%, compared with 2019, and included a $59.8 million loss on sale of business and $43.2 million of restructuring expense related to the 2020 Projects
•Net loss attributable to Itron, Inc. was $58.0 million compared with net income attributable to Itron, Inc. of $49.0 million in 2019
•GAAP loss per share was $1.44 compared with diluted EPS of $1.23 in 2019
•Non-GAAP net income attributable to Itron, Inc. was $75.3 million compared with $132.8 million in 2019
•Non-GAAP diluted EPS was $1.85 compared with $3.32 in 2019
•Adjusted EBITDA decreased $91.6 million, or 34%, to $178.4 million compared with adjusted EBITDA of $270.0 million in 2019
•Total backlog was $3.3 billion, and twelve-month backlog was $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020, compared with $3.2 billion and $1.5 billion at December 31, 2019.
Outlook for 2021 due to COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has had global economic impacts including disrupting global supply chains and creating market volatility. The extent of the recent pandemic and its ongoing impact on our operations is volatile but is being monitored closely by our management. While certain of our European factories were closed during portions of the first half of 2020 due to government actions and local conditions, all were open by May and throughout the remainder of the year. Any further closures that may be imposed on us could impact our results for 2021. Incremental costs we have incurred related to COVID-19, such as personal protective equipment, increased cleaning and sanitizing of our facilities, and other such items, have not been material to date. At this time, we have not identified any significant decrease in long-term customer demand for our products and services. Certain of our customers’ projects and deployments have shifted into 2021 and beyond. For more information on risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, please see our risk in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors.
The COVID-19 pandemic remains a rapidly evolving situation. Changes in the mix of earnings or losses from our different geographical operations, as well as any future enactment of tax legislation and other factors, may result in more volatile quarterly and annual effective tax rates. The detrimental impacts to financial results may be partially offset by financial assistance from the U.S. or the municipalities in which we operate, including employer payroll tax credits for wages paid to employees who are unable to work during the COVID-19 outbreak. Other benefits, including options to defer payroll tax payments and additional deductions, have resulted in reduced future cash outlays in the near term.
2020 Restructuring Plan
On September 17, 2020, our Board of Directors approved a restructuring plan (the 2020 Projects), which includes activities that continue our efforts to optimize our global supply chain and manufacturing operations, sales and marketing organizations, and other overhead. These projects are scheduled to be substantially complete by the end of 2022. We estimate pre-tax restructuring charges of $55 million to $65 million, of which approximately $35 million to $45 million will result in cash expenditures, and the remainder relates to non-cash charges. Of the total expected charges, $43.2 million was recognized in 2020. The largest component of expected remaining costs to be recognized is related to a non-cash cumulative translation adjustment charge. Many of the affected employees are represented by unions or works councils, which require consultation, and potential restructuring projects may be subject to regulatory approval, both of which could impact the timing of charges, total expected charges, cost recognized, and planned savings in certain jurisdictions. Refer to Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 13: Restructuring for more information.
Sale of Business
On June 25, 2020, we closed on the sale of five subsidiaries comprising our manufacturing and sales operations in Latin America to buyers led by Instalación Profesional y Tecnologías del Centro S.A. de C.V., a Mexican company doing business as Accell in Brazil (Accell), through the execution of various definitive stock purchase agreements. The sale of these Latin America-based operations is part of our continued strategy to improve profitability and focus on growing our Networked Solutions and Outcomes businesses in Latin America and throughout the world. We retained the intellectual property rights to our products sold in Latin America. As part of the transaction, we entered into an intellectual property license agreement whereby Accell pays a royalty on certain products manufactured by Accell using licensed Company intellectual property. In addition, Accell serves as the exclusive distributor for our Device Solutions, Networked Solutions, and Outcomes product and service offerings in Latin America. We recognized a loss on sale of business of $59.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to foreign currency translation losses and allocated goodwill. Refer to Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 18: Sale of Business for more information.
Credit Facility Revolving Line of Credit
In March 2020, we drew $400 million in U.S. dollars under the multicurrency revolving line of credit (the revolver) within the credit facility that was initially entered on January 5, 2018 and amended on October 18, 2019 (2018 credit facility) to increase our cash position and preserve future financial flexibility. During the fourth quarter, we repaid the $400 million under the revolver. At December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under the revolver and $64.9 million was utilized by outstanding standby letters of credit, resulting in $435.1 million available for additional borrowings or standby letters of credit under the revolver. At December 31, 2020, $235.1 million was available for additional standby letters of credit under the letter of credit sub-facility and no amounts were outstanding under the swingline sub-facility.
Credit Facility Amendment
On October 19, 2020, we completed a second amendment to our 2018 credit facility. This amendment adjusts the maximum total net leverage ratio thresholds for the period beginning with the fourth quarter of 2020 through the fourth quarter of 2021 to allow for increased operational flexibility. The maximum leverage ratio is increased to 4.75:1 for the fourth quarter of 2020 and the first quarter of 2021 and 4.5:1 for the second quarter through the fourth quarter of 2021. An additional level of pricing was added to the existing pricing grid and is effective throughout the remaining term of the 2018 credit facility. Beginning with the
fourth quarter of 2020, the commitment fee ranges from 0.15% to 0.30% and drawn amounts are subject to a margin ranging from 1.00% to 2.00%. Debt fees of approximately $1.4 million were incurred for the amendment, as well as other legal and advisory fees. Both the U.S. term loan (the term loan) and the revolver may be repaid without penalty. Amounts repaid on the term loan may not be reborrowed and amounts borrowed under the revolver may be repaid and reborrowed until the revolver's maturity, at which time all outstanding loans together with all accrued and unpaid interest must be repaid.
Stock Repurchase Authorization
On March 14, 2019, Itron's Board of Directors authorized the Company to repurchase up to $50 million of our common stock over a 12-month period (the 2019 Stock Repurchase Program). Following the announcement of the program and through December 31, 2019, we repurchased 529,396 shares at an average share price of $47.22 (including commissions) for a total of $25 million. The program expired on March 13, 2020, and no additional shares were repurchased during 2020.
Total Company GAAP and Non-GAAP Highlights and Endpoints Under Management
(1)These measures exclude certain expenses that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating results. See pages 42-44 for information about these non-GAAP measures and reconciliations to the most comparable GAAP measures.
Introduction to Itron’s Managed Endpoint Metric
More than 15 years ago we accelerated our ability to offer utilities higher value solutions with the purchase of Schlumberger's electricity metering business. With this acquisition, Itron solidified itself as one of the leaders in AMR modules, meters, and other critical infrastructure to the electric, gas, and water utility industries. In 2008, we continued our technology advancement with our first generation of AMI focused on growing our offerings of networked products and services around the globe. We expanded our network footprint and expanded our capabilities as a unified operating platform with the acquisition of Silver Spring Networks (SSNI) in 2018, strengthening our position as a global technology leader in smart utility and smart city critical infrastructure and outcomes.
Following the acquisition of SSNI, we realigned out product portfolio into reporting segments of Device Solutions, Networked Solutions, and Outcomes to emphasize our transformation from increasingly commoditized, undifferentiated endpoints to higher value data-centric networked solutions and outcomes. Our customers - utilities, municipalities, and cities - who deploy our Networked Solutions tend to utilize these assets for 10 to 15 years after their initial deployment. Building upon our established installed base of networked endpoints, our strategy focuses on converting our customers to long-term clients with ongoing professional services, managed services, software, security, and tools that improve data insight, risk mitigation, service resiliency, sustainability, and efficiency in their daily operations. In some instances, the "endpoints under management" are not on an Itron provided network but rather a network of another third party that has asked Itron to manage, monitor, or run the network or application for them.
Our management team places an emphasis on investments, both organic and inorganic, focused on growth in our Outcomes segment. Our strategy is to build higher value solutions, applications, and customer focused outcomes upon a set of global networked endpoint assets under Itron’s active management on behalf of our clients. To inform progression of our strategy, management relies on the metric of "endpoints under management" as a leading indicator of the potential for long-term value creation and growth for our Outcomes business.
Management believes using the "endpoints under management" metric enhances insight to the strategic and operational direction of our Networked Solutions and Outcomes segments to serve clients for years after their one-time installation of an endpoint.
Definition of an Endpoint Under Management
An "endpoint under management" is a unique endpoint, or data from that endpoint, which Itron manages via our networked platform or a third party's platform that is connected to one or multiple types of endpoints. Itron’s management of an endpoint occurs when on behalf of our client, we manage one or more of the physical endpoint, operating system, data, application, data analytics, and/or outcome deriving from this unique endpoint. Itron has the ability to monitor and/or manage endpoints or the data from the endpoints via NaaS, Software-as-a-Service (SaaS), and/or a licensed offering at a remote location designated by our client. Our offerings typically, but not exclusively, provide an Itron product or Itron certified partner product to our clients that has the capability of one-way communication or two-way communication of data that may include remote product configuration and upgradability. Examples of these offerings include our Temetra, OpenWay®, OpenWay® Riva and Gen X.
This metric primarily includes Itron or third party endpoints deployed within the electricity, water, and gas utility industries, as well as within cities and municipalities around the globe. Endpoints under management also include smart communication modules and network interface cards (NICs) within Itron’s platforms. At times, these NICs are communicating modules that were sold separately from an Itron product directly to our customers or to third party manufacturers for use in endpoints such as electric, water, and gas meters; streetlights and other types of IIoT sensors and actuators; sensors and other capabilities that the end customer would like Itron to connect and manage on their behalf.
The "endpoint under management" metric only accounts for the specific, unique endpoint itself, though that endpoint may have multiple applications, services, outcomes, and higher margin recurring offerings associated with it. This metric does not reflect the multi-application value that can be derived from the individual endpoint itself. Additionally, this metric excludes those endpoints that are non-communicating, non-Itron system hardware component sales or licensed applications that Itron does not manage the unit or the data from that unit directly.
While the one-time sale of the platform and endpoints are primarily delivered via our Networked Solutions segment, our enhanced solutions, on-going monitoring, maintenance, software, analytics, and distributed intelligent applications are predominantly recognized in our Outcomes segment. We would anticipate the opportunity to increase our penetration of Outcomes applications, software, and managed applications will increase as our Endpoints Under Management increases.
A summary of our endpoints under management is as follows:
Results of Operations
Revenues and Gross Margin
The actual results of and effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on revenues and gross profit were as follows:
Revenues
Revenues decreased $329.1 million in 2020 compared with 2019. We have been unfavorably impacted by COVID-19, which played a significant role in customer demand and lower year-over-year results. Product revenues decreased $331.2 million in 2020 and service revenues increased $2.1 million in 2020 as compared with 2019. Device Solutions decreased by $164.9 million; Networked Solutions decreased by $167.9 million; and Outcomes increased by $3.6 million when compared with the same period last year. Changes in currency exchange rates unfavorably impacted revenues by $3.4 million in 2020, primarily in Device Solutions.
No single customer represented more than 10% of total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Our 10 largest customers accounted for 33% of total revenues in 2020 and 31% of total revenues in 2019.
Gross Margin
Gross margin was 27.7% for 2020, compared with 30.1% in 2019. We were unfavorably impacted by COVID-19 induced operating inefficiencies, product mix and increased inventory reserves. Product sales gross margin decreased to 25.4% in 2020 from 28.5% in 2019. Gross margin on service revenues increased to 42.8% from 42.4% in 2019.
Refer to Operating Segment Results section below for further detail on total company revenues and gross margin.
Operating Expenses
The actual results of and effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on operating expenses were as follows:
Operating expenses decreased $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with the same period in 2019. This was primarily due to a decrease of $70.0 million in sales, general and administrative expenses due to lower variable compensation and reduced travel expenses, which includes lower acquisition and integration costs of $25.6 million classified
within sales, general and administrative expenses. We had a decrease in amortization of intangible assets, as expected based on the amortization schedule determined at acquisition, of $19.6 million and an $8.1 million decrease in research and development expenses. These decreases were partially offset by an increase of $59.8 million in a loss on the sale of our Latin America business and a $30.7 million increase in restructuring expenses. See Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 18: Sale of Business and Note 13: Restructuring for more details.
Other Income (Expense)
The following table shows the components of other income (expense):
Total other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a net expense of $46.2 million compared with $59.7 million in 2019.
The change in other income (expense), net, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with the same period in 2019 was primarily the result of $8.9 million decrease in interest expense for the credit facility, $2.7 million decrease due to lower foreign currency exchange losses resulting from transactions denominated in currency other than the reporting entity's functional currency, and $1.5 million decrease in amortization of prepaid debt fees, offset by an increase in interest rate swap expense of $2.2 million and an increase of $1.1 million in interest income.
Income Tax Provision
Our income tax provision was $0.2 million and $20.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 differed from the U.S. federal statutory tax rate of 21% due primarily to a significant loss recognized in the second quarter for the divestiture of the majority of our Latin American business activities. Refer to Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 18: Sale of Business for additional information on the transaction. This loss was recognized for tax as a discrete item and resulted in no tax benefit. A discrete tax benefit was recognized in the third quarter for $10.1 million related to the release of a valuation allowance on U.S. foreign tax credit deferred tax assets. This release was triggered by the carryforward of tax attributes due to the filing of amended tax returns in the third quarter. Other rate drivers include losses in jurisdictions for which no benefit is recognized because of valuation allowances on deferred tax assets, the level of profit or losses in domestic and international jurisdictions, a benefit related to excess stock-based compensation, and uncertain tax positions.
For additional discussion related to income taxes, see Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 11: Income Taxes.
Operating Segment Results
The following tables and discussion highlight significant changes in trends or components of each operating segment:
Device Solutions:
The effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and the constant currency changes in certain Device Solutions segment financial results were as follows:
Revenues
Revenues decreased by $164.9 million in 2020, or 19%, compared with 2019 of which $3.9 million was due to foreign exchange rate changes. The decrease was mainly due to reduced shipments driven by COVID-19 and revenue decreased $33.0 million in the Latin America region driven by the sale of the business in June 2020.
Gross Margin
Gross margin was 12.5% in 2020 compared with 17.8% in 2019. The 530 basis point decrease was primarily due to COVID-19 induced operating inefficiencies, unfavorable product mix and increased inventory reserves.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses decreased $8.7 million, or 16%. The decrease was primarily a result of a $6.6 million decrease in research and development costs, and a $2.1 million decrease due to lower sales commissions and travel costs.
Networked Solutions:
The effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and the constant currency changes in certain Networked Solutions segment financial results were as follows:
Revenues
Revenues decreased by $167.9 million, or 12%, in 2020 compared with 2019. The change was primarily due to the timing of customer deployments and the impact of COVID-19 project delays, with lower product revenue of $173.7 million partially offset by higher maintenance service revenue of $5.8 million.
Gross Margin
Gross margin was 34.6% in 2020 compared with 36.6% in 2019. The decrease of 200 basis points was primarily related to COVID-19 induced operational inefficiencies and unfavorable product mix.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased by $3.4 million, or 2.8%, in 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased investment in product development of $7.9 million, partially offset by a decrease of $4.5 million in product marketing and travel expenses.
Outcomes:
The effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and the constant currency changes in certain Outcomes segment financial results were as follows:
Revenues
Revenues increased $3.6 million, or 2%, in 2020. This increase was primarily due to a one-time customer adjustment recognized in 2019 in North America and an increase in software license sales and services.
Gross Margin
Gross margin was consistent at 35.8% in 2020 and 2019. Margin remained unchanged due to an unfavorable customer adjustment in 2019 in addition to higher margin software license sales in 2020, which were offset by higher costs in 2020.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses decreased $2.4 million, or 6.5%, in 2020. The decrease was due to lower research and development of $1.8 million and lower marketing expense of $0.6 million.
Corporate unallocated:
Operating expenses not directly associated with an operating segment are classified as Corporate unallocated. These expenses increased $0.7 million in 2020 as compared with 2019. This was primarily the result of a $59.8 million loss on sale of business due to the Latin America divestiture and an increase of $30.7 million in restructuring expense primarily due to the 2020 Projects. Sales, general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses decreased $44.7 million mainly driven by lower variable compensation and reduced travel expenses. In addition, costs related to the SSNI integration decreased $25.6 million, and amortization of intangible assets decreased $19.6 million.
Financial Condition
Cash Flow Information:
Cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash at December 31, 2020 was $206.9 million compared with $149.9 million at December 31, 2019. The $57.0 million increase in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash in the 2020 period was primarily the result of cash flows from operating activities, partially offset by acquisitions of property, plant, and equipment, and net repayment of debt.
Operating activities
Cash provided by operating activities in 2020 was $63.3 million lower than in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to lower earnings, partially offset by increased net cash inflows for working capital.
Investing activities
Cash used in investing activities during 2020 was $7.1 million lower than in 2019. This decrease in use of cash was primarily lower spending of $14.5 million for property, plant, and equipment, as well as lower proceeds from sale of property, plant, and equipment.
Financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities during 2020 was $11.6 million, compared with net cash used in 2019 of $97.5 million. In 2020, we had net repayments of debt of $14.1 million. In 2019, we paid down our debt of $87.7 million and repurchased $25 million of our stock.
Effect of exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents
The effect of exchange rates on the cash balances of currencies held in foreign denominations resulted in an increase of $0.1 million in 2020 and an increase of $0.4 million in 2019. Our foreign currency exposure relates to non-U.S. dollar denominated balances in our international subsidiary operations.
Free cash flow (Non-GAAP)
To supplement our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows presented on a GAAP basis, we use the non-GAAP measure of free cash flow to analyze cash flows generated from our operations. The presentation of non-GAAP free cash flow is not meant to be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net income as an indicator of our performance, or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity. We calculate free cash flows, using amounts from our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, as follows:
Free cash flow decreased primarily as a result lower earnings, partially offset by lower spending for property, plant, and equipment. See the cash flow discussion of operating activities above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources:
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations, borrowings, and the sale of our common stock. Cash flows may fluctuate and are sensitive to many factors including changes in working capital and the timing and magnitude of capital expenditures and payments of debt. Working capital, which represents current assets less current liabilities, continues to be in a net favorable position.
Borrowings
On October 18, 2019, we amended our credit facility that was initially entered on January 5, 2018 (together with the amendment, the 2018 credit facility). The 2018 credit facility provides for committed credit facilities in the amount of $1.2 billion U.S. dollars. The 2018 credit facility consists of a $650 million the term loan and the revolver with a principal amount of up to $500 million. The revolver also contains a $300 million standby letter of credit sub-facility and a $50 million swingline sub-facility. The October 18, 2019, amendment extended the maturity date to October 18, 2024 and re-amortized the term loan based on the new balance as of the amendment date.
We drew $400 million in U.S. dollars under the revolving line of credit within the 2018 credit facility in March 2020. In light of the uncertain environment, we deemed it prudent to increase our cash position and preserve financial flexibility. We repaid the revolving line of credit during the fourth quarter of 2020. The Total Net Leverage Ratio, as defined in the amended 2018 credit facility agreement, was unchanged by this drawing.
On October 19, 2020, we completed a second amendment to our 2018 credit facility. This amendment adjusts the maximum total net leverage ratio thresholds for the period beginning with the fourth quarter of 2020 through the fourth quarter of 2021 to allow for increased operational flexibility. The maximum leverage ratio is increased to 4.75:1 for the fourth quarter of 2020 and the first quarter of 2021 and 4.50:1 for the second quarter through the fourth quarter of 2021. An additional level of pricing was added to the existing pricing grid and is effective throughout the remaining term of the 2018 credit facility. Beginning with the fourth quarter of 2020, the commitment fee ranges from 0.15% to 0.30% and drawn amounts are subject to a margin ranging
from 1.00% to 2.00%. Going forward, we do not expect any significant increase in interest expense as the result of this amendment.
At December 31, 2020, no amount was outstanding under the 2018 credit facility revolver, and $65 million was utilized by outstanding standby letters of credit, resulting in $435.1 million available for additional borrowings or standby letters of credit under the revolver. At December 31, 2020, $235 million was available for additional standby letters of credit under the letter of credit sub-facility and no amounts were outstanding under the swingline sub-facility. Both the term loan and the revolver mature on October 18, 2024 and may be repaid without penalty. Amounts repaid on the term loan may not be reborrowed and amounts borrowed under the revolver may be repaid and reborrowed until the revolver's maturity, at which time all outstanding loans together with all accrued and unpaid interest must be repaid. Principal and interest payments due in the next 12 months for the term loan are $27.7 million and $543.7 million is due beyond 12 months.
In December 2017 and January 2018, we issued a combined $400 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.00% senior notes maturing January 15, 2026 (Senior Notes). The proceeds were used to refinance existing indebtedness related to the acquisition of SSNI, pay related fees and expenses, and for general corporate purposes. Interest on the Senior Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears on January 15 and July 15, commencing on July 15, 2018. The $10 million interest payment due on January 15, 2021 was paid as of December 31, 2020. The Senior Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally, on a senior unsecured basis by each of our subsidiaries that guarantee the 2018 credit facility.
Prior to maturity, we may redeem some or all of the Senior Notes, together with accrued and unpaid interest, if any, plus a "make-whole" premium. On or after January 15, 2021, we may redeem some or all of the Senior Notes at any time at declining redemption prices equal to 102.50% beginning on January 15, 2021, 101.25% beginning on January 15, 2022 and 100.00% beginning on January 15, 2023 and thereafter to the applicable redemption date. In the next 12 months, principal and interest of $10 million is due on the Senior Note. Principal and interest of $490 million is due beyond the next 12 months.
For further description of our borrowings, refer to Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 6: Debt.
For a description of our letters of credit and performance bonds, and the amounts available for additional borrowings or letters of credit under our lines of credit, including the revolver that is part of our credit facility, refer to Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 12: Commitments and Contingencies.
Silver Spring Networks, Inc. Acquisition
As part of the acquisition of SSNI, we announced an integration plan to obtain approximately $50 million of annualized savings by the end of 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid out $13.1 million and we have approximately $5 million to $10 million of estimated cash payments remaining on the integration plan, the majority of which is expected to be paid within the next 12 months.
Restructuring
On September 17, 2020, our Board of Directors approved a restructuring plan (the 2020 Projects). The 2020 Projects include activities that continue our efforts to optimize its global supply chain and manufacturing operations, sales and marketing organizations, and other overhead. These projects are scheduled to be substantially complete by the end of 2022. We estimate pre-tax restructuring charges of $55 million to $65 million. Of the total estimated charge, approximately $35 million to $45 million will result in cash expenditures, and the remainder relates to non-cash charges.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid out a net $17.1 million related to all our restructuring projects. As of December 31, 2020, $72.6 million was accrued for these restructuring projects, of which $31.7 million is expected to be paid within the next 12 months.
For further details regarding our restructuring activities, refer to Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 13: Restructuring.
Other contractual obligations and commitments
Operating lease obligations are disclosed in Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 19: Leases and do not include common area maintenance charges, real estate taxes, and insurance charges for which we are obligated. Amounts due under operating lease liabilities for the next twelve months are $18.3 million and beyond the next twelve months are $75.6 million.
We enter into standard purchase orders in the ordinary course of business that typically obligate us to purchase materials and other items. Purchase orders and other purchase obligations can include open-ended agreements that provide for estimated quantities over an extended shipment period, typically up to one year at an established unit cost. Our long-term executory purchase agreements, which contain termination clauses, have been classified as less than one year, as the commitments are the estimated amounts, we would be required to pay at December 31, 2021 if the commitments were canceled. Purchase order and other purchase obligations are $236.7 million for the next twelve months and $2.5 million for periods longer than twelve months, which includes capital expenditures of $0.8 million for the next twelve months and no obligations related to capital expenditures for periods beyond twelve months.
Other long-term liabilities consist of warranty obligations, estimated pension benefit payments, and other obligations. Estimated pension benefit payments include amounts to be paid from our assets for unfunded plans and reflect expected future service. The following table summarizes our known obligations to make future payments pursuant to certain contracts as of December 31, 2020.
The period of cash settlement for long-term unrecognized tax benefits, which include accrued interest and penalties, cannot be reasonably estimated with the respective taxing authorities. For further information on defined benefit pension plans, income taxes, warranty obligations, and unearned revenue for extended warranties, see Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 8: Defined Benefit Pension Plans, Note 11: Income Taxes, Note 12: Commitments and Contingencies, and Note 17: Revenues, respectively.
Income Tax
Our tax provision as a percentage of income before tax typically differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%. Changes in our actual tax rate are subject to several factors, including fluctuations in operating results, new or revised tax legislation and accounting pronouncements, changes in the level of business in domestic and foreign jurisdictions, research and development tax credits, state income taxes, adjustments to valuation allowances, settlement of tax audits, and uncertain tax positions, among other items. Changes in tax laws, valuation allowances, and unanticipated tax liabilities could significantly impact our tax rate.
Our cash income tax payments were as follows:
Based on current projections, we expect to pay, net of refunds, approximately $5 million in U.S. federal and state taxes and $9 million in foreign and local income taxes in 2021.
As of December 31, 2020, there was $43.3 million of cash and short-term investments held by certain foreign subsidiaries in which we are permanently reinvested for tax purposes. As a result of recent changes in U.S. tax legislation, any repatriation in the future would not result in U.S. federal income tax. Accordingly, there is no provision for U.S. deferred taxes on this cash. If this cash were repatriated to fund U.S. operations, additional withholding tax costs may be incurred. Tax is only one of many factors that we consider in the management of global cash. Accordingly, the amount of taxes that we would need to accrue and pay to repatriate foreign cash could vary significantly.
Other Liquidity Considerations
In several of our consolidated international subsidiaries, we have joint venture partners who are minority shareholders. Although these entities are not wholly-owned by Itron, Inc., we consolidate them because we have a greater than 50% ownership interest and/or because we exercise control over the operations. The noncontrolling interest balance in our Consolidated Balance Sheets represents the proportional share of the equity of the joint venture entities, which is attributable to the minority shareholders. At December 31, 2020, $21.8 million of our consolidated cash balance was held in our joint venture entities. As a result, the minority shareholders of these entities have rights to their proportional share of this cash balance, and there may be limitations on our ability to repatriate cash to the United States from these entities.
General Liquidity Overview
Notwithstanding the expected short to mid-term impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect to grow through a combination of internal new research and development, licensing technology from and to others, distribution agreements, partnering arrangements, and acquisitions of technology or other companies. We expect these activities to be funded with existing cash, cash flow from operations, borrowings, or the sale of our common stock or other securities. We believe existing sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund our existing operations and obligations for the next 12 months and into the foreseeable future but offer no assurances. Our liquidity could be affected by the stability of the electricity, gas, and water utility industries, competitive pressures, our dependence on certain key vendors and components, changes in estimated liabilities for product warranties and/or litigation, duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, future business combinations, capital market fluctuations, international risks, and other factors described under Item 1A: Risk Factors, as well as