ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION & ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto. As we noted earlier in the Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, this Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, and Part II, Item 7A, Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk (along with other sections of this Annual Report), may contain forward-looking statements. The risks discussed in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, and other risks identified in this Annual Report on Form 10-K could cause our actual results to differ materially from those expressed by such forward-looking statements.
All comparisons included within this Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, refer to results for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, unless stated otherwise. Please refer to our Annual Report on Form 10-K (2019 Annual Report) for discussion of the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
OVERVIEW
ITT Inc., through its worldwide subsidiaries, is a diversified manufacturer of highly engineered critical components and customized technology solutions for the energy, transportation and industrial markets. We refer you to Part I, Item 1, Description of Business for a further overview of our company, segments, products and service offerings, and other information about the business.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has changed the lives of our employees, our customers, and our community. While most of our businesses are deemed essential, governmental and other restrictions to help slow the spread of the virus have presented challenges for certain businesses at ITT. In response, ITT established cross-functional global crisis management teams to address the changing environment. We are proud of how our team has responded, showing resilience, innovating in real time, and demonstrating the tremendous value of our manufacturing network to customers and partners around the world. In the face of this unprecedented challenge posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, we remain united in our focus on our top three priorities: the health of our people, the health of our business, and the health of our financials.
Health of our People
From the earliest signs of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken aggressive actions to protect the health and safety of our employees. We have created core crisis teams and enacted rigorous safety measures at all of our sites. These measures include enhanced cleaning protocols, temperature checks, on-site rapid testing, and distribution of personal protective equipment and testing kits. We also redesigned employee workspaces to enable social distancing and allowed non-essential employees to work from home when appropriate. We continue to be proactive in our response and take all necessary actions to keep our people safe.
Health of our Business
While we do not yet know how long this pandemic will last or how it will impact customer demand for 2021, our ITT team continues to work closely with our customers and suppliers to support them and to minimize disruptions within our supply chain. We continue to work hard to generate value for our customers, striving to go above and beyond to be flexible and responsive to their needs, and continue to maintain our focus on quality and delivery performance.
Health of our Financials
ITT entered 2020 with a strong balance sheet and liquidity position. Due to the pandemic, we took additional measures in 2020 to enhance our liquidity and reduce costs to better navigate the uncertain environment and secure ITT’s future. Here are some of the liquidity and cost action highlights:
•Strong available liquidity of $1.6 billion, including:
•$860 cash on hand with $352 in the U.S.;
•$500 available borrowing capacity on our revolver; and
•$200 undrawn under our 364-Day Revolving Credit Agreements.
•Executed over $100 of cost actions, including:
•$65 in structural cost reductions; and
•$40 of discretionary spend reductions, including approximately $10 of savings from a temporary reduction in the compensation of our Board of Directors, Chief Executive Officer and other executives, and suspension of select 401(k) benefits for certain U.S. employees.
These actions have put ITT in a good position to confront and manage through the pandemic. The ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our business and financials remain uncertain and will be dependent on the severity of a resurgence of COVID-19 or variant strains of the virus, the effectiveness of vaccines, and the overall duration of the pandemic. We remain more focused than ever on our priorities as we manage through this challenging time. See Part II, Item 1A, Risk Factors, for an additional discussion of risk related to COVID-19.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
While the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on our customers and the end markets we serve, we remained focused on execution and our commitment to our customers. This unwavering focus enabled us to deliver strong sequential performance to end a challenging year.
See the section titled "Key Performance Indicators and Non-GAAP Measures" for a definition and reconciliation of organic revenue, adjusted segment operating income and margin, and adjusted EPS.
Our 2020 results include:
•Revenue of $2,477.8 decreased $368.6 including $24.4 from our 2019 acquisitions and unfavorable foreign exchange of $1.3. Organic revenue decreased 13.8%, mainly as a result of the global impact of COVID-19 which drove declines in transportation of 16%, industrial of 7%, and oil and gas of 23%. Sequentially, revenue increased each of the past two quarters from $514.7 to $591.2 in the third quarter, and further improved to $708.6 in the fourth quarter.
•Segment operating income of $318.6 declined $113.7, which included higher restructuring and asset impairment costs of $28.1 and $15.3, respectively. Adjusted segment operating income declined $80.3 due to reduced volume from weaker demand and disruption caused by COVID-19, partially offset by savings from restructuring, productivity and cost actions. Sequentially, segment operating income increased each of the past two quarters from $37.3 to $83.9 in the third quarter, and further improved to $119.5 in the fourth quarter.
•Income from continuing operations decreased $254.9, which included increased pension costs of $108.2, net of tax, from the termination of our U.S. qualified pension plan, a decline in segment operating income, and higher asbestos costs of $64.4, net of tax, primarily to extend the period over which we estimate our net liability through 2052 (i.e., “full horizon”), partially offset by a reduction in corporate costs. As a result, earnings per diluted share decreased from $3.65 to $0.78. Adjusted earnings per share was $3.20, reflecting a decrease of $0.61 from the prior year.
•Operating cash flow of $435.9 increased $78.2 or 21.9%, primarily due higher collections from customers, improved inventory management, and cost containment measures. Operating cash flow less capital expenditures was $372, an increase of $106 or 40%.
In 2020, we focused on what we can control and executed timely cost actions to counter the anticipated impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. We generated strong levels of cash flow through intense working capital efficiency, and
focused our strategic priorities to drive long-term growth and share gains. The following highlights a few examples of strategic actions that occurred during the year that will help position us for continued value creation:
•Our elastomeric rotorcraft business was awarded a position on the next U.S. military reconnaissance helicopter codenamed FARA. This is a major recognition for our rotorcraft business which we created organically just a few years ago.
•Our friction business continued to outpace global auto production by 640 basis points and added key automotive platforms, including doubling our share in electric vehicles.
•Funded new innovations, such as the added diagnostics capabilities to our i-Alert remote monitoring platform and various product redesign projects, including our BB2 and process pumps.
•Continued to invest in smart and energy efficient applications, for example our ITT SmartPad, which is making new inroads with both aftermarket and OE customers, and an energy efficient power source for our pumps. We also won content on 42 new electrical vehicle platforms in North America, Europe, and China, where we continue to increase our market share.
In 2020, we continued to effectively manage our legacy liabilities positioning us well for the future, including:
•Termination of our U.S. pension plan that was primarily funded with assets of the plan.
•Improved visibility to net asbestos liability through 2052, resulting from underlying trends and insurance settlements.
•Continued effective cash flow management resulted in projected annual average net after-tax defense and indemnity outflows for the next 10 years of $20 million to $30 million, a reduction of 23% from the midpoint.
•Negotiated certain asbestos-related insurance coverage in 2020, resulting in a net benefit of $100.4, including a coverage-in-place agreement in the fourth quarter that increased our asbestos-related asset by $52.1.
Finally, we returned $143 to shareholders, including dividends of $59, an increase of 13.2%, and discretionary share repurchases of $73 at average price of $42.34 per share.
Today, ITT is firmly on the road to recovery thanks to the resilience of our businesses and of our people. ITT’s performance is the outcome of a sound and actionable strategy, one with clear priorities and a strong focus on execution, driven by unprecedented level of granularity. As a result of this strategy, we generated strong levels of profitability and outstanding free cash flow. We continue to manage through the ongoing impacts of the global pandemic and believe we are on track to emerge stronger and bolder than ever before.
We do expect some challenges in the coming year primarily related to COVID-19 uncertainty, including market recovery timing and potential supply chains disruptions, as well as increased commodity costs, tight capital expenditure budgets, and uncertain oil and gas market dynamics. Despite these uncertainties, in 2021, we expect to continue to drive productivity and innovation across our businesses, with clear priorities on operational excellence, customer centricity, innovation, and effective capital deployment. We raised our first quarter 2021 quarterly dividend by 30%, which represents our ninth consecutive year of dividend increases.
DISCUSSION OF FINANCIAL RESULTS
2020 VERSUS 2019
** Resulting percentage change not considered meaningful.
All comparisons included within the Discussion of Financial Results for 2020 versus 2019 refer to results for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, unless stated otherwise.
REVENUE
The following table illustrates the year-over-year revenue results from each of our segments for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(a)See the section titled "Key Performance Indicators and Non-GAAP Measures" for a definition and reconciliation of organic revenue and organic orders.
Motion Technologies
MT revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $120.7 and included favorable foreign currency translation of $8.1. Organic revenue declined $128.8 as sales from Friction decreased 12% driven by global weakness in automotive demand as a result of COVID-19. While automotive sales softened, we significantly outperformed the global market. Weakness in the automotive market also negatively impacted Wolverine, resulting in a decline of 12%. KONI & Axtone sales decreased 4%.
Industrial Process
IP revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $100.8, and included revenue of $18.6 from our 2019 acquisition of Rheinhütte along with unfavorable foreign currency translation of $11.4. Organic revenue decreased $108.0 primarily driven by pump projects, which declined 22% due to large prior year deliveries in the chemical and oil and gas markets, partially offset by growth in general industrial projects. Revenue from our short-cycle business decreased 8% due to a decline of 16% in industrial valve sales, a 10% decline in baseline pumps, and a 4% decline in aftermarket primarily due to lower oil and gas activity.
The level of order and shipment activity at IP can vary significantly from period to period due to pump projects which are highly engineered, customized to customer needs, and have longer lead times. Total IP orders during 2020 were $798.1, a decrease of 10.0%, compared to the prior year. IP's backlog as of December 31, 2020 was $367.4, reflecting a decrease of $40.1, or 9.8%, compared to December 31, 2019. Our backlog represents firm orders that have been received, acknowledged, and entered into our production systems.
Connect & Control Technologies
CCT revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $147.4, which included revenue of $5.8 from our 2019 acquisition of Matrix along with favorable foreign currency impact of $2.0. Organic revenue decreased $155.2 primarily due to a 32% decline within the aerospace and defense market. The decrease in aerospace and defense was driven by a decline in global commercial air traffic due to COVID-19 and reduced production levels on key platforms, as well as unfavorable timing of defense programs. Revenue from the industrial market decreased 6% driven by COVID-19 impacts on demand for our actuation and process control products and weakness in energy absorption during the first half of 2020 on large infrastructure projects.
GROSS PROFIT
Gross profit for 2020 was $782.2, reflecting a gross margin of 31.6%. Gross profit for 2019 was $910.1, reflecting a gross margin of 32.0%. The decline in gross profit was primarily driven by lower demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and higher commodity costs, partially offset by supply chain and productivity improvements, restructuring benefits, and lower tariffs.
During 2020, the prices of commodities, including raw materials such as steel, used in our production processes have risen each quarter. The rising prices are a result of increased demand as companies increased their safety stock due to supply chain uncertainty amid the COVID-19 pandemic. The impact of higher commodities prices on our fiscal year 2020 financial results were partially mitigated by fixed-price supply contracts with suppliers. The expiration of these fixed-price contracts and continued future commodity price uncertainty exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic may have an unfavorable impact on our fiscal 2021 financial results.
OPERATING EXPENSES
The following table provides further information by expense type, as well as a breakdown of operating expense by segment.
General and administrative (G&A) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $39.6. The decrease was primarily driven by proactive cost actions across all segments, which included savings from our 2020 global restructuring plan, as well as reductions to professional services of $11.7, and reduced travel expenses of $5.3. In addition, incentive compensation costs declined $7.0 and we experienced lower medical, workers' compensation, and long-term disability insurance expenses due to favorable claim activity. G&A expenses were also favorable due to the recognition of a $4.4 legal reserve in 2019. These items were partially offset by an increase in bad debt expense of $2.7.
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $19.4, driven by proactive cost-saving actions.
Research and development (R&D) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $13.0 due to cost containment actions partially offset by increased focus on strategic investments. R&D as a percentage of revenue was 3.4% during both 2020 and 2019.
Asbestos-related costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $86.5 as a result of the transition to a full horizon estimate. The table below summarizes the total net asbestos-related charge for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(a)The asbestos provision includes amounts recognized on a quarterly basis to maintain a rolling 10-year provision prior to the transition in the third quarter of 2020 to full horizon, described in note (b).
(b)In the third quarter of 2020, we extended our projection to include claims expected to be filed through 2052, reflecting the full time period over which we expect asbestos-related claims to be filed against us. The asbestos remeasurement conducted during the third quarter of 2019 resulted in a net gain of $68.1 primarily reflecting an increase in estimated asbestos-related assets.
(c)The current period includes a net benefit of $100.4 from settlement agreements with insurers.
See Note 20, Commitments and Contingencies, to the Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements for further information.
Restructuring costs increased $30.2 during the year ended December 31, 2020, due to actions taken under the Company’s 2020 global restructuring plan. See Note 5, Restructuring Actions, to the Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements for further information.
Asset impairment charges during the year ended December 31, 2020 are related to a business within IP that primarily serves the global upstream oil and gas market. See Note 11, Plant, Property and Equipment, Net, and Note 12, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net, to the Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements for further information. Significant additional adverse changes to the economic environment and future cash flows of other businesses could cause us to record additional impairment charges in future periods, which may be material.
OPERATING INCOME
The following table illustrates the 2020 and 2019 operating income and operating margin by segments and at the consolidated level.
(a)Includes a gain on sale of corporate long-lived assets of $0.7 during 2020 and a loss on sale of $0.2 during 2019, respectively.
MT operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $32.1. The decline in operating income was primarily driven by unfavorable sales volume of $48 due to a decline in automotive production resulting from COVID-19, as well as unfavorable product mix and pricing. In addition, there was an increase in restructuring costs of $7.8 and investment incentives received in the prior year of $3.1. Partially offsetting the decline was net savings from productivity, sourcing and restructuring actions of $35 and a reduction in tariffs.
IP operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $27.1. The decline in operating income was primarily driven by lower sales volumes of $41 and an increase in restructuring costs of $13.8. In addition, the year ended 2020 included asset impairments of $16.3 related to a business that primarily serves the global upstream oil and gas market. These items were partially offset by net savings from productivity, supply chain and restructuring actions of $29, as well as favorable product mix and pricing of $12 and lower acquisition-related costs of $7.
CCT operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $54.5. The decrease was driven by lower sales volumes of $82, mainly due to the negative impact of COVID-19 on global commercial air traffic and an increase in restructuring costs of $6.5. These items were partially offset by benefits from productivity, supply chain, and restructuring actions of $26.
Other corporate costs, net, decreased $15.3 primarily driven by lower incentive compensation costs of $4.1, benefits from cost containment and restructuring actions, and a prior year legal reserve of $4.4. These items were partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency impacts of $2.7.
INTEREST AND NON-OPERATING (INCOME) EXPENSES, NET
The decline in interest (income) expense, net is due to higher interest expense from an increase in outstanding revolver borrowings in the first half of 2020 and a decline in interest returns on cash and money market investments, partially offset by interest income of $1.6 in the current year related to a change in uncertain tax positions.
The increase in non-operating postretirement costs is due to the termination of our U.S. qualified pension plan and transfer of the plan's liabilities to an insurance company. In connection with the termination, we recognized a settlement charge of $136.9, which primarily represents the acceleration of deferred charges previously accrued in accumulated other comprehensive loss and derecognition of the net assets of the plan. See Note 16, Postretirement Benefit Plans, to the Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements for further information.
INCOME TAX EXPENSE
The decrease in the effective tax rate was due to a benefit of $25.9 resulting from a recently completed internal reorganization in Europe. The reorganization increased projections of future earnings, which will result in the realization of a portion of our deferred tax assets. This benefit was partially offset by the recognition of a $21.7 valuation allowance on our Germany and UK entities.
The Company’s financial condition and results of operations have been and may continue to be adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and the governmental and market reactions to COVID-19. The impacts on earnings have already had, and may continue to have, an impact on the Company’s overall effective tax rate.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the CARES Act) was enacted March 27, 2020. The CARES Act provides numerous tax provisions and other stimulus measures, including temporary changes regarding the prior and future utilization of net operating losses, temporary suspension of certain payment requirements for the employer portion of Social Security taxes, and the creation of certain refundable employee retention credits. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized a benefit of $10.7 from the CARES Act. The benefit was recorded in operating income and was applied against the employer portion of payroll taxes.
Certain non-U.S. jurisdictions have enacted similar stimulus measures focused on payroll incentives and tariff reductions. We continue to monitor any effects that may result from the CARES Act or other similar legislation globally. On December 21, 2020, the U.S. Congress enacted the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, also known as "CARES Act 2." The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this new legislation on its consolidated financial statements.
We operate in various tax jurisdictions and are subject to examination by tax authorities in these jurisdictions. We are currently under examination in several jurisdictions including the Czech Republic, Germany, Hong Kong, India, Italy, Japan, the U.S. and Venezuela. The calculation of our tax liability for unrecognized tax benefits includes dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in various tax jurisdictions. Due to the complexity of some uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the unrecognized tax benefit. Over the next 12 months, the net amount of the tax liability for unrecognized tax benefits in foreign and domestic jurisdictions could change by approximately $15 due to changes in audit status, expiration of statutes of limitations and other events. The settlement of any future foreign examinations could result in changes in the amounts attributable to the Company under its existing Tax Matters Agreement with Exelis Inc. (Exelis) and Xylem Inc. (Xylem).
See Note 6, Income Taxes, to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on tax-related matters.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Funding and Liquidity Strategy
We monitor our funding needs and execute strategies to meet overall liquidity requirements, including the management of our capital structure, on both a short-term and long-term basis. Significant factors that affect our overall management of liquidity include our cash flow from operations, credit ratings, the availability of commercial paper, access to bank lines of credit, term loans, and the ability to attract long-term capital on satisfactory terms. We assess these factors along with current market conditions on a continuous basis, and as a result, may alter the mix of our short- and long-term financing when it is advantageous to do so. We expect to have enough liquidity to fund operations for at least the next 12 months and beyond.
As a result of the COVID-19 global pandemic, we have experienced, and may continue to experience, unfavorable impacts to our cash flow from operations, which is the primary source of funding for our ongoing working capital needs. These negative impacts include, but are not limited to, lower revenues and orders from customer delays, missed or late deliveries due to disruptions in our global supply chain, delayed supplier deliveries, or the inability to procure supplier inputs at reasonable prices or at all, and customer bankruptcies or delays in customer receivable collections. We are unable to predict how long these negative impacts will last, and therefore have taken proactive measures to access additional liquidity. On April 29, 2020, we secured two 364-day revolving credit agreements totaling $200 to supplement our existing $500 Revolving Credit Agreement and commercial paper programs. As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit agreements. We also continue to take a proactive approach to preserve cash by renegotiating contracts with vendors where possible, applying aggressive cost savings measures to limit discretionary spending, and implementing actions to reduce our cost structure. The Company also continues to evaluate the various global governmental programs instituted in response to COVID-19, including the CARES Act in the U.S., to further maximize our liquidity. The CARES Act and various global programs in the jurisdictions in which we operate generally provide for deferrals of tax payments, employee retention credits, workforce incentives, as well as incentive financing programs backed by governmental agencies. As of December 31, 2020, we have not incurred any borrowings under governmental loan programs.
We manage our worldwide cash requirements considering available funds among the many subsidiaries through which we conduct business and the cost effectiveness with which those funds can be accessed. We have identified and continue to look for opportunities to access cash balances in excess of local operating requirements to meet our global liquidity needs in a cost-efficient manner. We plan to continue to transfer cash between certain international subsidiaries and the U.S. and other international subsidiaries when it is cost effective to do so. The passage of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (Tax Act) in 2017 provided greater flexibility around our global cash management strategy related to the amount and timing of transfers, and we will continue to support growth and expansion in markets outside of the U.S. through the development of products, increased capital spending, and potential foreign acquisitions. Net cash distributions from foreign countries to the U.S. during the year ended December 31, 2020 were $498.2. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we had net cash distributions from foreign countries to the U.S. of $11.4. The timing and amount of any additional future distributions remains under evaluation based on our jurisdictional cash needs.
The amount and timing of dividends payable on our common stock are within the sole discretion of our Board of Directors and will be based on, and affected by, a number of factors, including our financial position and results of operations, available cash, expected capital spending plans, prevailing business conditions, and other factors the Board of Directors deems relevant. Therefore, there can be no assurance as to what level of dividends, if any, will be paid in the future. Aggregate dividends paid in 2020 were $59.0, compared to $52.1 in 2019, reflecting annual per share amounts of $0.676 and $0.588, respectively. In the first quarter of 2021, we declared a quarterly dividend of $0.22 per share for shareholders of record on March 17, 2021, which will be paid on April 5, 2021.
During the first quarter of 2020, we completed our $1 billion share repurchase plan approved in 2006 and commenced repurchases under the $500 share repurchase plan approved in 2019. In 2020 and 2019, we repurchased and retired 1.7 and 0.5 shares of common stock for $73.2 and $28.7, respectively, under our share repurchase plans. Separate from our share repurchase plans, the Company repurchased 0.2 shares and 0.3 shares for an aggregate price of $11.0 and $12.7 during 2020 and 2019, respectively, in settlement of employee tax withholding obligations due upon the vesting of RSUs and PSUs. All repurchased shares are canceled immediately following the repurchases.
Commercial Paper
We have access to the commercial paper market through programs in place in the U.S. and Europe, to supplement the cash flows generated internally and to provide additional short-term funding for strategic investments and other funding requirements. We manage our short-term liquidity through the use of our commercial paper program by adjusting the level of commercial paper borrowings as opportunities to deploy additional capital arise and it is cost effective to do so. We had $104.3 and $84.2 of commercial paper outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our average daily outstanding commercial paper balance for the years ended 2020 and 2019 was $76.4 and $122.0, respectively, and the maximum outstanding commercial paper during each of those respective years was $159.1 and $167.9. There have been no other material changes that have impacted our funding and liquidity capabilities.
Revolving Credit Agreement
Our $500 revolving credit agreement (the Revolving Credit Agreement) provides for increases of up to $200 for a possible maximum total of $700 in aggregate principal amount, at the request of the Company and with the consent of the institutions providing such increased commitments. The Revolving Credit Agreement is intended to provide access to additional liquidity to be a source of alternate funding to the commercial paper program, if needed. Our policy is to maintain unused committed bank lines of credit in an amount greater than outstanding commercial paper balances. Two borrowing options are available under the Revolving Credit Agreement: (i) a competitive advance option, and (ii) a revolving credit option. The interest rates for the competitive advance option will be obtained from bids in accordance with competitive auction procedures. The interest rates under the revolving credit option will be based either on LIBOR plus spreads reflecting the Company’s credit ratings, or on the Administrative Agent’s Alternate Base Rate. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019 we had no outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Agreement. In the event of a ratings downgrade of the Company to a level below investment grade, the direct and indirect significant U.S. subsidiaries of the Company would be required to guarantee the obligations under the Revolving Credit Agreement. The Revolving Credit Agreement matures in November 2022.
On April 29, 2020, we entered into two 364-day revolving credit agreements totaling $200 (the Incremental Revolving Credit Agreements) which provide the Company with additional liquidity in excess of the Revolving Credit Agreement. The provisions of the Incremental Revolving Credit Agreements mirror those of the Revolving Credit Agreement, including all covenants. In addition, the Incremental Revolving Credit Agreements did not violate any negative covenants associated with the existing Revolving Credit Agreement. There were no outstanding borrowings under the Incremental Revolving Credit Agreements as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, our interest coverage ratio and leverage ratios associated with our revolving credit agreements were within the prescribed thresholds. Additionally, we expect to remain within the prescribed thresholds until maturity.
Our credit ratings as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
In 2020, Moody's Investors Service upgraded its credit rating for ITT, including the Company's senior unsecured debt rating to Baa2 from Baa3 and its short-term commercial paper rating to P-2 from P-3. The upgrades reflect Moody's expectation that ITT will sustain improvements in profitability and free cash flows while maintaining relatively low funded debt levels, a strong liquidity profile and well-balanced financial policies. The ratings upgrades also reflect Moody's expectation that ITT's earnings and cash flow resiliency amid the COVID-19 pandemic will be sustained. Please refer to the rating agency websites and press releases for more information.
Sources and Uses of Liquidity
Our principal source of liquidity is our cash flow generated from operating activities, which provides us with the ability to meet the majority of our short-term funding requirements. The following table summarizes net cash derived from operating, investing, and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Operating Activities
The increase in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to increased collections from customers and improved inventory management. Also contributing to the increase was lower asbestos-related payments of $11.8. These items were partially offset by lower segment operating income, timing of accounts payable and an increase in restructuring payments of $21.3. In addition, the Company’s 2019 net settlement of $10 for a civil matter with the U.S. Department of Justice was partially offset by proceeds received of $9 in 2019 from an intellectual property settlement.
Investing Activities
The decrease in net cash used in investing activities of $137.6 was primarily driven by 2019 payments of $113.1 related to the acquisitions of Rheinhütte and Matrix. In addition, capital expenditures decreased $27.7 as a result of cost containment measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Financing Activities
The increase in net cash used in financing activities of $57.1 was primarily driven by an increase in repurchases of ITT common stock of $42.8. In addition, proceeds from the issuance of common stock decreased $10.6 and dividend payments increased $6.9. During 2020, we borrowed approximately $500 from our Revolving Credit Agreement which was outstanding for approximately three months.
Asbestos
Based on the estimated undiscounted asbestos liability as of December 31, 2020 for claims filed or estimated to be filed through 2052, we have estimated that we will be able to recover approximately 48% of the asbestos indemnity and defense costs from our insurers. However, actual insurance reimbursements may vary significantly from period to period and the anticipated recovery rate is expected to decline over time due to gaps in our insurance coverage, reflecting uninsured periods, the insolvency of certain insurers, prior settlements with our insurers, and our expectation that certain insurance policies will exhaust over time. Additionally, future recovery rates may be impacted by other factors, such as future insurance settlements, insolvencies, and judicial determinations relevant to our coverage program, which are difficult to predict. The Company has negotiated with certain of its excess insurers to reimburse the Company for a portion of its settlement or defense costs as incurred, frequently referred to as "coverage-in-place" agreements. Under coverage-in-place agreements, an insurer’s policies remain in force and the insurer undertakes to provide coverage for the Company’s present and future asbestos claims on specified terms and conditions that address, among other things, the share of asbestos claims costs to be paid by the insurer, payment terms, claims handling procedures and the expiration of the insurer’s obligations. The Company has
entered into policy buyout agreements with certain insurers confirming the aggregate amount of available coverage under the subject policies and setting forth a schedule for future payments to a Qualified Settlement Fund, to be disbursed for future asbestos costs. Collectively, these agreements are designed to facilitate an orderly resolution and collection of ITT’s insurance and to mitigate issues that insurers may raise regarding their responsibility to respond to claims. During 2020, we negotiated certain asbestos-related insurance coverage, resulting in a net benefit of $100.4, including a coverage-in-place agreement in the fourth quarter that increased our asbestos-related asset by $52.1.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has entered into coverage-in-place agreements and policy buyout agreements representing approximately 76% of our recorded asbestos-related asset. While there are overall limits on the aggregate amount of insurance available to the Company with respect to asbestos claims, with respect to certain coverage, those overall limits were not reached by the estimated liability recorded by the Company at December 31, 2020. We continue to pursue our right to reimbursement for asbestos-related losses under certain insurance policies in the coverage litigation and explore negotiations with our insurers to maximize our insurance recoveries.
Although asbestos cash outflows can vary significantly from year to year, our current net cash outflows for defense and indemnity, net of tax benefits, are projected to average $20 to $30 per year over the next ten years, with declines in subsequent years. Net cash outflows for defense and indemnity, net of tax, averaged $13 over the past three annual periods. Total net asbestos cash outflows also include certain administrative costs such as legal related costs for insurance asset recoveries.
In light of the uncertainties and variables inherent in the long-term projection of the Company's asbestos exposures and potential recoveries, it is difficult to predict the ultimate cost of resolving the pending and estimated future claims. We believe it is possible that future events affecting the key factors and other variables over the projection period could have a material adverse effect on our financial statements.
Funding of Postretirement Plans
The following table provides a summary of the funded status of our postretirement benefit plans as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we completed the termination of our U.S. qualified pension plan and transfer of the plan's liabilities to an insurance company. We settled all future obligations under the plan by providing lump sum payments to eligible participants who elected to receive them, and by purchasing a group annuity contract from MassMutual Life Insurance Company (MassMutual) for the remaining projected benefit obligation. MassMutual has fully assumed the responsibility for paying and administering pension benefits to the approximately five thousand plan participants and their beneficiaries. The termination was funded with plan assets of approximately $320 and cash of $8.4. Contributions to our U.S. pension plans, including the amount related to the plan termination, were $9.3 and $9.9 during 2020 and 2019, respectively. The 2019 amount included discretionary contributions to our U.S. pension plans of $9.0. We estimate contributions to the remaining non-qualified U.S. pension plan will be approximately $1 in 2021.
Our non-U.S. pension plans, which are typically not funded due to local regulations, had a decline in funded status of $10.7 during 2020, primarily due to a lower discount rate and unfavorable foreign currency translation. Contributions to our non-U.S. pension plans were $4.1 and $3.1 during 2020 and 2019, respectively, which were utilized to pay participant benefits. We currently estimate that the 2021 contributions to our non-U.S. pension plans will be approximately $5.
Our other employee-related benefit plans are generally unfunded plans. The funded status of these plans declined by $3.0 during 2020. We contributed $4.6 and $10.0 to our other employee-related defined benefit plans during 2020 and 2019, respectively. We currently estimate that the 2021 contributions to our other employee-related defined benefit plans will be approximately $9.
See Note 16, Postretirement Benefit Plans, for additional financial information related to our postretirement obligations.
Capital Resources
Long-term debt is generally defined as any debt with an original maturity greater than 12 months. As of December 31, 2020, we have sources of short- and long-term funding including access to the capital markets through a commercial paper program and $700 of available borrowing capacity under our revolving credit agreements, which may potentially be expanded to $900, under the Revolving Credit Agreement, as well as market access to longer-term markets. Our commercial paper program is supported by the Revolving Credit Agreement and our policy is to maintain unused committed bank lines of credit in an amount greater than outstanding commercial paper balances.
The table below provides long-term debt outstanding and finance lease obligations at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Contractual Obligations
ITT’s commitment to make future payments under long-term contractual obligations was as follows, as of December 31, 2020:
In addition to the amounts presented in the table above, we have recorded liabilities for pending asbestos claims and asbestos claims estimated to be filed through 2052 and uncertain tax positions of $932.0 and $17.2, respectively, in our Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2020. These amounts have been excluded from the contractual obligations table due to an inability to reasonably estimate the timing of payments in individual years.
(a)Represents unconditional purchase agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms to purchase goods or services, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Purchase agreements that are cancellable without penalty have been excluded.
(b)Represents the projected timing of payments for benefits earned to date and the expectation that certain future service will be earned by current active employees for our pension and other employee-related benefit plans. See Note 16, Postretirement Benefit Plans, for additional financial information related to our postretirement obligations.
(c)Other long-term obligations include amounts recorded on our December 31, 2020 Consolidated Balance Sheet, including estimated environmental payments and employee compensation agreements. We estimate based on historical experience that we will spend approximately $5 per year on environmental investigation and remediation. A portion of our environmental investigation and remediation costs are legally mandated through various orders and agreements with state and federal oversight agencies. At December 31, 2020, our recorded environmental liability was $58.3. See Note 20, Commitments and Contingencies, to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Off-balance sheet arrangements represent transactions, agreements or other contractual arrangements with unconsolidated entities, where an obligation or contingent interest exists. Our off-balance sheet arrangements, as of December 31, 2020, consist of indemnities related to acquisition and disposition agreements and certain third-party guarantees.
Indemnities
Since our founding in 1920, we have acquired and disposed of numerous businesses. The related acquisition and disposition agreements allocate certain assets and liabilities among the parties and contain various representation and warranty clauses and may provide indemnities for a misrepresentation or breach of the representations and warranties by either party or for assumed or excluded liabilities. These provisions address a variety of subjects. The term and monetary amounts of each such provision are defined in the specific agreements and may be affected by various conditions and external factors. Many of the provisions have expired either by operation of law or as a result of the terms of the agreement. We do not have a liability recorded for these expired provisions and are not aware of any claims or other information that would give rise to material payments under such provisions.
As part of ITT's 2011 spin-off of its Defense and Information Solutions business, Exelis, and its water-related business, Xylem, ITT LLC agreed to assume certain liabilities and provide certain indemnifications and cross-indemnifications among ITT LLC, Exelis and Xylem, subject to limited exceptions with respect to employee claims. The provisions address a variety of subjects, including asserted and unasserted product liability matters (e.g., asbestos claims, product warranties) which relate to certain products manufactured, repaired or sold prior to the date of the 2011 spin-off. These provisions last indefinitely and are not affected by Harris' acquisition of Exelis, or Harris' merger with L3 Technologies. In addition, ITT LLC, Exelis and Xylem agreed to certain cross-indemnifications with respect to other liabilities and obligations. ITT LLC expects Exelis and Xylem to fully perform under the terms of the Distribution Agreement and therefore has not recorded a liability for matters for which we have been assumed or indemnified. In addition, both Exelis and Xylem have made asbestos indemnity claims that could give rise to material payments under the indemnity provided by ITT LLC; such claims are included in our estimate of asbestos liabilities.
Guarantees
We had $150.5 of guarantees, letters of credit and similar arrangements outstanding at December 31, 2020, primarily pertaining to commercial or performance guarantees and insurance matters. We have not recorded any material loss contingencies under these guarantees, letters of credit and similar arrangements as of December 31, 2020 as the likelihood of nonperformance by the underlying obligors is considered remote. From time to time, we may provide certain third-party guarantees that may be affected by various conditions and external factors, some of which could require that payments be made under such guarantees. We do not consider the maximum exposure or current recorded liabilities under our third-party guarantees to be material either individually or in the aggregate. We do not believe such payments would have a material adverse impact on our financial statements.
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND NON-GAAP MEASURES
Management reviews a variety of key performance indicators including revenue, segment operating income and margins, and earnings per share, some of which are calculated other than in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United State of America (GAAP). In addition, we consider certain measures to be useful to management and investors when evaluating our operating performance for the periods presented. These measures provide a tool for evaluating our ongoing operations and management of assets from period to period. This information can assist investors in assessing our financial performance and measures our ability to generate capital for deployment among competing strategic alternatives and initiatives, including, but not limited to, acquisitions, dividends, and share repurchases. Some of these metrics, however, are not measures of financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered a substitute for measures determined in accordance with GAAP. We consider the non-GAAP measures disclosed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to be key performance indicators. These measures, which may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies, consist of the following:
•“Organic revenue” is defined as revenue, excluding the impacts of foreign currency fluctuations, acquisitions, and divestitures that did not meet the criteria for presentation as a discontinued operation. The period-over-period change resulting from foreign currency fluctuations is estimated using a fixed exchange rate for both the current and prior periods. Management believes that reporting organic revenue provides useful information to investors by facilitating comparisons of our revenue performance with prior and future periods and to our peers. A reconciliation of revenue to organic revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 is provided below.
•“Adjusted operating income” and “Adjusted segment operating income” are defined as operating income, adjusted to exclude special items that include, but are not limited to, asbestos-related impacts, restructuring, realignment, certain asset impairment charges, certain acquisition-related impacts, and unusual or infrequent operating items. Special items represent charges or credits that impact current results, which management views as unrelated to the Company’s ongoing operations and performance. “Adjusted operating margin” and “Adjusted segment operating margin” are defined as adjusted operating income or adjusted segment operating income divided by revenue. We believe that these financial measures are useful to investors and other users of our financial statements in evaluating ongoing operating profitability, as well as in evaluating operating performance in relation to our competitors.
A reconciliation of operating income to adjusted operating income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are provided in the tables below.
(a)Asset impairment charges in 2020 are related to a business within IP that primarily serves the global upstream oil and gas market.
(b)Realignment costs and other at MT include costs associated with the settlement of a legal matter in 2019.
Realignment costs and other at IP include a management reorganization.
Realignment costs and other at CCT include costs associated with a resolved DOJ civil matter.
Realignment costs and other at Corporate primarily reflects accelerated amortization of an intangible asset.
•“Adjusted income from continuing operations” is defined as income from continuing operations attributable to ITT Inc. adjusted to exclude special items that include, but are not limited to, asbestos-related impacts, restructuring, realignment, certain asset impairment charges, pension termination and settlement impacts, certain acquisition-related impacts, income tax settlements or adjustments, and unusual or infrequent items. Special items represent charges or credits, on an after-tax basis, that impact current results, which management views as unrelated to the Company’s ongoing operations and performance. The after-tax basis of each special item is determined using the jurisdictional tax rate of where the expense or benefit occurred. “Adjusted income from continuing operations per diluted share” (Adjusted EPS) is defined as adjusted income from continuing operations divided by diluted weighted average common shares outstanding. We believe that adjusted income from continuing operations and adjusted EPS are useful to investors and other users of our financial statements in evaluating ongoing operating profitability, as well as in evaluating operating performance in relation to our competitors.
A reconciliation of adjusted income from continuing operations, including adjusted earnings per diluted share, to income from continuing operations and income from continuing operations per diluted share for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are provided in the table below.
(a)Asset impairment charges in 2020 are related to a business within IP that primarily serves the global upstream oil and gas market.
(b)The following table details significant components of the tax-related special items. See Note 6, Income Taxes, to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
(c)Realignment and other in 2020 primarily relates to amortization of certain intangible assets. Realignment and other in 2019 primarily relates to amortization of certain intangible assets, management reorganization costs at IP and our Corporate Headquarters, and costs associated with a legal matter.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in accordance with GAAP requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the financial statements are discussed in Note 1, Description of Business, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the Consolidated Financial Statements. An accounting policy is deemed critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes to the estimate that are reasonably possible could materially affect the financial statements. Senior management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of ITT’s Board of Directors.
The accounting estimates and assumptions discussed below are those that we consider most critical to fully understanding our financial statements and evaluating our results as they are inherently uncertain, involve the most subjective or complex judgments, include areas where different estimates reasonably could have been used, and the use of an alternative estimate that is reasonably possible could materially affect the financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and other data and assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting balances reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements are reasonable; however, actual results could differ materially from our estimates and assumptions.
Asbestos Matters
Our subsidiaries, ITT LLC and Goulds Pumps LLC, have been sued along with many other companies in product liability lawsuits alleging personal injury due to asbestos exposure. These claims generally allege that certain products sold by our subsidiaries prior to 1985 contained a part manufactured by a third party (e.g., a gasket) that contained asbestos. To the extent that these third-party parts may have contained asbestos, it was encapsulated in the gasket (or other) material and was non-friable.
Estimating our exposure to pending asbestos claims and those that may be filed in the future is subject to significant uncertainty and risk as there are multiple variables that can affect the timing, severity, quality, quantity, and resolution of claims. The methodology used to project future asbestos costs is based largely on the Company’s recent experience in resolving asbestos claims. To estimate the Company's exposure for pending claims, we use recent dismissal rates and settlement averages to calculate the expected cost of those cases. To estimate the unasserted claims, the Company relies on previously conducted epidemiological studies estimating the population of U.S. workers across 11 different industry and occupation categories believed to have been exposed to asbestos. We use relevant information from those studies to calculate an estimate of the number of claims to be compensated by the Company and then apply our recent experience on settlement averages to calculate the estimated costs to be incurred to resolve those unasserted claims. In addition, the estimate is augmented for the costs of defending asbestos claims in the tort system. The asbestos liability has not been discounted to present value as the timing of future cash flows may vary. The Company retains a consulting firm to assist management in estimating our potential exposure to pending asbestos claims and for claims estimated to be filed in the future. The methodology to project future asbestos costs is one in which the underlying assumptions are separately assessed for their reasonableness and then each is used as an input to the liability estimate.
The liability estimate is most sensitive to assumptions surrounding mesothelioma and lung cancer claims, as together, the estimated costs to resolve pending and estimated future mesothelioma and lung cancer claims represent approximately 98% of the indemnity liability, but only 33% of pending claims.
The assumptions used by the Company are interdependent and no one factor predominates in estimating the asbestos liability. While there are other potential inputs to the model used to estimate our asbestos exposures for pending and estimated future claims, our methodology relies on the best input available for each individual assumption and, due to the interdependencies, does not create a range of reasonably possible outcomes. Projecting future asbestos costs is subject to numerous variables and uncertainties that are inherently difficult to predict. In addition to the uncertainties surrounding the key assumptions, additional uncertainty related to asbestos claims arise from the long latency period prior to the manifestation of an asbestos-related disease, changes in available medical treatments and associated medical costs, changes in plaintiff behavior resulting from bankruptcies of other companies that are potential defendants or co-defendants, uncertainties surrounding the litigation process from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, and the impact of potential legislative or judicial changes.
The forecast period used to estimate our potential exposure to projected asbestos claims is a judgment based on a number of factors, including volatility in asbestos litigation in general, the number and type of claims filed, recent experience with claims activity, and whether our past experience is expected to continue into the future. During the third quarter of 2020, we extended our forecast period to include pending claims and claims expected to be filed through 2052, reflecting the full time period over which we expect asbestos-related claims to be filed against us. Our ability to reasonably estimate the liability over the full time horizon resulted from the culmination of various factors, including:
•We observed stability in our data, particularly our experience in the number of and percentage of claims compensated by the Company, the amounts paid to settle claims, and related defense costs, subsequent to the implementation of our one-firm defense strategy.
•Recent favorable developments in our insurance coverage litigation, including a stipulation filed with the court in the third quarter of 2020, upon which we subsequently entered into a coverage-in-place agreement with a group of insurers regarding the remaining available and solvent limits of a significant coverage block, and our experience with insurance settlements, provided additional certainty with respect to the availability of insurance to reimburse us for certain asbestos-related expenses and the overall net exposure of the Company.
Overall, we believe there is greater predictability of outcomes from insurance settlements and stability of underlying inputs used in calculating the gross liability. As a result, we believe the uncertainty in calculating the net liability has been reduced and there was sufficient reliability to transition to a full time horizon in 2020.
We record a corresponding asbestos-related asset that represents our best estimate of probable insurance recoveries related to the recorded asbestos liability. In developing this estimate, the Company considers coverage-in-place and other settlement agreements with its insurers, as well as a number of additional factors, including expected levels of future cost recovery, the financial viability of the insurance companies, the method by which losses will be allocated to the various insurance policies and the years covered by those policies, the extent to which settlement and defense costs will be reimbursed by the insurance policies, and interpretation of the various policy and contract terms and limits and their interrelationships. The asbestos-related asset has not been discounted to present value, consistent with the asbestos liability as the timing of the insurance recoveries, including those under coverage-in-place and other settlement agreements, is dependent on the timing of payments of the asbestos liability.
The Company retains a consulting firm to assist management in estimating probable insurance recoveries related to pending and future asbestos claims. The analysis of policy terms and the likelihood of recovery from solvent insurers are provided by external legal counsel and includes a risk assessment where policy terms or other factors are not certain and allocates asbestos settlement and defense costs among our insurers. The aggregate amount of insurance available to the Company was acquired over many years and from many different carriers. The Company is in litigation with certain of these carriers to enforce its right to coverage for asbestos-related losses under policies they or their predecessors issued. Amounts deemed not recoverable generally are due from insurers that are insolvent.
Based on the estimated undiscounted asbestos liability as of December 31, 2020, we have estimated that we will be able to recover 48% of asbestos indemnity and defense costs from our insurers. However, actual insurance reimbursements may vary significantly from period to period and the anticipated recovery rate is expected to decline over time due to exhaustion of policies and the insolvency of certain insurers. Future recovery rates may be impacted (positively or negatively) by other factors, such as future insurance settlements, unforeseen insolvencies, and judicial determinations relevant to our coverage program, which are difficult to predict.
Our estimated asbestos liability and related receivables are based on management’s best estimate of future events largely based on past experience; however, past experience may not prove a reliable predictor of the future. Future events affecting the key assumptions and other variables for either the asbestos liability or the related receivables could cause actual costs and recoveries to be materially higher or lower than currently estimated. For example, a significant upward or downward trend in the number of claims filed, depending on the nature of the alleged injury, the jurisdiction where filed and the quality of the product identification could change the estimated liability, as would substantial adverse verdicts at trial. A legislative solution, structured settlement transaction, or significant change in relevant case law could also change the estimated liability. Further, the bankruptcy of an insurer or settlements with our insurers, whether through coverage-in-place agreements or policy buyouts, could change the estimated amount of recoveries.
Due to these uncertainties, it is difficult to predict the ultimate cost of resolving all pending and estimated unasserted asbestos claims. We believe it is possible that the future events affecting the key factors and other variables in estimating our liability could have a material adverse effect on our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is derived from the sale of products and services to customers. We recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. For product sales, other than certain long-term construction and production type contracts where we have no alternative use for the product and have an enforceable right to payment, we recognize revenue at the time control passes to the customer, generally when products are shipped and the contractual terms have been fulfilled.
We recognize revenue for certain highly customized long-term design and build projects using the cost-to-total cost method, based upon the percentage of costs incurred to total projected costs. Revenue and profit recognized under the cost-to-total cost method are based on management’s estimates such as total contract revenues, contract costs and the extent of progress toward completion. Due to the long-term nature of the contracts, these estimates are subject to uncertainties and require significant judgment. Estimates of contract costs include labor hours and rates, and material costs. These estimates consider historical performance, the complexity of the work to be performed, the estimated time to complete the project, and other economic factors such as inflation and market rates. We update our estimates on a periodic basis and any revisions to such estimates are recorded in earnings in the period in which they are determined. Provisions for estimated losses, if any, on uncompleted long-term contracts, are made in the period in which such losses are determined.
For contracts recognized at a point in time, provisions for estimated losses, if any, on uncompleted arrangements, are recognized in the period in which such losses are determined. These estimates are subject to uncertainties and require significant judgment and may consider historical performance, the complexity of the work to be performed, the estimated time to complete the project, and other economic factors such as inflation.
Additionally, accruals for estimated expenses related to sales returns and warranties are made at the time products are sold. Reserves for sales returns, rebates and other allowances are established using historical information on the frequency of returns for a particular product and period over which products can be returned. For distributors and resellers, our typical return period is less than 180 days. Future market conditions and product transitions may require us to take actions to increase customer incentive offerings, possibly resulting in a reduction in revenue at the time the incentive is offered.
Warranty accruals are established using historical information on the nature, frequency and average cost of warranty claims and estimates of future costs. Our standard product warranty terms generally include post-sales support and repairs or replacement of a product at no additional charge for a specified period of time. While we engage in extensive product quality programs and processes, we base our estimated warranty obligation on product warranty terms offered to customers, ongoing product failure rates, materials usage, service delivery costs incurred in correcting a product failure, and specific product class failures outside of our baseline experience and associated overhead costs. If actual product failure rates, repair rates, or any other post-sales support costs differ from these estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be required.
For certain highly complex contracts, design, engineering, and other preproduction costs may be capitalized if the costs relate directly to a contract or anticipated contract that the entity can specifically identify, the costs generate or enhance resources of the entity that will be used in satisfying performance obligations in the future and the costs are expected to be recovered. In addition to direct labor and materials to fulfill a contract or anticipated contract, we exercise judgment in determining which costs are allocated, including allocations of contract management and depreciation of tooling used to fulfill the contract. Additionally, overall contract profitability is estimated in determining cost recoverability.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the estimated future tax effects of differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, applying currently enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect the differences will reverse. We periodically assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets and reflect any changes to our estimate of the amount we are more likely than not to realize as a valuation allowance, with a corresponding adjustment to earnings or other comprehensive income (loss), as appropriate. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets depends on the
generation of future taxable income (including the reversals of deferred tax liabilities) during the periods in which those deferred tax assets will become deductible.
The Company assesses all available positive and negative evidence regarding the realizability of its deferred tax assets. Significant judgment is required in assessing the need for any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, including the future reversal of existing taxable temporary differences, taxable income in carryback periods, prudent and feasible tax planning strategies, estimated future taxable income, and whether we have a recent history of losses. The valuation allowance can be affected by changes to tax regulations, interpretations and rulings, changes to enacted statutory tax rates, and changes to future taxable income estimates.
Our effective tax rate reflects the impact of certain undistributed foreign earnings for which we have not provided U.S. taxes because these earnings are considered indefinitely reinvested outside of the U.S. We plan foreign earnings remittance amounts based on projected cash flow needs, as well as the working capital and long-term investment requirements of our foreign subsidiaries and our domestic operations. Based on these assumptions, we estimate the amount we will distribute to the U.S. and accrue U.S. and foreign taxes on these planned foreign remittance amounts. Material changes in our estimates of cash, working capital and long-term investment requirements in the various jurisdictions in which we do business could impact our effective tax rate. Our provision for income taxes could be adversely impacted by changes in our geographic mix of earnings or changes in the enacted tax rates in the jurisdictions in which we conduct our business.
The calculation of our deferred and other tax balances involves significant management judgment when dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations and rulings in a multitude of taxing jurisdictions across our global operations. The Company is routinely audited by U.S. federal, state and foreign tax authorities, the results of which could result in proposed assessments against the Company. We recognize potential liabilities and record tax liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues based on our estimate of whether, and to the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. Furthermore, we recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position in consideration of applicable tax statutes and related interpretations and precedents and the expected outcome of the proceedings (or negotiations) with the taxing authorities. Tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized on ultimate settlement.
We adjust our liability for uncertain tax positions in light of changing facts and circumstances; however, the ultimate resolution of a tax examination may differ from the amounts recorded in the financial statements for a number of reasons, including the Company’s decision to settle rather than litigate a matter, relevant legal precedent related to similar matters, and the Company’s success in supporting its filing positions with the tax authorities. If our estimate of tax liabilities proves different than the ultimate outcome, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
We review goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. We also review the carrying value of our finite-lived intangible assets for potential impairment when impairment indicators arise. We conduct our annual impairment tests as of the first day of the fourth quarter. When reviewing for impairment, we may opt to make an initial qualitative evaluation, which considers present events and circumstances, to determine the likelihood of impairment. Our decision to perform a qualitative impairment assessment for an individual reporting unit in a given year is influenced by a number of factors, including the significance of the excess of the reporting unit's estimated fair value over carrying value at the last quantitative assessment date, changes in macroeconomic, industry and reporting-unit specific conditions and the amount of time in between quantitative fair value measurements. If the likelihood of impairment is not considered to be more likely than not, then no further testing is performed.
In cases when we opt not to perform a qualitative evaluation or the qualitative evaluation indicates that the likelihood of impairment is more likely than not, we then perform a quantitative impairment test for goodwill. We test each reporting unit for goodwill impairment quantitatively at a minimum of once every three years. We compare the estimated fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. If the estimated fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that reporting unit, goodwill is not impaired. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, then we record an impairment loss equal to the difference. In our annual impairment test for indefinite-lived intangible assets, we compare the fair value of those assets to their carrying value. We recognize an impairment loss when the estimated fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying value.
We estimate the fair value of our reporting units using an income approach. Under the income approach, we calculate fair value based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. We estimate the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets using the relief from royalty method. The relief from royalty method estimates the portion of a company’s earnings attributable to an intellectual property asset based on an assumed royalty rate that the company would have paid had the asset not been owned.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit or an indefinite-lived intangible asset is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, particularly related to future operating results and cash flows. These estimates and assumptions include, but are not limited to, revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, assumed royalty rates, future economic and market conditions and the identification of appropriate market comparable data. In addition, the identification of reporting units and the allocation of assets and liabilities to the reporting units when determining the carrying value of each reporting unit also requires judgment. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, which, based on the applicable accounting guidance, is either the operating segment or one level below (e.g., the divisions of our Connect & Control Technology segment). The fair value of our reporting units and indefinite-lived intangible assets are based on estimates and assumptions that are believed to be reasonable. Significant changes to these estimates and assumptions could adversely impact our conclusions. Actual future results may differ from those estimates. Further, had different reporting units been identified or had different valuation techniques or assumptions been utilized, the results of our impairment tests could have resulted in an impairment loss, which could have been material. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we performed our annual impairment assessment and determined that the estimated fair values of our goodwill reporting units were substantially in excess of each of their carrying values.
See Note 12, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net, to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Environmental Liabilities
We are subject to various federal, state, local, and foreign environmental laws and regulations that require environmental assessment or remediation efforts. Accruals for environmental exposures are recorded on a site-by-site basis when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be reasonably estimated, based on current law and existing technologies. Significant judgment is required to determine both the likelihood of a loss and the estimated amount of loss. Engineering studies, probability techniques, historical experience and other factors are used to identify and evaluate remediation alternatives and their related costs in estimating our reserve for environmental liabilities. Our environmental reserve of $58.3 at December 31, 2020, represents management’s estimate of undiscounted costs expected to be incurred related to environmental assessment or remediation efforts, as well as related legal fees, without regard to potential recoveries from insurance companies or other third parties. Our estimated liability is reduced to reflect the participation of other potentially responsible parties in those instances where it is probable that such parties are legally responsible and financially capable of paying their respective share of the relevant costs and that share can be reasonably estimated. Our environmental accruals are reviewed and adjusted for progress of investigation and remediation efforts and as additional technical or legal information become available, such as the impact of negotiations with regulators and other potentially responsible parties, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and other current information.
We closely monitor our environmental responsibilities, together with trends in the environmental laws. Environmental remediation reserves are subject to numerous inherent uncertainties that affect our ability to estimate our share of the costs. Such uncertainties involve incomplete information regarding particular sites and other potentially responsible parties, uncertainty regarding the nature and extent of contamination at each site, the extent of remediation required under existing regulations, our share of any remediation liability, if any, widely varying cost estimates associated with potential alternative remedial approaches, the length of time required to remediate a particular site, the potential effects of continuing improvements in remediation technology, and changes in environmental standards and regulatory requirements. While environmental laws and regulations are subject to change, the nature of such change is inherently unpredictable and the timing of potential changes is uncertain. The effect of legislative or regulatory changes on environmental standards could be material to the Company’s financial statements. Additionally, violations by us of such laws and regulations, discovery of previously unknown or more extensive contamination, litigation involving environmental impacts, our inability to recover costs associated with any such developments, or financial insolvency of other potentially responsible parties could have a material adverse effect on our financial statements.
Although it is not possible to predict with certainty the ultimate costs of environmental remediation, the reasonably possible high-end range of our estimated environmental liability at December 31, 2020 was $97.6.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Recent Accounting Pronouncements, to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a complete discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.