Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements, which are included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Report.
Overview
We are a Maryland corporation primarily focused on investing in, financing and managing mortgage-backed securities (“MBS”) and other mortgage-related assets. Our objective is to provide attractive risk-adjusted returns to our stockholders, primarily through dividends and secondarily through capital appreciation. To achieve this objective, we have invested in the following:
•Residential mortgage-backed securities (“RMBS”) that are guaranteed by a U.S. government agency such as the Government National Mortgage Association (“Ginnie Mae”) or a federally chartered corporation such as the Federal National Mortgage Association (“Fannie Mae”) or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (“Freddie Mac”) (collectively “Agency RMBS”);
•Commercial mortgage-backed securities (“CMBS”) that are guaranteed by a U.S. government agency such as Ginnie Mae or a federally chartered corporation such as Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac (collectively “Agency CMBS”);
•RMBS that are not guaranteed by a U.S. government agency or a federally chartered corporation (“non-Agency RMBS”);
•CMBS that are not guaranteed by a U.S. government agency or a federally chartered corporation (“non-Agency CMBS”);
•Credit risk transfer securities that are unsecured obligations issued by government-sponsored enterprises (“GSE CRT”);
•To-be-announced securities forward contracts ("TBAs") to purchase Agency RMBS;
•Residential and commercial mortgage loans; and
•Other real estate-related financing arrangements.
We conduct our business through IAS Operating Partnership L.P. (our “Operating Partnership”). We are externally managed and advised by Invesco Advisers, Inc. (our “Manager”), an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of Invesco Ltd. (“Invesco”).
We have elected to be taxed as a real estate investment trust (“REIT”) for U.S. federal income tax purposes under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. To maintain our REIT qualification, we are generally required to distribute at least 90% of our REIT taxable income to our stockholders annually. We operate our business in a manner that permits our exclusion from the definition of an “Investment Company” under the 1940 Act.
In the first half of 2020, we experienced unprecedented market conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to significant spread widening in both Agency and non-Agency securities, we received an unusually high number of margin calls from counterparties in the latter part of March. We notified our financing counterparties on March 23, 2020 that we were not in a position to fund the margin calls we received and that we did not expect to be in a position to fund the anticipated volume of future margin calls under our financing arrangements. To generate liquidity and reduce leverage in the first half of 2020, we sold a substantial portion of our MBS and GSE CRT portfolio. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repaid all of our repurchase agreements that may not have been in compliance under our borrowing agreements and repaid our secured borrowings from the FHLBI.
We resumed investing in Agency RMBS in July 2020 with approximately 98% of our portfolio, excluding TBAs, invested in Agency RMBS at year end. We are financing our purchases of Agency RMBS with repurchase agreements and are in compliance with the terms of our financing arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We also began investing in TBAs as an alternative means of investing in and financing Agency RMBS in the third quarter of 2020. These TBAs are accounted for as derivative instruments under U.S. GAAP. We continue to hold unencumbered credit assets and evaluate potential credit investments that do not rely on short-term or mark-to-market financing. To further strengthen our balance sheet and position ourselves for future investment opportunities, we have explored and will continue to explore additional sources of financing including issuances of debt and equity securities and other forms of long-term financing arrangements. However, no assurance can be given that we will be able to access any additional sources of financing.
On March 24, 2020, we announced that we would delay the payment of quarterly dividends on our common and preferred stock to preserve liquidity until we could more accurately assess the impact of volatile market conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic. On May 9, 2020, our board of directors approved payment of the previously declared common and preferred dividends. We paid our first quarter 2020 common stock dividend of $0.50 per share on June 30, 2020 in a combination of cash and common shares. We paid cash dividends of $0.02, $0.05 and $0.08 per share on our common stock for the second, third and fourth quarter of 2020, respectively. Dividends on our Series A Preferred, Series B Preferred and Series C Preferred Stock are current.
While the Federal Reserve has taken a number of proactive measures to bolster liquidity, we expect market conditions to continue to be challenging due to the uncertainty around the duration and ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Invesco is committed to helping its employees, clients and communities navigate the challenges presented by the spread of COVID-19. The primary focus of Invesco's efforts is to ensure the health and safety of its employees while preserving its ability to serve clients and manage assets in a highly dynamic market environment. To help ensure it can continue to meet client needs, such as those of our Company, the majority of our Manager’s employees are working remotely. Portfolio managers, research analysts and traders are successfully working remotely or in secure locations with access to all systems necessary to fulfill their responsibilities and an ability to connect with their teams to manage client assets. Additionally, our Manager’s operational, control and support teams have successfully transitioned to a remote working environment.
Factors Impacting Our Operating Results
Our operating results can be affected by a number of factors and primarily depend on the level of our net interest income and the market value of our assets. Our net interest income, which includes the amortization of purchase premiums and accretion of purchase discounts, varies primarily as a result of changes in market interest rates and prepayment speeds, as measured by the constant prepayment rate (“CPR”) on our assets. Interest rates and prepayment speeds vary according to the type of investment, conditions in the financial markets, competition and other factors, none of which can be predicted with any certainty. The market value of our assets can be impacted by credit spread premiums (yield advantage over U.S. Treasury notes) and the supply of, and demand for, assets in which we invest.
Market Conditions
Macroeconomic factors that affect our business include interest rate spread premiums, governmental policy initiatives, residential and commercial real estate prices, credit availability, consumer personal income and spending, corporate earnings, employment conditions, financial conditions and inflation.
Financial conditions eased over the course of 2020, as conditions continued to improve during the third and fourth quarter. This reflected the continued economic recovery following the sharp declines brought on by the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic earlier in the year. The performance of U.S. equities also followed this pattern, with the S&P 500 Index increasing by almost 12% during the fourth quarter and over 16% for the year despite falling sharply during the first quarter. Investor confidence was bolstered through the year as the U.S. Government embarked on multiple stimulus packages. The Federal Reserve provided unprecedented support to the markets via direct securities purchases, implementing various lending programs and facilities, and pledging to keep the Federal Funds rate in a range of 0% to 0.25% for an extended period. Gains in nonfarm payrolls averaged 283,000 per month during the fourth quarter, and the unemployment rate ended the year at 6.7%, improving from the high of 14.7% that was recorded in April. The continued rebound in economic activity from the March and April trough can be seen across a number of measures, as consumer activity remained positive as evidenced by gains in spending, retail sales and consumer confidence metrics. While the continued economic recovery is encouraging, we remain cautious about the pace of near-term gains as the number of COVID-19 cases has remained elevated with the vaccine rollout underway.
Interest rates fell sharply across the yield curve during 2020, reflecting both the effects of the Federal Reserve’s bond buying program and investor demand for safe-haven assets. The yield on the 2 year Treasury note fell 145 basis points to 0.12% while the yield on the 10 year Treasury bond fell by 100 basis points to 0.91%. During the fourth quarter, the yield curve steepened as investors began pricing in the impact of further stimulus along with positive news regarding multiple vaccine trials. During the quarter, the yield on the 2 year Treasury note fell one basis point while the yield on the 10 year bond increased by 23 basis points. The short end of the yield curve remains pinned close to zero, as the Federal Funds target rate is at the lower bound, and the futures market continues to forecast no change for the next several years. Interest rate volatility measures also reflect the view that rates will stay contained, as these remain near multi-year lows. While price data has broadly shown a rebound off the lows of March and April, most measures still show that inflation remains subdued. The consumer price index was 1.4% at year end, well off the low of 0.1% in May, but still lower than pre-COVID levels. The personal consumption expenditure index (1.5% at year end) also increased in the fourth quarter but remains close to pre-COVID lows. On the other hand, breakeven rates on inflation protected Treasuries have broken out to levels not seen in several years as investors price in the potential impact on prices of the recent stimulus measures and positive growth expectations. The inflation rate implied by 2 year and 5 year TIPs was 2.01% and 1.97%, respectively, at year end.
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted most commercial real estate property types. The lodging and retail sectors have been the most impacted due to travel restrictions and accelerated growth in e-commerce. In the retail sector, many tenants are finding it difficult to meet rent obligations and, in some instances, are foregoing payments or seeking forbearance relief. Real estate loans are experiencing growing delinquencies and are at greater risk of default which could impact the fundamental performance of our investments. Despite fundamental deterioration, CMBS risk premiums contracted in the fourth quarter due to modest new issuance supply and increased investor demand. The United States Federal Reserve’s Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (“TALF”) that provides financing for triple-A rated conduit non-Agency CMBS also continued to contribute to stability in the CMBS market.
While residential real estate fundamentals deteriorated significantly at the onset of the pandemic, low mortgage rates and tight housing supply have driven a dramatic recovery. Demographic trends and changes in housing preferences shaped by the COVID-19 pandemic have combined with improved affordability to generate robust demand, especially for single family homes. This strength is also reflected in home price appreciation, which accelerated in the second half of the year. Meanwhile, credit spreads on residential mortgage backed securities have largely recovered the widening that occurred at the onset of the pandemic.
Nevertheless, many individual homeowners have been adversely impacted by the economic consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic. The U.S. Congress has responded by passing three rounds of fiscal stimulus measures, the most notable being the $2.2 trillion Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), which included relief measures for households and businesses directly or indirectly impacted by the virus. The CARES Act includes provisions for COVID-19 related temporary forbearance on federally backed mortgage loans, which allows borrowers of loans guaranteed by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Ginnie Mae to suspend making principal and interest payments for a period of up to 360 days if they are facing hardship. Following the temporary forbearance period, mortgage servicers must provide several options to impacted borrowers, including a repayment schedule or loan modification, depending on the borrowers’ circumstances. We believe the provision of forbearance and loan modifications has and will continue to substantially reduce borrower defaults and loan losses relative to levels that would have likely occurred without these actions.
The performance of Agency RMBS was mixed during 2020, as sharp underperformance during the first quarter was mostly offset by significant gains resulting from the Federal Reserve’s strong response to the liquidity crisis, which included a bond purchase program beginning in March. The Agency RMBS sector also received support from commercial banks, as bank deposits overwhelmed tepid loan demand and left banks with significant amounts to invest in the sector. Lower coupon mortgages were the primary beneficiary of the Federal Reserve and commercial bank demand, as those bonds experienced significant spread tightening and a favorable dollar roll environment for most of the year. Higher coupon mortgages did not fare as well, as their relatively high dollar prices exacerbate the impact of increasing prepayment rates. Pay-ups on specified pool collateral remained elevated, reflecting strong demand for prepayment protection. We expect the market for Agency RMBS to remain positive, as the level of support from the Federal Reserve outweighs the negative impact of higher prepayment rates.
As we move into 2021, investor concerns center around the pace of the recovery and the implementation of vaccines to combat and eventually bring an end to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our expectation is that growth in the U.S. will remain robust as the economy continues to reopen over the course of the year.
In addition, the regulatory landscape for our repurchase agreement counterparties continues to evolve, which may affect funding methods and lending practices. While we are not directly subject to compliance with the implementation of rules regarding financial institutions, the effect of these regulations and others could impact our ability to finance our assets in the future.
Proposed Changes to LIBOR
In 2017, the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority (the “FCA”), which regulates LIBOR, announced that the FCA will no longer persuade or compel banks to submit rates for the calculation of the LIBOR benchmark after 2021. This announcement indicates that the continuation of LIBOR will not be guaranteed after 2021. The Alternative Reference Rates Committee (“ARRC”), which was convened by the Federal Reserve Board and the New York Fed to help ensure a successful transition from LIBOR, has proposed that the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) is the rate that represents best practice as the alternative to LIBOR for use in derivatives and other financial contracts that are currently indexed to LIBOR. ARRC has proposed a paced market transition plan to SOFR from LIBOR, and organizations are currently working on industry wide and company specific transition plans as it relates to derivatives and cash markets exposed to LIBOR. Further, on November 30, 2020, ICE Benchmark Administration (“IBA”), the administrator of LIBOR, released a consultation on its intention to cease the publication of the one week and two month U.S. Dollar (“USD”)-LIBOR settings immediately following the LIBOR publication on December 31, 2021, and the five remaining USD-LIBOR settings (overnight and one, three, six and twelve months) immediately following the LIBOR publication on June 30, 2023.
SOFR is an overnight rate unlike LIBOR which is a forward-looking term rate, making SOFR an inexact replacement for LIBOR. There is currently no perfect way to create robust, forward-looking, SOFR term rates. Market participants are still considering how various types of financial instruments and securitization vehicles should react to a discontinuation of LIBOR. It is possible that not all of our assets and liabilities will transition away from LIBOR at the same time or to the same alternative reference rate, in each case increasing the difficulty of hedging. Switching existing financial instruments and hedging transactions from LIBOR to SOFR requires calculations of a spread. Industry organizations are attempting to structure the spread calculation in an objective manner, but there is no assurance that all asset types or securitization vehicles will use the same spread. We and other market participants have less experience understanding and modeling SOFR-based assets and liabilities than LIBOR-based assets and liabilities, increasing the difficulty of investing, hedging, and risk management.
We have material contracts that are indexed to LIBOR and are monitoring this activity and evaluating the related risks. However, it is not possible to predict the effect of any of these developments, and any future initiatives to regulate, reform or change the manner of administration of LIBOR could result in adverse consequences to the rate of interest payable and receivable on, market value of and market liquidity for LIBOR-based financial instruments. We do not currently intend to amend our 7.75% Fixed-to-Floating Series B Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock or our 7.50% Fixed-to-Floating Series C Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock to change the existing USD-LIBOR cessation fallback language. Our Series B and Series C Preferred Stock each become callable at the time the stock begins to pay a USD-LIBOR-based rate. Should we choose to call the Series B or Series C Preferred Stock in order to avoid a dispute over the results of the USD-LIBOR fallbacks for that class, we may be forced to raise additional funds at an unfavorable time.
In October 2019, the IRS and Treasury proposed regulations that are expected to provide taxpayers relief from adverse impacts resulting from the transition away from LIBOR to an alternative reference rate. The proposed regulations make clear that a change in the reference rate (and associated alterations to payment terms) of a financial instrument is generally not considered a taxable event, provided the fair value of the modified instrument is substantially equivalent to the fair value of the unmodified instrument.
The Financial Accounting Standards Board has also issued accounting guidance that provides optional expedients and exceptions to contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions impacted by LIBOR transition if certain criteria are met.
The guidance can be applied as of January 1, 2020. We will evaluate our contracts that are eligible for modification relief and may apply the elections prospectively as needed. We are currently evaluating what impact the guidance will have on our consolidated financial statements.
Investment Activities
The table below shows the breakdown of our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1)TBAs that we do not intend to physically settle on the contractual settlement date are accounted for as derivative financial instruments and recorded on our consolidated balance sheets at net carrying value, which represents the difference between the fair market value and the implied cost basis of the TBAs. Refer to Note 8 "Derivatives and Hedging Activities" in Part IV. Item 15. of this report on Form 10-K.
As of December 31, 2020 our holdings of 30 year fixed-rate Agency RMBS represented 81% of our total investment portfolio, including TBAs, versus 48% as of December 31, 2019. As previously discussed, we sold substantially all of our Agency RMBS portfolio in the first half of 2020 to generate liquidity and reduce leverage. We resumed investing in 30-year fixed-rate Agency RMBS in July 2020. Our Agency RMBS holdings as of December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of newly issued specified pools with coupon distributions as shown in the table below.
Our purchases of Agency RMBS have been primarily focused on specified pools with prepayment protection, as low mortgage rates and a robust housing market have increased borrower incentives to prepay their mortgage loans. We seek to mitigate the negative impact of prepayments on our investment portfolio by purchasing specified pools with characteristics that diminish borrower incentive to prepay, such as a lower loan balance, higher loan-to-value (“LTV”) ratio, lower FICO score, higher percentage of non-owner occupied loans (investment and vacation properties) and newly originated loans. In addition, we focus a significant amount of purchases in specified pools that have higher geographic concentrations in states that exhibit slower prepayments such as New York, Florida and Texas.
We began investing in TBAs as an alternative means of investing in and financing Agency RMBS in the third quarter of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the implied cost basis of TBAs represented approximately 18% of our total investment portfolio. Our investments consist of 30-year Agency RMBS TBAs with coupons that range from 2.0% to 2.5% in conventional and Ginnie Mae collateral. We maintain a meaningful allocation to TBAs given attractive implied financing rates in the Agency RMBS TBA dollar roll market. Implied financing rates in the dollar roll market were substantially below those available in the repurchase market due to the magnitude and persistence of the Federal Reserve's MBS purchase program, which began to increase holdings in March of 2020. We expect the purchase program to continue in 2021, as the Federal Reserve views the program as a key component of its stated objectives.
We sold all of our holdings of Agency CMBS in the first half of 2020. Agency CMBS represented approximately 22% of our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2019. We historically focused our Agency CMBS investments in securities issued by Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae and Ginnie Mae that had characteristics that reduced prepayment risk.
As of December 31, 2020, our holdings of non-Agency CMBS represented approximately 1% of our total investment portfolio, including TBAs, versus 17% as of December 31, 2019. Our non-Agency CMBS portfolio is collateralized by loans that were originated before 2015 that are secured by various property types located across the United States. Property types include but are not limited to office, retail, multifamily, industrial warehouses and hotels. The largest property geographic locations include Texas, Ohio, California, New York and Virginia as detailed in the table below. Most of our non-Agency CMBS portfolio is comprised of fixed-rate securities that are rated investment grade by a nationally recognized statistical rating organization. Approximately 75% of non-Agency CMBS are rated single-A (or equivalent) or higher by a nationally recognized statistical rating organization as of December 31, 2020. Further, approximately 59% of non-Agency CMBS are rated double-A (or equivalent) or higher by a nationally recognized statistical rating organization as of December 31, 2020.
The table below illustrates the vintage distribution of our non-Agency CMBS portfolio as of December 31, 2020 as a percentage of fair value:
The table below presents the geographic concentration of the underlying collateral for our non-Agency CMBS portfolio as of December 31, 2020. The geographic markets that we invest in have been and continue to be severely impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
As of December 31, 2020, our holdings of non-Agency RMBS represented less than 1% of our total investment portfolio, including TBAs, versus 4% as of December 31, 2019. We historically held non-Agency RMBS securities collateralized by prime and Alt-A loans and invested in re-securitizations of real estate mortgage investment conduit ("Re-REMIC") RMBS and securitizations of reperforming mortgage loans.
We did not hold any GSE CRTs as of December 31, 2020. Our holdings of GSE CRTs represented approximately 4% of our total investment portfolio, including TBAs, as of December 31, 2019. GSE CRTs are unsecured general obligations of the GSEs that are structured to provide credit protection to the issuer with respect to defaults and other credit events within pools of mortgage loans that collateralize MBS issued and guaranteed by the GSEs.
As of December 31, 2020, we held an investment in one commercial real estate mezzanine loan that matures in 2021 and has a LTV ratio of approximately 78.9%. Refer to Note 16 - “Subsequent Events” of our consolidated financial statements in Part IV of this Report for additional information on the contractual maturity of our commercial loan.
As of December 31, 2020, we held investments in two unconsolidated ventures that are managed by an affiliate of our Manager. The unconsolidated ventures invest in our target assets. We are committed to invest $6.8 million in additional capital in these unconsolidated ventures to fund future investments and cover future expenses should they occur.
Financing and Other Liabilities. We have historically used repurchase agreements to finance the majority of our target assets and expect to continue to use repurchase agreements to finance Agency investments in the future. Repurchase agreements are generally settled on a short-term basis, usually from one to six months, and bear interest at rates that have historically moved in close relationship to LIBOR.
We also used secured loans from the FHLBI to finance a portion of our investment portfolio. We repaid our secured loans during 2020 with proceeds from sales of assets that collateralized the secured loans. We terminated our membership in FHLBI in the third quarter of 2020.
The following table presents the amount of collateralized borrowings outstanding under repurchase agreements and secured loans as of the end of each quarter, the average amount outstanding during the quarter and the maximum balance outstanding during the quarter:
(1)Average quarterly balance for each period is based on month-end balances.
(2)Amount represents the maximum borrowings at month-end during each of the respective periods.
Hedging Instruments. We generally hedge as much of our interest rate and foreign exchange risk as we deem prudent because of market conditions. No assurance can be given that our hedging activities will have the desired beneficial impact on our results of operations or financial condition. Our investment policies do not contain specific requirements as to the percentages or amount of risk that we are required to hedge.
Hedging may fail to protect or could adversely affect us because, among other things:
•available interest rate hedging may not correspond directly with the interest rate risk for which protection is sought;
•the duration of the hedges may not match the duration of the related liabilities;
•our counterparty in the hedging transaction may default on its obligation to pay;
•the credit quality of our counterparty on the hedge may be downgraded to such an extent that it impairs our ability to sell or assign our side of the hedging transaction; and
•the value of derivatives used for hedging may be adjusted from time-to-time in accordance with accounting rules to reflect changes in fair value.
We enter into interest rate swap agreements that are designed to mitigate the effects of increases in interest rates for a portion of our borrowings. Under these swap agreements, we generally pay fixed interest rates and receive floating interest rates indexed off of one- or three-month LIBOR.
We actively manage our swap portfolio by terminating and entering into new swaps as the size and composition of our investment portfolio changes. We terminated all of our interest rate swaps in March 2020 as we repositioned our portfolio in response to unprecedented market conditions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. We realized a net loss of $904.7 million
on these swaps during the first half of 2020 due to falling interest rates. We entered into new swaps during the six months ended December 31, 2020 as we resumed investing in Agency RMBS and financing our investments with repurchase agreements. As of December 31, 2020, we had $6.3 billion of notional amount of interest rate swaps. All of these interest rate swaps are centrally cleared by a registered clearing organization. We realized a net gain of $47.0 million on these swaps during the second half of 2020.
We enter into currency forward contracts to help mitigate the potential impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on investments denominated in foreign currencies. As of December 31, 2020, we had €27.8 million or $33.1 million (2019: €20.8 million or $23.1 million) of notional amount of forward contracts related to our investment in an unconsolidated venture. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we settled currency forward contracts of €83.4 million or $93.4 million (2019: €89.8 million or $101.6 million) in notional amount and realized a net loss of $1.3 million (2019: $1.5 million net gain).
Capital Activities
On February 6, 2020, we completed a public offering of 20,700,000 shares of common stock at the price of $16.78 per share. Total net proceeds were approximately $347.0 million after deducting offering costs.
On February 4, 2021, we completed a public offering of 27,600,000 shares of common stock at the price of $3.75 per share. Total net proceeds were approximately $103.1 million after deducting estimated offering costs.
As of December 31, 2020, we may sell up to 37,610,000 shares of our common stock and 7,000,000 shares of our preferred stock from time to time in at-the-market or privately negotiated transactions under our equity distribution agreements. We sold 21,849,740 shares of common stock for proceeds of $73.7 million, net of approximately $1.2 million in commissions and fees, under these agreements during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For information on dividends declared and paid during the year ended December 31, 2020, including our common stock dividend paid on June 30, 2020 in a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, see Note 12 - "Stockholders' Equity" of our consolidated financial statements in Part IV. Item 15 of this report on Form 10-K.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not repurchase any shares of our common stock.
Book Value per Common Share
We calculate book value per common share as follows:
Our book value per common share decreased 76.3% as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 primarily due to realized and unrealized losses on investments and derivatives during the year ended December 31, 2020 resulting from the unprecedented market disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our book value per common share increased 6.7% as of December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018 primarily due to interest rate spread tightening in both Agency and credit assets. Monetary policy eased notably in 2019, as the Federal Reserve pivoted from increasing in the Federal Funds rate in 2018 to an easing policy through a pause in the first half of 2019 and cutting the Federal Funds rate in the second half of 2019. This shift in monetary policy supported risk assets, with additional steps by the Federal Reserve, such as increasing the size of its balance sheet via asset purchases and supporting the repurchase market through temporary open market operations, supporting market liquidity.
Refer to