ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Readers are also urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us, which attempt to advise interested parties of the factors which affect our business, including (without limitation) the disclosures made under the captions “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and “Risk Factors”, and in the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
The Company is a pioneer and leader in biometric identification and authentication software. Using human characteristics that are unique to us all, the Company creates software that provides a highly reliable indication of a person’s identity. The Company’s products are used to manage and issue secure credentials, including national IDs, passports, driver licenses and access control credentials. The Company’s products also provide law enforcement with integrated mugshot, fingerprint LiveScan and investigative capabilities. The Company also provides comprehensive authentication security software using biometrics to secure physical and logical access to facilities or computer networks or Internet sites. Biometric technology is now an integral part of all markets the Company addresses, and all the products leveraged by our patented IWS Biometric Engine®
The IWS Biometric Engine® is a patented biometric identity and authentication database built for multi-biometric enrollment, management and authentication. It is hardware agnostic and can utilize different types of biometric algorithms. It allows different types of biometrics to be operated at the same time on a seamlessly integrated platform. It is also offered as a Software Development Kit (“SDK”), enabling developers and system integrators to implement biometric solutions or integrate biometric capabilities into existing applications. 
Our secure credential solutions empower customers to design and create smart digital identification wristbands and badges for access control systems. We develop, sell and support software and design systems that utilize digital imaging and biometrics for photo identification cards, credentials and identification systems. Our products in this market consist of IWS EPI Suite and IWS EPI Builder. These products allow for production of digital identification badges and related databases and records and can be used by, among others, schools, airports, hospitals, corporations and governments. We have added the ability to incorporate multiple biometrics into the ID systems with the integration of IWS Biometric Engine®.
The Company is also a developer of a biometric based multi-factor authentication (MFA) Cloud-based service. ImageWare Authenticate brings together Cloud and mobile technologies to offer multi-factor authentication for the enterprise, and across industries. ImageWare Authenticate consists of mobile and desktop clients, and the backend system which is a Cloud-based Software-as-a-Service (“SaaS”) servicing Cloud-based biometric template matching requests. ImageWare Authenticate comes in two offerings, Workforce and Customer. ImageWare Authenticate Customer is leveraged by product developers to enable biometric authentication for their consumers. For the enterprise, ImageWare Authenticate Workplace provides turnkey integration with Microsoft Windows, Microsoft Active Directory, CA SSO, IBM Security Access Manager (“ISAM”), SAP Cloud Platform, Fujitsu's RunMyProcess, Palo Alto Networks VPN and HPE’s Aruba ClearPass. These integrations provide multi-modal biometric authentication to replace or augment passwords for use with enterprise and consumer class systems.
Our law enforcement solutions enable agencies to quickly capture, archive, search, retrieve, and share digital images, fingerprints and other biometrics, as well as criminal history records on a stand-alone, networked, wireless or Web-based platform. We develop, sell and support a suite of modular software products used by law enforcement and public safety agencies to create and manage criminal history records and to investigate crime. Our IWS Law Enforcement solution consists of five software modules: Capture and Investigative modules, which provide a criminal booking system with related databases as well as the ability to create and print mug photo/scars, marks, and tattoos (SMT), as well as image lineups and electronic mug-books; a Facial Recognition module, which uses biometric facial recognition to identify suspects; a Web module, which provides access to centrally stored records over the Internet in a connected or wireless fashion; and a LiveScan module, which incorporates LiveScan capabilities into IWS Law Enforcement platform providing integrated fingerprint and palm print biometric management for civil and law enforcement use. The IWS Biometric Engine® is also available to our law enforcement clients and allows them to capture and search using multiple biometrics.
Recent Market Conditions
During March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization related to the rapidly growing outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”).
The pandemic has significantly impacted the economic conditions both in the United States and worldwide, with accelerated effects in February 2020 through the date of this Annual Report, as federal, state and local governments react to the public health crisis, creating significant uncertainties in both the worldwide and the United States economies. The situation is rapidly changing and additional impacts to our business may arise that we are not aware of currently. We cannot predict whether, when or the manner in which the conditions surrounding COVID-19 will change including the timing of lifting any restrictions or office closure requirements.
The full extent of COVID-19’s impact on our operations and financial performance depends on future developments that are uncertain and unpredictable, including the duration and spread of the pandemic, its impact on capital and financial markets and any new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the virus, its spread to other regions as well as the actions taken to contain it, among others.
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed into law the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”). The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations, increased limitations on qualified charitable contributions and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property.
The Company continues to examine the impact that the CARES Act may have on our business. Currently the Company is unable to determine the impact that the CARES Act will have on our financial condition, results of operation or liquidity.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to utilize accounting policies and make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingencies as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expense during a fiscal period. The SEC considers an accounting policy to be critical if it is important to a company’s financial condition and results of operations, and if it requires significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in its application.
Significant estimates include the evaluation of our ability to continue as a going concern, the allowance for doubtful accounts receivable, assumptions used in the Black-Scholes model to calculate the fair value of share-based payments, fair value of Series D Preferred and financial instruments issued with and affected by the Series D Preferred Financing (defined below), fair value of financial instruments with and affected by the Series C Preferred (defined below), fair value of Series A Preferred (defined below), fair value of Series A-1 Preferred (defined below), assumptions used in the application of revenue recognition policies, assumptions used in the derivation of the Company’s incremental borrowing rate used in the computation of the Company’s operating lease liabilities and assumptions used in the application of fair value methodologies to calculate the fair value of pension assets and obligations. Actual results could differ from estimates.
The following are our critical accounting policies because we believe they are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require critical management judgments and estimates about matters that are uncertain. If actual results or events differ materially from those contemplated by us in making these estimates, our reported financial condition and results of operations for future periods could be materially affected.
Revenue Recognition. Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”), Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), using the modified retrospective transition method.
In accordance with ASC 606, revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
The core principle of the standard is that we should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve that core principle, we apply the following five step model:
1.
Identify the contract with the customer;
2.
Identify the performance obligation in the contract;
3.
Determine the transaction price;
4.
Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
5.
Recognize revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied.
At contract inception, we assess the goods and services promised in a contract with a customer and identify as a performance obligation each promise to transfer to the customer either: (i) a good or service (or a bundle of goods or services) that is distinct or (ii) a series of distinct goods or services that are substantially the same and that have the same pattern of transfer to the customer. We recognize revenue only when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring a promised good or service to a customer.
Determining the timing of the satisfaction of performance obligations as well as the transaction price and the amounts allocated to performance obligations requires judgement.
We disclose disaggregation of our customer revenue by classes of similar products and services as follows:
●
Software licensing and royalties;
●
Sales of computer hardware and identification media;
●
Services; and
●
Post-contract customer support.
Software licensing and royalties
Software licenses consist of revenue from the sale of software for identity management applications. Our software licenses are functional intellectual property and typically provide customers with the right to use our software in perpetuity as it exists when made available to the customer. We recognize revenue from software licensing at a point in time upon delivery, provided all other revenue recognition criteria are met.
Royalties consist of revenue from usage-based arrangements and guaranteed minimum-based arrangements. We recognize revenue for royalty arrangements at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied.
Computer hardware and identification media
We generate revenue from the sale of computer hardware and identification media. Revenue for these items is recognized upon delivery of these products to the customer, provided all other revenue recognition criteria are met.
Services
Services revenue is comprised primarily of software customization services, software integration services, system installation services and customer training. Revenue is generally recognized upon completion of services and customer acceptance provided all other revenue recognition criteria are met.
Post-contract customer support (“PCS”)
PCS consists of maintenance on software and hardware for our identity management solutions. We recognize PCS revenue from periodic maintenance agreements. Revenue is generally recognized ratably over the respective maintenance periods provided no significant obligations remain. Costs related to such contracts are expensed as incurred.
Arrangements with multiple performance obligations
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer. In addition to selling software licenses, hardware and identification media, services and post-contract customer support on a standalone basis, certain contracts include multiple performance obligations. For such arrangements, we allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on our best estimate of the relative standalone selling price. The standalone selling price for a performance obligation is the price at which we would sell a promised good or service separately to a customer. The primary methods used to estimate standalone selling price are as follows: (i) the expected cost-plus margin approach, under which we forecast our expected costs of satisfying a performance obligation and then add an appropriate margin for that distinct good or service and (ii) the percent discount off of list price approach.
Contract costs
We recognize an asset for the incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer if we expect the benefit of those costs to be longer than one year. We apply a practical expedient to expense costs as incurred for costs to obtain a contract when the amortization period is one year or less.
Other items
We do not offer rights of return for our products and services in the normal course of business.
Sales tax collected from customers is excluded from revenue.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. We provide an allowance for our accounts receivable for estimated losses that may result from our customers’ inability to pay. We determine the amount of allowance by analyzing historical losses, customer concentrations, customer creditworthiness, current economic trends, and the age of the accounts receivable balances and changes in our customer payment terms when evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts.
Impairment of Goodwill, Other Intangible and Long-Lived Assets. The Company accounts for its intangible assets under the provisions of ASC 350, “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other”. In accordance with ASC 350, intangible assets with a definite life are analyzed for impairment under ASC 360-10-05 “Property, Plant and Equipment” and intangible assets with an indefinite life are analyzed for impairment under ASC 360 annually, or more often if circumstances dictate. The Company performs its annual simplified impairment test in the fourth quarter of each year. In December 2018, the Company adopted the provisions of ASU 2017-04, “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment”. The provisions of ASU 2017-04 eliminate the requirement to calculate the implied fair value of goodwill to measure a goodwill impairment charge. Instead, entities will record an impairment charge based on the excess of a reporting unit's carrying amount over its fair value. Entities that have reporting units with zero or negative carrying amounts will no longer be required to perform a qualitative assessment assuming they pass the simplified impairment test.
The Company did not record any goodwill impairment charges for the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
The Company evaluates long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate their net book value may not be recoverable. When such factors and circumstances exist, the Company compares the projected undiscounted future cash flows associated with the related asset or group of assets over their estimated useful lives against their respective carrying amount. Impairment, if any, is based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value, based on market value when available, or discounted expected cash flows, of those assets and is recorded in the period in which the determination is made. The Company’s management currently believes there is no impairment of its long-lived assets. There can be no assurance, however, that market conditions will not change or demand for the Company’s products under development will continue. Either of these could result in future impairment of long-lived assets.
There are many management assumptions and estimates underlying the determination of an impairment loss, and estimates using different, but reasonable, assumptions could produce significantly different results. Significant assumptions include estimates of future levels of revenue and operating expense. Therefore, the timing and recognition of impairment losses by us in the future, if any, may be highly dependent upon our estimates and assumptions. There can be no assurance that goodwill impairment will not occur in the future.
Stock-Based Compensation. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had one stock-based compensation plan for employees and nonemployee directors, which authorizes the granting of various equity-based incentives including stock options and restricted stock.
The Company estimates the fair value of its stock options using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model, consistent with the provisions of ASC 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation”. The fair value of stock options granted is recognized to expense over the requisite service period. Stock-based compensation expense for all share-based payment awards is recognized using the straight-line single-option method. Stock-based compensation expense is reported in general and administrative, sales and marketing, engineering and customer service expense based upon the departments to which substantially all of the associated employees report and credited to additional paid-in capital.
ASC 718 requires the use of a valuation model to calculate the fair value of stock-based awards. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has elected to use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which incorporates various assumptions including volatility, expected life, and interest rates. The Company is required to make various assumptions in the application of the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Company has determined that the best measure of expected volatility is based on the historical weekly volatility of the Company’s Common Stock. Historical volatility factors utilized in the Company’s Black-Scholes computations for options granted during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 ranged from 57% and 83%. The Company has elected to estimate the expected life of an award based upon the SEC approved “simplified method” noted under the provisions of Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 14. The expected term used by the Company to value the grants issued in 2020 and 2019 as computed by this method was 5.17 years. The effect of the difference between the actual historical expected life and the simplified method was immaterial. The interest rate used is the risk-free interest rate and is based upon U.S. Treasury rates appropriate for the expected term. Interest rates used in the Company’s Black-Scholes calculations averaged 2.58% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Dividend yield is zero, as the Company does not expect to declare any dividends on the Company’s common shares in the foreseeable future.
In addition to the key assumptions used in the Black-Scholes model, the estimated forfeiture rate at the time of valuation is a critical assumption. The Company has estimated an annualized forfeiture rate of approximately 5.0% for corporate officers, 4.1% for members of the Board of Directors and 15.0% for all other employees. The Company reviews the expected forfeiture rate annually to determine if that percent is still reasonable based on historical experience.
Income Taxes. The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, “Accounting for Income Taxes”. Deferred income taxes are recognized for the tax consequences related to temporary differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for tax purposes at each year-end, based on enacted tax laws and statutory tax rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. A valuation allowance is established when necessary based on the weight of available evidence, if it is considered more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Income tax expense is the sum of current income tax plus the change in deferred tax assets and liabilities.
ASC 740-10 requires a company to first determine whether it is more-likely-than-not (defined as a likelihood of more than fifty percent) that a tax position will be sustained based on its technical merits as of the reporting date, assuming that taxing authorities will examine the position and have full knowledge of all relevant information. A tax position that meets this more-likely-than-not threshold is then measured and recognized at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely to be realized upon effective settlement with a taxing authority.
We recognize and measure uncertain tax positions in accordance with GAAP, pursuant to which we only recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. Any tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We report a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. GAAP further requires that a change in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions be recognized in earnings in the quarter of such change. We recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
We file annual income tax returns in multiple taxing jurisdictions around the world. A number of years may elapse before an uncertain tax position is audited and finally resolved. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution of any particular uncertain tax position, we believe that our analysis of income tax reserves reflects the most likely outcome. We adjust these reserves, if any, as well as the related interest, in light of changing facts and circumstances. Settlement of any particular position could require the use of cash.
Significant judgment is required in evaluating the Company’s uncertain tax positions and determining the Company’s provision for income taxes. No assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different from that which is reflected in the Company’s historical income tax provisions and accruals. The Company adjusts these items in light of changing facts and circumstances. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will impact the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
The Internal Revenue Code (the “Revenue Code”) limits the availability of certain tax credits and net operating losses that arose prior to certain cumulative changes in a corporation’s ownership resulting in a change of control of the Company. The Company’s use of its net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards will be significantly limited because the Company believes it underwent “ownership changes”, as defined under Section 382 of the Revenue Code, in 1991, 1995, 2000, 2003, 2004, 2011, 2012, 2018 and 2020, though the Company has not performed a study to determine the limitation. The Company has reduced its deferred tax assets to zero relating to its federal and state research credits because of such limitations. The Company continues to disclose the tax effect of the net operating loss carryforwards at their original amount as the actual limitation has not yet been quantified. The Company has also established a full valuation allowance for substantially all deferred tax assets due to uncertainties surrounding its ability to generate future taxable income to realize these assets. Since substantially all deferred tax assets are fully reserved, future changes in tax benefits will not impact the effective tax rate. Management periodically evaluates the recoverability of the deferred tax assets. If it is determined at some time in the future that it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets will be realized, the valuation allowance would be reduced accordingly at that time.
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed the CARES Act into law, which, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations, increased limitations on qualified charitable contributions and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property.
The Company continues to examine the impact that the CARES Act may have on our business. Currently the Company is unable to determine the impact that the CARES Act will have on our financial condition, results of operation or liquidity.
Fair-Value Measurements. The Company accounts for fair value measurements in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures”, which defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted accounting principles, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements.
ASC 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy under ASC 820 are described below:
Level 1- Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities.
Level 2- Applies to assets or liabilities for which there are inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in markets with insufficient volume or infrequent transactions (less active markets); or model-derived valuations in which significant inputs are observable or can be derived principally from, or corroborated by, observable market data.
Level 3- Prices or valuation techniques that require inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable (supported by little or no market activity).
Assessing the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement requires judgment, considering factors specific to the asset or liability. Determining whether a fair value measurement is based on Level 1, Level 2, or Level 3 inputs is important because certain disclosures are applicable only to those fair value measurements that use Level 3 inputs. The use of Level 3 inputs may include information derived through extrapolation or interpolation which involves management assumptions as well as valuation techniques employing Monte Carlo simulation methodologies.
Lease Liabilities and Operating Lease Right-of-Use Assets
The Company is a party to certain contractual arrangements for office space which meet the definition of leases under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 842 - Leases (“ASC 842”). In accordance with ASC 842, the Company has determined that such arrangements are operating leases and accordingly the Company has, as of January 1, 2019, recorded operating lease right-of-use assets and related lease liability for the present value of the lease payments over the lease terms using the Company’s estimated weighted-average incremental borrowing rate of approximately 14.5%. The Company has utilized the practical expedient regarding lease and nonlease components and has combined such items into a single combined component. The Company has also utilized the practical expedient regarding leases of twelve months or less and has excluded such leases from its computation of lease liability and related right-of-use assets. The Company has also elected the optional transition package of practical expedients which include:
A package of practical expedient to not reassess:
●
Whether a contract is or contains a lease
●
Lease classification
●
Initial direct costs
For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 2 to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the Year Ended December 31, 2020.
Comparison of Results for Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020 and
Product Revenue
Software and royalty revenue increased 78% or approximately $383,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019. This increase is attributable to higher identification project related revenue of approximately $539,000, offset by lower law enforcement project related revenue of approximately $11,000, lower royalty revenue of approximately $116,000 and lower sales of boxed identity management software sold through our distribution channel of approximately $29,000. The increase in identification project related revenue is reflective of the expansion of the Company’s identity management software base combined with the sale of additional software licenses into existing identification projects caused by increased end-user utilization during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019. The decrease in our law enforcement project revenue resulted from a decrease in the timing of procurement by our law enforcement customers. The decrease in boxed identity management software sold through our distribution channel reflects slightly lower procurement from both domestic and international customers and the decrease in royalty revenue reflects the expiration of a minimum royalty contract.
Revenue from the sale of hardware and consumables decreased approximately $12,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019 due to a decrease in project related solutions containing hardware and consumable sales primarily to law enforcement customers.
Services revenue is comprised primarily of software integration services, system installation services and customer training. Such revenue increased $937,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019, due to an increase in the service element of project related work completed during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We believe that the period-to-period fluctuations of identity management software revenue in project-oriented solutions are largely due to the timing of government procurement with respect to the various programs we are pursuing. Although no assurances can be given, based on management’s current visibility into the timing of potential government procurements and potential partnerships and current pilot programs, we believe that we will see an increase in government procurement and implementations with respect to identity management initiatives; however, government procurement initiatives, implementations and pilots are frequently delayed and extended and we cannot predict the timing of such initiatives.
As discussed more fully elsewhere in this Annual Report, the full extent of COVID-19’s impact on our operations and financial performance depends on future developments that are uncertain and unpredictable, including the duration and spread of the pandemic, its impact our ability to close sales transactions and on capital and financial markets and any new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the virus, its spread to other regions as well as the actions taken to contain it, among others.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we have focused on strategically updating our products with the latest mobile and cloud technology prioritized by market opportunities. We relaunched ImageWare Authenticate (formerly GoVerify ID®) in July 2020. This relaunch includes a new container and microservices-based architecture along with refreshed mobile and desktop clients. We believe these updates will result in additional customers implementing our ImageWare Authenticate solution. Additionally, we have focused on the integration of the suite of products that comprise our Identity Platform. Throughout 2021 we plan to continue to enhance our Identity Platform products, including our EPI (our biometric smart access cards) and law enforcement offerings by leveraging cloud and mobile technologies to improve both functionality and value to the customer. Management believes that these initiatives will result in the expansion of our solutions into both law enforcement and non-governmental sectors including commercial, consumer and healthcare applications, further resulting in additional implementations of both our ImageWare Authenticate products and Identity Platform products.
Maintenance Revenue
Maintenance revenue was approximately $2,554,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to approximately $2,583,000 for the corresponding periods in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, identity management maintenance revenue was approximately $1,264,000 as compared to $1,275,000 for the comparable period in 2019. The decrease of $11,000 in identification software maintenance revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period of 2019 is reflective of the expiration of certain maintenance contracts combined with the timing of the commencement of maintenance services related to a certain customer. The decrease of $18,000 in law enforcement maintenance revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period of 2019 is reflective of the expiration of certain maintenance contracts.
We anticipate growth of our maintenance revenue through the retention of existing customers combined with the expansion of our installed base resulting from the completion of project-oriented work; however, we cannot predict the timing of this anticipated growth.
Cost of Product Revenue
The cost of software and royalty product revenue increased approximately $18,000 from higher software and royalty revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 of approximately $383,000 due to a significant percentage of the revenue increase containing solutions with extremely minimal third-party software costs. In addition to changes in costs of software and royalty product revenue caused by revenue level fluctuations, costs of products can vary as a percentage of product revenue from period to period depending upon level of software customization and third-party software license content included in product sales during a given period.
The cost of product revenue for our hardware and consumable sales during the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased approximately $14,000 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019 due primarily to lower hardware and consumable product revenue of approximately $12,000 during the 2020 period.
The cost of services revenue increased approximately $578,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019 due to higher service revenue of approximately $937,000. Cost of services revenue as a percentage of service revenue increased to 54% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 34% for the corresponding 2019 period. This increase reflects the one-time impact of additional service costs incurred in the completion of the service element for a particular customer. Although changes in costs of services product revenue are sometimes caused by revenue level fluctuations, costs of services can also vary as a percentage of service revenue from period to period depending upon both the level and complexity of professional service resources utilized in the completion of the service element.
Cost of Maintenance Revenue
Cost of maintenance revenue increased approximately $23,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019 despite lower maintenance revenue of approximately $29,000. This increase is reflective of higher maintenance labor costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019 due primarily to the composition of engineering resources used in the provision of maintenance services.
Product Gross Profit
Software and royalty gross profit increased 81% or approximately $365,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019, due primarily to higher software and royalty revenue of approximately $383,000 combined with higher software and royalty cost of revenue of $18,000 for the same period. This revenue increase with only a minimal increase in software and royalty cost of revenue reflects extremely low third-party software costs. In addition to changes in costs of software and royalty product revenue caused by revenue level fluctuations, costs of products can vary as a percentage of product revenue from period to period depending upon level of software customization and third-party software license content included in product sales during a given period.
Hardware and consumables gross profit increased approximately $2,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the 2019 period, due primarily to lower hardware and consumable revenue of approximately $12,000 combined with lower cost of hardware and consumable revenue of approximately $14,000. These decreases result from a decrease in project related solutions containing hardware and consumable components.
Services gross profit increased approximately $359,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019 due to higher service revenue of approximately $937,000 combined with higher service cost of revenue of $578,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019. The decrease in services gross profit as a percentage of services revenue from 66% in the year ended December 31, 2019 to 46% in the corresponding period of 2020 reflects the one-time impact of additional service costs incurred in the completion of the service element for a particular customer. Although changes in costs of services product revenue are sometimes caused by revenue level fluctuations, costs of services can also vary as a percentage of service revenue from period to period depending upon both the level and complexity of professional service resources utilized in the completion of the service element.
Maintenance Gross Profit
Gross profit related to maintenance revenue decreased 2% or approximately $52,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019. This decrease reflects lower maintenance revenue of approximately $29,000 combined with higher cost of maintenance revenue of approximately $23,000. The decrease in maintenance revenue results from the timing of maintenance revenue recognition related to a certain customer combined with the expiration of certain maintenance contracts. The increase cost of maintenance revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019 is due primarily to the composition of engineering resources used in the provision of maintenance services. The decrease in maintenance revenue results from the timing of maintenance revenue recognition related to a certain contract. Maintenance gross profit can change from period to period depending upon both the level and complexity of engineering resources utilized in the provision of the maintenance services.
Operating Expense
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense is comprised primarily of salaries and other employee-related costs for executive, financial, and other infrastructure personnel. General legal, accounting and consulting services, insurance, occupancy and communication costs are also included with general and administrative expense.
The dollar increase of approximately $488,000 in general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019 is comprised of the following major components:
●
Overall decrease in personnel related expense of approximately $55,000 is due to reductions in employer contributions to employee benefit plans of approximately $230,000 offset by higher personnel expenses of approximately $175,000 due to the effects of various senior management changes;
●
Increases in professional services of approximately $252,000 which includes higher legal fees of approximately $197,000, higher patent-related legal and other fees of approximately $155,000 resulting from the Company’s efforts to monetize certain patents, higher contractor and contract service expenses of approximately $23,000 and higher general corporate expense of $16,000 offset by reductions in Board of Director fees of approximately $6,000, lower investor and public relations fees of approximately $106,000 and lower audit fees of approximately $27,000,
●
Increase in insurances, licenses, dues, rent, office related costs and other of approximately $21,000;
●
Increase in financing expense of approximately $66,000; and
●
Increase in stock-based compensation expense related to options and restricted stock units ("RSU’s") of approximately $204,000.
We continue to focus our efforts on achieving additional future operating efficiencies by reviewing and improving upon existing business processes and evaluating our cost structure. We believe these efforts will allow us to continue to gradually decrease our level of general and administrative expense expressed as a percentage of total revenue.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of the salaries, commissions, other incentive compensation, employee benefits and travel expense of our sales, marketing, and business development personnel.
The dollar decrease of approximately $1,001,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019 is primarily comprised of the following major components:
●
Decrease in personnel related expense of approximately $369,000 driven primarily by headcount reductions;
●
Decrease in contractor and contract services of approximately $388,000 resulting from lower contract service expense of approximately $303,000 which includes lower dues and subscription expense, and reduced utilization of certain sales consultants of approximately $85,000.;
●
Decrease in travel, trade show expense and office related expense of approximately $257,000;
●
Decrease in stock-based compensation expense of approximately $45,000; and
●
Increase in our Mexico sales office expense of approximately $58,000 due to certain personnel separation expenses.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consists primarily of salaries, employee benefits and outside contractors for new product development, product enhancements, custom integration work and related facility costs.
Research and development expense decreased approximately $1,782,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the corresponding period in 2019, due primarily to the following major components:
●
Decrease in personnel related expense of approximately $1,092,000 due to headcount reductions;
●
Decrease in contractor fees and contract services of approximately $537,000;
●
Decrease in rent, office related expense and engineering tools and supplies of approximately $128,000; and
●
Decrease in stock based-compensation expense of approximately $25,000.
Depreciation and Amortization
During the year ended December 31, 2020, depreciation and amortization expense increased approximately $1,000 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019. The relatively small amount of depreciation and amortization reflects the relatively small property and equipment carrying value.
Interest Expense (Income), Net
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized interest income of $2,000 and interest expense of $104,000. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was comprised of approximately $94,000 on our related party notes payable and approximately $10,000 on notes payable under the PPP Loan program. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized interest income of $90,000 and interest expense of $0.
Other Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized other income of approximately $0 and other expense of approximately $4,000. Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 is comprised of approximately $4,000 in late payment penalty fees.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized other income of approximately $0 and other expense of $1,000. Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 is comprised of approximately $1,000 in foreign transaction expense.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized approximately $369,000 from the decrease of derivative liabilities arising from the consummation of the Series C Convertible Preferred Stock financing in September 2019 (“Series C Financing”). Such decrease was determined by management using fair value methodologies and is included as non-cash income under the caption “Change in fair value of derivative liabilities” in our consolidated statement of operations for twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Also for the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized approximately $1,883,000 from the change in fair value of derivative liabilities arising from the Series D Financing. Such decrease was determined by management using fair value methodologies and is included as non-cash income under the caption “Change in fair value of derivative liabilities” in our consolidated statement of operations for twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized approximately $696,000 from the decrease of derivative liabilities arising from the consummation of the Series C Financing in September 2019. Such decrease was determined by management using fair value methodologies and is included as non-cash income under the caption “Change in fair value of derivative liabilities” in our consolidated statement of operations for twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
Income Tax Expense
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded an expense for income taxes of $7,000 and $10,000, respectively. These tax expenses relate to taxes on income generated in certain foreign jurisdictions offset by research and development tax credits generated in certain foreign jurisdictions.
We have incurred consolidated pre-tax losses during the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, and have incurred operating losses in all prior periods. Management has determined that it is more likely than not that a tax benefit from such losses will not be realized and has established a full valuation allowance for any tax benefits. Accordingly, we did not record a benefit for income taxes for these periods.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
Historically, our principal sources of cash have included customer payments from the sale of our products, proceeds from the issuance of common and preferred stock and proceeds from the issuance of debt. Our principal uses of cash have included cash used in operations, product development, and payments relating to purchases of property and equipment. We expect that our principal uses of cash in the future will be for product development, including customization of identity management products for enterprise and consumer applications, further development of intellectual property, development of SaaS capabilities for existing products as well as general working capital. Management expects that, as our revenue grows, our sales and marketing and research and development expense will continue to grow, albeit at a slower rate and, as a result, we will need to generate significant net revenue to achieve and sustain income from operations.
Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC
On April 28, 2020, the Company entered into a purchase agreement, and as amended on June 11, 2020 (the “Lincoln Purchase Agreement”), and a registration rights agreement (the “Lincoln Registration Rights Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”) pursuant to which Lincoln Park committed to purchase up to $10,250,000 of our Common Stock.
Under the terms and subject to the conditions of the Lincoln Purchase Agreement, including stockholder approval of an amendment to the Company’s Certificate of Incorporation, as amended from time to time (the "Certificate of Incorporation"), to increase the number of shares of the Company’s capital stock to 350 million shares, obtained from our shareholders effective June 9, 2020, we have the right, but not the obligation, to sell to Lincoln Park, and Lincoln Park is obligated to purchase up to $10,250,000 of shares of Common Stock. Future sales of Common Stock under the Lincoln Purchase Agreement, if any, will be subject to certain limitations, and may occur from time to time, at our sole discretion, over the 24-month period commencing on July 8, 2020, and the other conditions set forth in the Purchase Agreement are satisfied (such date on which all of such conditions are satisfied, the “Commencement Date”). During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company sold an aggregate of 5,700,000 shares of Common Stock to Lincoln Park under the terms of the Lincoln Purchase Agreement resulting in gross cash proceeds to the Company of approximately $918,000.
After the Commencement Date, on any business day over the term of the Lincoln Purchase Agreement, the Company has the right, in its sole discretion, to direct Lincoln Park to purchase up to 125,000 shares of its Common Stock on such business day (the “Regular Purchase”), subject to increases under certain circumstances as provided in the Lincoln Purchase Agreement. The purchase price per share of Common Stock for each such Regular Purchase will be based on prevailing market prices of the Company’s Common Stock immediately preceding the time of sale as computed under the Lincoln Purchase Agreement. In each case, Lincoln Park’s maximum commitment in any single Regular Purchase may not exceed $500,000. In addition to Regular Purchases, provided that the Company presents Lincoln Park with a Lincoln Park Purchase Notice for the full amount allowed for a Regular Purchase, the Company may also direct Lincoln Park to make accelerated purchases and additional accelerated purchases as described in the Lincoln Purchase Agreement.
Pursuant to the terms of the Lincoln Purchase Agreement, in no event may the Company issue or sell to Lincoln Park shares of Common Stock under the Lincoln Purchase Agreement which, when aggregated with all other shares of Common Stock then beneficially owned by Lincoln Park and its affiliates (as calculated pursuant to Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act and Rule 13d-3 promulgated thereunder), would result in the beneficial ownership by Lincoln Park and its affiliates of more than 4.99% of the then issued and outstanding shares of Common Stock (the “Beneficial Ownership Limitation”).
The Lincoln Purchase Agreement and the Lincoln Registration Rights Agreement contain customary representations, warranties, agreements and conditions and indemnification obligations of the parties. The Company has the right to terminate the Purchase Agreement at any time, at no cost or penalty. The Company issued to Lincoln Park 2,500,000 shares of Common Stock in consideration for entering into the Lincoln Purchase Agreement. Pursuant to this issuance, $400,000 was recorded by the Company as a deferred stock issuance cost. Such amount is recorded in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet under the caption “Other assets”. Such deferred stock issuance costs will be recognized as a charge against paid in capital in proportion to securities sold under this Lincoln Purchase Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized approximately $36,000, respectively, as a charge against paid in capital relating to securities sold under the Lincoln Purchase Agreement.
Due to the terms of the Lincoln Purchase Agreement as described above, management is not currently expecting the related proceeds from the Lincoln Purchase Agreement to be sufficient to sustain operations for an extended period of time.
Series D Preferred Stock Financings
On November 12, 2020 and December 23, 2020, the Company consummated private placements of 12,060 shares of its Series D Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share (the "Series D Preferred"), resulting in gross proceeds to the Company of $12.06 million, less fees and expenses (the “Series D Financing”). The gross proceeds included approximately $2.2 million in principal amount due and payable under the terms of certain term loans issued by the Company on September 29, 2020 (“Bridge Notes”), which Bridge Notes were converted into Series D Preferred at Closing (the “Conversion”). The issuance of the Series D Preferred was made pursuant to securities purchase agreements, dated September 28, 2020 (the "Series D Purchase Agreement"), by and between the Company and certain accredited investors (the "Purchasers"), for the sale of the Series D Preferred at a purchase price of $1,000 per share of Series D Preferred. The holders of Series D Preferred may voluntarily convert their shares of Series D Preferred into shares of the Company’s Common Stock at any time that is at least ninety days following the issuance date, at the conversion price calculated by dividing the Stated Value by the conversion price of $0.0583 per share of Common Stock, subject to adjustments as set forth in Section 5(e) of the Certificate of Designations, Preferences, and Rights of Series D Convertible Preferred Stock (the "Series D Certificate"). Dividends on shares of Series D Preferred will be paid prior to any junior securities, and are to be paid at the rate of 4% of the Stated Value (as defined in the Series D Certificate) per share per annum in the form of cash or shares of Series D Preferred.
Concurrently with the execution of the Purchase Agreement, the Company and the Investors executed (i) a Registration Rights Agreement, pursuant to which the Company agreed to file a registration statement with the SEC within thirty days of closing to register the shares of Common Stock issuable upon conversion of the Series D Preferred; (ii) a Series C Exchange Agreement (the "Exchange Agreement"), pursuant to which the Company and certain holders of the Company’s Series C Preferred agreed to exchange their Series C Preferred, with a liquidation preference of approximately $10.0 million, for Series D Preferred at closing; and (iii) a Term Loan and Security Agreement (“Loan Agreement”), pursuant to which each investor signatory thereto agreed to make a term loan to the Company, secured by all assets of the Company, in an amount equal to 20% of such investor’s purchase commitment as set forth in the Purchase Agreement (“Bridge Loan”), which Bridge Loan, plus accrued interest, rolled into, and was used to purchase, Series D Preferred at Closing.
Bridge Loan
Concurrently with the execution of the Series D Purchase Agreement, the Company and certain investors in the Series D Financing executed the Loan Agreement, pursuant to which each such investor signatory thereto (the "Investors") agreed to the Bridge Loan, secured by all assets of the Company, in an amount equal to 20% of such Investor’s purchase commitment as set forth in the Series D Purchase Agreement, which Bridge Loan, plus accrued interest, rolled into, and was used to purchase, Series D Preferred at Closing. For more information regarding the Series D Purchase Agreement, the Investors, the Loan Agreement, and the Bridge Loan, see Note 1, Description of Business and Operations to the consolidated financial statements.
Pursuant to the Bridge Loan, the Company received proceeds of $2,187,000 in September 2020. The Bridge Loan bears interest at a fixed rate of 12% and is due and payable in arrears on the earlier of the Loan Conversion Date, as such term is defined in the Loan Agreement, or six months after the disbursement of the Bridge Loan. All amounts due and payable pursuant to the Bridge Loan are automatically convertible, without further action by the Investors, into shares of Series D Preferred at closing at a purchase price of $1,000 for each share of Series D Preferred. The repayment of all amounts due under the terms of the Loan Agreement are secured by all assets of the Company. On November 12, 2020, contemporaneously with the closing of the Series D Preferred Financing, all amounts due under the Bridge Loan were converted into shares of Series D Preferred Stock.
Going Concern and Management’s Plan
At December 31, 2020, we had negative working capital of approximately $19,349,000 as compared to negative working capital of approximately $1,653,000 at December 31, 2019. Included in our negative working capital as of December 31, 2020 are $24,128,000 of derivative liabilities which are not required to be settled in cash except in the event of the consummation of a Change of Control or at any time after the fourth anniversary of the Series D Preferred issuance, at which time the holders of the Series D Preferred may require the Company to redeem in cash any or all of the holder’s outstanding Series D Preferred at an amount equal to the Series D Liquidation Preference Amount. At December 31, 2020 the Liquidation Preference Amount totaled $22,863,000.
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic is affecting the United States and global economies and may affect the Company's operations and those of third parties on which the Company relies. Additionally, as the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic is difficult to assess or predict, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the financial markets may reduce our ability to access capital, which could negatively impact the Company's short-term and long-term liquidity. These effects could have a material impact on the Company's liquidity, capital resources, operations and business and those of the third parties on which the Company relies.
To address our working capital requirements, management has instituted several cost cutting measures and has utilized cash proceeds from borrowing under the PPP loan, sales of our Common Shares utilizing the Lincoln Park facility and closing of the Series D Financing to satisfy the Company’s working capital requirements. However, we believe our available cash balances will be insufficient to satisfy our cash requirement for the next twelve months from the date of this filing. To address our working capital requirements, management intends to seek additional equity and/or debt financing through the issuance of additional debt and/or equity securities. Other than the Lincoln Purchase Agreement, there are currently no formal committed financing arrangements to support our projected cash shortfall, including commitments to purchase additional debt and/or equity securities, or other agreements, and no assurances can be given that we will be successful in raising additional capital through the issuance of debt and/or equity securities, or entering into any other transaction that addresses our ability to continue as a going concern.
However, in view of the matters described in the preceding paragraphs, recoverability of a major portion of the recorded asset amounts shown in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet is dependent upon continued operations of the Company, which, in turn, is dependent upon the Company’s ability to generate positive cash flows from operations. The Company, however, operates in markets that are emerging and highly competitive. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to obtain additional capital, operate at a profit or generate positive cash flows in the future. Therefore, management’s plans do not alleviate the substantial doubt regarding the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classifications of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $8,009,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $11,267,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities consisted of net loss of $7,253,000 and an increase in working capital and other assets and liabilities of $438,000. Those amounts in addition to approximately $1,194,000 of non-cash income, including $2,252,000 in income from the change in fair value of derivative liabilities offset by $862,000 in stock-based compensation, $72,000 in depreciation and amortization and $124,000 from the application of rent deposits. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated cash of $690,000 from decreases in current assets offset by $20,000 from increases in our operating leases right-of-use assets and used cash of $410,000 through decreases in current liabilities and deferred revenue offset by increases of $178,000 in pension liability.
Net cash used in operating activities was $11,267,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $10,310,000 during the year ended December 31, 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities consisted of net loss of $11,581,000 and an increase in working capital and other assets and liabilities of $287,000. Those amounts were offset by approximately $723,000 of non-cash costs and $696,000 in non-cash income. Non-cash costs were $652,000 in stock-based compensation and $71,000 in depreciation and amortization. Non-cash income consisted of $696,000 in the change in fair value of derivative liabilities. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we used cash of $209,000 from increases in current assets offset by $168,000 from decreases in our operating leases right-of-use assets and generated cash of $357,000 through increases in current liabilities and deferred revenue offset by $32,000 used from decreases in contract costs.
Investing Activities
There was no net cash used or generated from investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we used cash of $31,000 to fund capital expenditures.
Financing Activities
Cash generated from financing activities was approximately $15,475,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of cash of approximately $12,060,000 generated from the sale of 12,060 shares of Series D Preferred. Such amount includes $2,187,000 received by the Company in the form of a Bridge Loan which was converted into shares of Series D Preferred before recognition of approximately $726,000 in cash direct stock issuance costs. We also generated cash of approximately $900,000 from the issuance of related party notes payable and generated cash of $1,571,000 from the issuance of the PPP Loan under the CARES Act. Also in the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated cash of approximately $2,360,000 from the sales of 15,700,000 shares of Common Stock before recognition of approximately $64,000 in direct stock issuance costs. We used cash of approximately $575,000 to repay certain related party notes payable and used cash of approximately $51,000 for the payment of dividends on our Series B Preferred.
Cash generated from financing activities was approximately $6,635,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, which consisted of cash generated of approximately $166,000 from the exercise of 351,334 stock options resulting in the issuance of 351,334 shares of Common Stock, and cash generated of $6,520,000 from the sale of 5,954,545 shares of Common Stock, offset by cash used of approximately $51,000 for the payment of dividends on our Series B Preferred Stock.
Real Property Leases
Our corporate headquarters is located in San Diego, California, where we now occupy approximately 500 square feet of office space at a cost of approximately $2,000 per month. We entered into this facility’s lease in February 2021 and this new lease commenced on March 1, 2021 and is on a month-to-month basis. In addition to our corporate headquarters, we also occupied the following spaces at December 31, 2020:
●
1,508 square feet in Ottawa, Province of Ontario, Canada, at a cost of approximately $3,000 per month until the expiration of the lease on March 31, 2021. The Company extended this lease for a 30-day period and is currently evaluating alternative premises which the Company believes are readily available;
●
9,720 square feet in Portland, Oregon, at a cost of approximately $23,000 per month until the expiration of the lease on February 28, 2023; and
●
183 square feet of office space in Mexico City, Mexico, at a cost of approximately $2,000 per month until September 30, 2021.
Prior to entering into our current lease agreement in January 2021 and moving our corporate headquarters to a new location, we occupied 8,511 square feet of office space in San Diego, at a cost of approximately $30,000 per month. In January 2021, we entered in a subleasing agreement for our previously occupied corporate headquarters located in San Diego, California. The term of the sublease commences on April 1, 2021 and expires on April 20, 2025 coterminous with the expiration of the Company's master lease. Sublease payments due the Company approximate $26,000 per month over the term of the sublease.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation related to equity options and restricted stock has been classified as follows in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations (in thousands):
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance, special purpose or variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. In addition, we did not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts. As a result, we are not exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in such relationships. We do not have relationships and transactions with persons or entities that derive benefits from their non-independent relationship with us or our related parties except as disclosed elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”), or other standard setting bodies, which are adopted by us as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, the Company’s management believes the impact of recently issued standards not yet effective will not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements upon adoption. See Note 2 to these consolidated financial statements for a detailed discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements.
Impact of Inflation
The primary inflationary factor affecting our operations is labor costs, and we do not believe that inflation has materially affected earnings during the past four years. Substantial increases in costs and expense, particularly labor and operating expense, could have a significant impact on our operating results to the extent that such increases cannot be passed along to customers and end users.