Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In order to better understand the changes that occur to key elements of our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows, a reader of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) should be aware of the critical accounting policies we apply in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
The consolidated financial statements contained in this report were prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and the financial statements of any business performing long-term professional services, engineering and construction-type contracts requires management to make certain estimates and judgments that affect both the entity’s results of operations and the carrying values of its assets and liabilities. Although our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2- Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the following discussion is intended to highlight and describe those accounting policies that are especially critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Accounting for Contracts
Engineering, Procurement & Construction Contracts and Service Contracts
On September 29, 2018, the Company adopted ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, including the subsequent ASUs that amended and clarified the related guidance. The Company recognizes engineering, procurement, and construction contract revenue over time, as performance obligations are satisfied, due to the continuous transfer of control to the customer. Upon adoption of ASC Topic 606, contracts which include engineering, procurement and construction services are generally accounted for as a single deliverable (a single performance obligation) and are no longer segmented between types of services. In some instances, the Company’s services associated with a construction activity are limited only to specific tasks such as customer support, consulting or supervisory services. In these instances, the services are typically identified as separate performance obligations.
The Company recognizes revenue using the percentage-of-completion method, based primarily on contract costs incurred to date compared to total estimated contract costs. Estimated contract costs include the Company’s latest estimates using judgments with respect to labor hours and costs, materials, and subcontractor costs. The percentage-of-completion method (an input method) is the most representative depiction of the Company’s performance because it directly measures the value of the services transferred to the customer. Subcontractor materials, labor and equipment and, in certain cases, customer-furnished materials and labor and equipment are included in revenue and cost of revenue when management believes that the company is acting as a principal rather than as an agent (e.g., the company integrates the materials, labor and equipment into the deliverables promised to the customer or is otherwise primarily responsible for fulfillment and acceptability of the materials, labor and/or equipment). The Company recognizes revenue, but not profit, on certain uninstalled materials that are not specifically produced, fabricated, or constructed for a project. Under the typical payment terms of our engineering, procurement and construction contracts, amounts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms at periodic intervals (e.g., biweekly or monthly) and customer payments on are typically due within 30 to 60 days of billing, depending on the contract.
For service contracts, the Company recognizes revenue over time using the cost-to-cost percentage-of-completion method. Service contracts that include multiple performance obligations are segmented between types of services. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the Company allocates the transaction price to each performance obligation using an estimate of the stand-alone selling price of each distinct service in the contract. In some instances where the Company is standing ready to provide services, the Company recognizes revenue ratably over the service period. Under the typical payment terms of our service contracts, amounts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms, and customer payments are typically due within 30 to 60 days of billing, depending on the contract.
Direct costs of contracts include all costs incurred in connection with and directly for the benefit of client contracts, including depreciation and amortization relating to assets used in providing the services required by the related projects. The level of direct costs of contracts may fluctuate between reporting periods due to a variety of factors, including the amount of pass-through costs we incur during a period. On those projects where we are acting as principal for subcontract labor or third-party materials and equipment, we reflect the amounts of such items in both revenues and costs (and we refer to such costs as “pass-through costs”).
Variable Consideration
The nature of the Company’s contracts gives rise to several types of variable consideration, including claims and unpriced change orders; awards and incentive fees; and liquidated damages and penalties. The Company recognizes revenue for variable consideration when it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. The Company estimates the amount of revenue to be recognized on variable consideration using the expected value (i.e., the sum of a probability-weighted amount) or the most likely amount method, whichever is expected to better predict the amount. If the requirements for recognizing revenue for claims or unapproved change orders are met, revenue is recorded only when the costs associated with the claims or unapproved change orders have been incurred and only up to the amount of cost incurred.
Practical Expedient
If the Company has a right to consideration from a customer in an amount that corresponds directly with the value of the Company’s performance completed to date (a service contract in which the company bills a fixed amount for each hour of service provided), the Company recognizes revenue in the amount to which it has a right to invoice for services performed.
Joint Ventures and VIEs
As is common to the industry, we execute certain contracts jointly with third parties through various forms of joint ventures. Although the joint ventures own and hold the contracts with the clients, the services required by the contracts are typically performed by us and our joint venture partners, or by other subcontractors under subcontracting agreements with the joint ventures. Many of these joint ventures are formed for a specific project. The assets of our joint ventures generally consist almost entirely of cash and receivables (representing amounts due from clients), and the liabilities of our joint ventures generally consist almost entirely of amounts due to the joint venture partners (for services provided by the partners to the joint ventures under their individual subcontracts) and other subcontractors. In general, at any given time, the equity of our joint ventures represents the undistributed profits earned on contracts the joint ventures hold with clients. Very few of our joint ventures have employees or third-party debt or credit facilities. The debt held by the joint ventures is non-recourse to the general credit of Jacobs.
Our unconsolidated joint ventures (including equity method investments) are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the investment might not be recoverable, and impairment losses are recognized for such investments if there is a decline in fair value below carrying value that is considered to be other-than-temporary.
Many of the joint ventures are deemed to be variable interest entities (“VIE”) because they lack sufficient equity to finance the activities of the joint venture. The Company uses a qualitative approach to determine if the Company is the primary beneficiary of the VIE, which considers factors that indicate a party has the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the joint venture’s economic performance. These factors include the composition of the governing board, how board decisions are approved, the powers granted to the operational manager(s) and partner that holds that position(s), and to a certain extent, the partner’s economic interest in the joint venture. The Company analyzes each joint venture initially to determine if it should be consolidated or unconsolidated.
•Consolidated if the Company is the primary beneficiary of a VIE, or holds the majority of voting interests of a non-VIE (and no significant participative rights are available to the other partners).
•Unconsolidated if the Company is not the primary beneficiary of a VIE, or does not hold the majority of voting interest of a non-VIE.
Share-Based Payments
We measure the value of services received from employees and directors in exchange for an award of an equity instrument based on the grant-date fair value of the award. The computed value is recognized as a non-cash cost on a straight-line basis over the period the individual provides services, which is typically the vesting period of the award with the exception of the value of awards containing an internal performance measure, such as EPS growth and ROIC, which is recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period subject to the probability of meeting the performance requirements and adjusted for the number of shares expected to be earned.
Accounting for Pension Plans
The accounting for pension plans requires the use of assumptions and estimates in order to calculate periodic pension cost and the value of the plans’ assets and liabilities. These assumptions include discount rates, investment returns
and projected salary increases, among others. The actuarial assumptions used in determining the funded statuses of the plans are provided in Note 13- Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The expected rates of return on plan assets ranged from 1.8% to 7% for fiscal 2021 and range from 2% to 7% fiscal 2022. We believe the range of rates selected for fiscal 2022 reflects the long-term returns expected on the plans’ assets, considering recent market conditions, projected rates of inflation, the diversification of the plans’ assets, and the expected real rates of market returns. The discount rates used to compute plan liabilities ranged from 0.4% to 6.6% in fiscal 2021 and range of 0.6% to 6.6% in fiscal 2022. These assumptions represent the Company’s best estimate of the rates at which its pension obligations could be effectively settled.
Changes in the actuarial assumptions often have a material effect on the values assigned to plan assets and liabilities, and the associated pension expense. For example, if the discount rate used to value the net pension benefit obligation (“PBO”) at October 1, 2021 was higher by 0.5%, the PBO would have been lower at that date by approximately $229.4 million for non-U.S. plans, and by approximately $20.5 million for U.S. plans. If the expected return on plan assets was higher by 1.0%, the net periodic pension cost for fiscal 2021 would be lower by approximately $21.2 million for non-U.S. plans, and by approximately $3.4 million for U.S. plans. Differences between actuarial assumptions and actual performance (i.e., actuarial gains and losses) that are not recognized as a component of net periodic pension cost in the period in which such differences arise are recorded to accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and are recognized as part of net periodic pension cost in future periods in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Management monitors trends in the marketplace within which our pension plans operate in an effort to assure the fairness of the actuarial assumptions used.
Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests
In connection with the PA Consulting investment, the Company recorded redeemable noncontrolling interests, representing the interest holders' 35% equity interest in the form of preferred and common shares of PA Consulting. The preferred shares are entitled to a cumulative annual compounding 12% dividend based on the outstanding preferred share subscription price. These interest holders have certain option rights to put the preferred and common share interests back to the Company at a value based on the fair value of PA Consulting (the redemption values). Additionally, the Company has an option to call the interests for certain individual shareholders in certain circumstances. Because the interests are redeemable at the option of the holders and not solely within the control of the Company, the Company classified the interests in redeemable noncontrolling interests within its Consolidated Balance Sheet at their redemption values. The optional redemption features may become exercisable no earlier than five years from the March 2, 2021 closing date, or upon the occurrence of certain other events.
The Company has deemed these interests probable of becoming redeemable in the future and requiring their measurement at the greater of (i) the redemption amount that would be paid if settlement occurred at the balance sheet date, or (ii) the historical value resulting from the original acquisition date fair value plus the impact of any earnings or loss attribution amounts, including dividends. The fair value of the the PA Consulting redeemable noncontrolling interests is determined using an income and market approach.
Further, any excess in redemption amounts over the historical values of the interests is recognized as an increase to redeemable noncontrolling interests and an offsetting decrease in consolidated retained earnings. Additionally, particular to the preference share and in certain circumstances the ordinary share components of redeemable noncontrolling interests, such decrease in consolidated retained earnings is also reflected as a corresponding downward adjustment to net earnings attributable to Jacobs for purposes of the calculation of consolidated earnings per share attributable to common shareholders.
Contractual Guarantees, Litigation, Investigations, and Insurance
In the normal course of business, we make contractual commitments, some of which are supported by separate guarantees; and on occasion we are a party in a litigation or arbitration proceeding. The litigation in which we are involved primarily includes personal injury claims, professional liability claims, and breach of contract claims. Where we provide a separate guarantee, it is strictly in support of the underlying contractual commitment. Guarantees take various forms including surety bonds required by law, or standby letters of credit ("LOC") (also referred to as “bank guarantees”) or corporate guarantees given to induce a party to enter into a contract with a subsidiary. Standby LOCs are also used as security for advance payments or in various other transactions. The guarantees have various expiration dates ranging from an arbitrary date to completion of our work (e.g., engineering only) to completion of the overall project. We record in the Consolidated Balance Sheets amounts representing our estimated liability relating to such guarantees, litigation and insurance claims. Guarantees are accounted for in accordance with ASC 460-10, Guarantees, at fair value at the inception of the guarantee.
We maintain insurance coverage for most insurable aspects of our business and operations. Our insurance programs have varying coverage limits depending upon the type of insurance, and include certain conditions and exclusions which insurance companies may raise in response to any claim that the Company brings. We have also elected to retain a portion of losses and liabilities that occur through the use of various deductibles, limits, and retentions under our insurance programs. As a result, we may be subject to a future liability for which we are only partially insured or completely uninsured. We intend to mitigate any such future liability by continuing to exercise prudent business judgment in negotiating the terms and conditions of the contracts which the Company enters with its clients. Our insurers are also subject to business risk and, as a result, one or more of them may be unable to fulfill their insurance obligations due to insolvency or otherwise.
Our Consolidated Balance Sheets include amounts representing our probable estimated liability relating to such claims, guarantees, litigation, audits, and investigations. Our estimates of probable liabilities require us to make assumptions related to potential losses regarding our determination of amounts considered probable and estimable. We perform an analysis to determine the level of reserves to establish for insurance-related claims that are known and have been asserted against us, as well as for insurance-related claims that are believed to have been incurred based on actuarial analysis, but have not yet been reported to our claims administrators as of the respective balance sheet dates. We include any adjustments to such insurance reserves in our consolidated results of operations. Insurance recoveries are recorded as assets if recovery is probable and estimated liabilities are not reduced by expected insurance recoveries.
The Company believes, after consultation with counsel, that such guarantees, litigation, U.S. government contract-related audits, investigations and claims, and income tax audits and investigations should not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial statements, beyond amounts currently accrued.
Testing Goodwill for Possible Impairment
The goodwill carried on our Consolidated Balance Sheets is tested annually for possible impairment, and on an interim basis if indicators of possible impairment exist. For purposes of impairment testing, goodwill is assigned to the applicable reporting units based on the current reporting structure. In performing the annual impairment test, we evaluate our goodwill at the reporting unit level. The Company performs the annual goodwill impairment test for the reporting units at the beginning of the fourth quarter of its fiscal year.
We evaluate impairment of goodwill either by assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or by performing a quantitative assessment. Qualitative factors include industry and market considerations, overall financial performance, and other relevant events and circumstances affecting the reporting unit. If we choose to perform a qualitative assessment and after considering the totality of events or circumstances, we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we would perform a quantitative fair value test.
U.S. GAAP does not prescribe a specific valuation method for estimating the fair value of reporting units. Any valuation technique used to estimate the fair value of a reporting unit requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including revenue growth rates, operating margins, discount rates and future market conditions, among others.
We use income and market approaches to test our goodwill for possible impairment which requires us to make estimates and judgments. Under the income approach, fair value is determined by using the discounted cash flows of our reporting units. The Company’s discount rate reflects a weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”) for a peer group of companies representative of the Company’s respective reporting units. Under the market approach, the fair values of our reporting units are determined by reference to guideline companies that are reasonably comparable to our reporting units; the fair values are estimated based on the valuation multiples of the invested capital associated with the guideline companies. In assessing whether there is an indication that the carrying value of goodwill has been impaired, we utilize the results of both valuation techniques and consider the range of fair values indicated.
It is possible that changes in market conditions, economy, facts and circumstances, judgments and assumptions used in estimating the fair value could change, resulting in possible impairment of goodwill in the future. The fair values resulting from the valuation techniques used are not necessarily representative of the values we might obtain in a sale of the reporting units to willing third parties.
For the 2021 fiscal year, we have determined that the fair value of our reporting units substantially exceeded their respective carrying values for the Consolidated Balance Sheets presented and any analysis beyond the qualitative level was not considered necessary.
JACOBS ENGINEERING GROUP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF EARNINGS
For the Fiscal Years Ended October 1, 2021, October 2, 2020 and September 27, 2019
(In thousands, except per share information)
2021 Overview
COVID-19 Pandemic. There are many risks and uncertainties regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, including the anticipated duration of the pandemic and the extent of local and worldwide social, political, and economic disruption it may cause. The Company’s operations for fiscal 2021 were adversely impacted by COVID-19. While certain business units of Critical Mission Solutions, People & Places Solutions and PA Consulting have experienced, and may continue to experience, an increase in demand for certain of their services regarding new projects that may arise in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, it is still expected that COVID-19 is likely to continue to have an adverse impact on each of Critical Missions Solutions, People & Places Solutions and PA Consulting in fiscal 2022, although to a lesser degree than what was seen in 2021 or 2020.
Please refer to Item 1A - Risk Factors, for a discussion of risks and uncertainties related to COVID-19, including the potential impacts on the Company’s business, financial condition and results of operations.
Net earnings attributable to the Company from continuing operations for fiscal 2021 were $467.0 million (or $3.12 per diluted share), an increase of $113.2 million, or 32.0%, from $353.9 million (or $2.67 per diluted share) for the prior year. Overall favorable operating profit improvements during the current year compared to the last year benefited from our PA Consulting and Buffalo Group investing activities in the current year as well as operating profit results in our legacy businesses. These favorable items were offset by the one-time impact of $261.4 million in relation to certain transaction proceeds amounts for the PA investment required to be treated as post-completion compensation expense due to continuing employment requirements associated with employees of PA receiving transaction proceeds in accordance with US generally accepted accounting principles. This required treatment had no impact on the total purchase consideration for this investment. Additionally, included in the Company's reported results in miscellaneous income (expense), net from continuing operations for the year ended October 1, 2021 was $34.7 million in pre-tax net gains associated with our investment in Worley stock (net of Worley stock dividend), which was sold during the fourth quarter fiscal 2021, and certain foreign currency revaluations relating to the ECR sale, as well as pre-tax realized gains associated with our investment in C3.ai, Inc. ("C3") of $49.6 million, which was sold during fiscal 2021, as further discussed Note 8- Joint Ventures, VIEs and Other Investments. Further, $38.6 million in offsetting pre-tax other-than-temporary impairment charges were recorded for our AWE Management Ltd ("AWE") investment in fiscal 2021. In comparison, miscellaneous income (expense), net for the corresponding 2020 period included pre-tax earnings of $330.2 million in Restructuring and other charges and transaction costs associated in part with the Company's fourth quarter fiscal 2020 transformation initiatives relating to real estate and other staffing programs which are discussed in Note 17- Restructuring and Other Charges and $74.5 million in pre-tax fair value losses associated with our investment in Worley stock (net of Worley stock dividend) and certain foreign currency revaluations relating to the ECR sale. Income tax expense for continuing operations for fiscal 2021 was $274.8 million, an increase of $219.5 million, or 396.7%, from $55.3 million in the prior year. Key drivers for this year-over-year increase include $48.7 million related to nondeductible compensation expense relating to the PA Consulting acquisition, $25.6 million related to tax law changes enacted in the United Kingdom, and the current year change in valuation allowance of $38.9 million as compared to income tax benefits during fiscal 2020 of $11.3 million for the release of uncertain tax positions, $6.8 million related to income tax rate changes, the prior year change in valuation allowance of $16.9 million, with the remaining increase related mainly to higher levels of pre-tax income in 2021.
Net earnings attributable to Jacobs from discontinued operations for fiscal 2021 were $10.0 million (or $0.08 per diluted share), a decrease of $128.0 million, or 92.8%, from $138.0 million (or $1.04 per diluted share) for the prior year. Included in net earnings attributable to the Company from discontinued operations for the current year was the pre-tax gain amount of $15.6 million associated with the final working capital settlement with Worley in connection with the ECR sale during the current year. Also, the comparative 2020 year to date period included the settlement of the Nui Phao ("NPMC") legal matter that was reimbursed by insurance, the recognition of the deferred gain for the delayed conveyance of the international entities and for the delivery of the ECR IT assets and adjustments for working capital and certain other items in connection with the ECR sale. For further discussion, see Note 16 - Sale of Energy, Chemicals and Resources ("ECR") Business.
On March 2, 2021, Jacobs completed the strategic investment of a 65% interest in PA Consulting. For further discussion, see Note 14- PA Consulting Business Combination.
On November 24, 2020, Jacobs completed the acquisition of Buffalo Group. For further discussion, see Note 15- Other Business Combinations.
Backlog at October 1, 2021 was $26.6 billion, up $2.8 billion, from $23.8 billion for the prior year. New prospects and new sales remain strong and the Company continues to have a positive outlook for many of the industry groups and sectors in which our clients operate.
Subsequent to October 1, 2021, the Company has entered into the planning stages for identifying certain additional leased space that it intends to abandon or market for sublease and expects to record associated impairment charges in fiscal 2022 upon finalization of these plans. Potential charges for these plans are expected to approximate up to $70 million.
Results of Operations
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Revenues for the year ended October 1, 2021 were $14.09 billion, an increase of $525.7 million, or 3.9%, from $13.57 billion for the prior year. The increase in revenues was due partly to fiscal 2021 incremental revenues from the PA Consulting investment completed in March 2021, the Buffalo Group business acquisition completed in November 2020 and the March 2020 John Wood Group nuclear business acquisition. In addition, revenue growth benefited from favorable foreign currency translation of $238.6 million for the year ended October 1, 2021, in our international businesses, as compared to unfavorable impacts of $30.8 million for the corresponding period last year. The current year benefits were partially offset by market conditions and certain contract wind downs in our U.S. businesses and the extra week of activity in fiscal 2020.
Pass-through costs included in revenues for the year ended October 1, 2021 were $2.38 billion, in comparison to $2.61 billion in the prior year. In general, pass-through costs are more significant on projects that have a higher content of field services activities. Pass-through costs are generally incurred at specific points during the life cycle of a project and are highly dependent on the needs of our individual clients and the nature of the clients’ projects. However, because we have hundreds of projects that start at various times within a fiscal year, the effect of pass-through costs on the level of direct costs of contracts can vary between fiscal years without there being a fundamental or significant change to the underlying business.
Gross profit for the year ended October 1, 2021 was $3.04 billion, up $457.1 million, or 17.7%, from $2.59 billion for the prior year. Our gross profit margins were 21.6% and 19.1% for the years ended October 1, 2021 and October 2, 2020, respectively. The increase in our gross profit and gross profit margins were mainly attributable to the recent business acquisitions mentioned along with favorable foreign currency translation impacts in our international businesses partially offset by market conditions and certain contract wind downs in our U.S. businesses and the extra week of activity in fiscal 2020 as noted above.
See Segment Financial Information discussion for further information on the Company’s results of operations at the operating segment level.
Selling, general & administrative expenses for the year ended October 1, 2021 were $2.36 billion, an increase of $305.0 million, or 14.9%, from $2.05 billion for the prior year. The current year's results were impacted by incremental SG&A expenses from the recent business acquisitions mentioned above and higher personnel-related costs, partly offset by lower other operational overhead costs and the extra week of activity in fiscal 2020. Additionally, restructuring and other charges for fiscal 2021 were mainly attributable to post-completion compensation expense of $261 million in connection with the investment in PA Consulting, while fiscal 2020 included $325.1 million of restructuring and other charges and transaction costs associated in part with the Company's fourth quarter fiscal 2020 transformation initiatives relating to real estate and other staffing programs. Incremental SG&A expenses from the above-mentioned business acquisitions have been offset in part by continued reductions in personnel-related and other overhead costs resulting from our ongoing cost reduction programs. Unfavorable impacts on SG&A expenses from foreign exchange were $75.9 million for the year ended October 1, 2021 as compared to nominal favorable impacts for the corresponding period last year.
Net interest expense for the year ended October 1, 2021 was $69.2 million, an increase of $11.7 million from $57.5 million for the prior year. The increase in net interest expense year over year is primarily due to the higher levels of debt outstanding in the current year as a result of the PA acquisition, partially offset by lower interest rates.
Miscellaneous income (expense), net for the year ended October 1, 2021 was $76.7 million, an increase of $114.0 million as compared to $(37.3) million in expense for the prior year. The increase from the prior year was due primarily to $34.7 million in pre-tax net gains associated with changes in the fair value of our investment in Worley stock (net of Worley stock dividend) (which was sold in fourth quarter fiscal 2021) and certain foreign currency revaluations relating to the ECR sale in the current year, compared to pre-tax net losses of $74.5 million in the prior year. Also included in miscellaneous (expense) income during the current year are pre-tax realized gains of $49.6 million related to holdings of our C3 shares sold during the period, as further discussed in Note 11 - Joint Ventures, VIEs and Other Investments. These favorable impacts for fiscal 2021 were partially offset by other-than-temporary impairment charges on our investment in AWE in the amount of $38.6 million.
The following table reconciles total income tax expense on continuing operations using the statutory U.S. federal income tax rate to the consolidated income tax expense on continuing operations shown in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Earnings for the years ended October 1, 2021, October 2, 2020 and September 27, 2019 (dollars in thousands):
The Company’s consolidated effective income tax rate for the year ended October 1, 2021 increased to 39.5% from 12.5% for fiscal 2020. Key drivers for this year-over-year increase in the effective tax rate include impacts from $261 million in nondeductible compensation relating to the PA investment post-completion compensation expense, $25.6 million related to tax law changes enacted in the United Kingdom, and the current year change in valuation allowance of $38.9 million as compared to income tax benefits during fiscal 2020 of $11.3 million for the release of uncertain tax positions, $6.8 million related to income tax rate changes, the prior year change in valuation allowance of $16.9 million, with the remaining increase related mainly to higher levels of pre-tax income in 2021.
Segment Financial Information
The following tables present total revenues and segment operating profit for each reportable segment (in thousands) and includes a reconciliation of segment operating profit to total U.S. GAAP operating profit by including certain corporate-level expenses and expenses relating to the restructuring other charges (as defined in Note 17- Restructuring and Other Charges) and transaction costs (in thousands).
(1)Includes $19.5 million, net, in charges related to a legal settlement for the year ended October 1, 2021 and $25.0 million in charges associated with a certain project for the year ended September 27, 2019.
(2)Other corporate expenses include intangibles amortization of $149.8 million, $90.6 million and $79.1 million for the years ended October 1, 2021, October 2, 2020 and September 27, 2019, respectively. Also includes costs that were previously allocated to the ECR segment prior to discontinued operations presentation in connection with the ECR sale in the approximate amount of $14.8 million for the year ended September 27, 2019.
(3)Included in the year ended October 1, 2021 is $297.8 million of costs incurred in connection with the investment in PA Consulting, in part classified as compensation costs.
(4)The years ended October 1, 2021, October 2, 2020 and September 27, 2019 include $34.7 million, $(74.3) million and $(64.8) million in fair value adjustments related to our investment in Worley stock (net of Worley stock dividends) (sold during the current year) and certain foreign currency revaluations relating to ECR sale proceeds, respectively and revenues under the Company's TSA with Worley of $0.2 million, $15.8 million and $35.4 million, respectively. The year ended October 1, 2021 includes $38.6 million related to impairment of our AWE Management Ltd. investment and $49.6 million in fair value adjustments related to our investment in C3 stock. Lastly, includes gain on settlement of the CH2M retiree medical plans of $35.0 million for the year ended September 27, 2019.
In evaluating the Company’s performance by operating segment, the CODM reviews various metrics and statistical data for each Line Of Business ("LOB") and PA Consulting, but focuses primarily on revenues and operating profit. As discussed above, segment operating profit includes not only local SG&A expenses but the SG&A expenses of the Company’s support groups that have been allocated to the segments. In addition, the Company attributes each segment's specific incentive compensation plan costs to the segments. The revenues of the People & Places Solutions LOB are more affected by pass-through revenues than the Critical Mission Solutions LOB or the PA Consulting segment. The methods for recognizing revenue, incentive fees, project losses and change orders are consistent among the segments.
Critical Mission Solutions
Critical Mission Solutions (CMS) segment revenues for the year ended October 1, 2021 were $5.09 billion, up $121.1 million, or 2.4%, from $4.97 billion for the prior year. Our increase in revenue was primarily attributable to incremental revenue from the Buffalo Group and John Wood Group nuclear business acquisitions. There was also comparable revenue growth from most elements of our legacy portfolio, driven by increased spending by customers in the U.S. government business sector and our legacy international clients, mitigated by several large contracts winding down in the U.S. and one less week of activity as compared to fiscal year end 2020. Impacts on revenues from favorable foreign currency translation were approximately $61.8 million for the year ended October 1, 2021, compared to $4.5 million in unfavorable impacts in the corresponding prior year.
Operating profit for the segment was $447.2 million for the year ended October 1, 2021, up $75.1 million, or 20.2%, from $372.1 million for the prior year. The increases from the prior year were primarily attributable to incremental operating profit from the Buffalo Group and John Wood Group nuclear business acquisitions, and the continued growth in profits from our U.S. governmental business sector and our legacy international business. Impacts on operating profit from favorable foreign currency translation were approximately $9.7 million for the year ended October 1, 2021, compared to $0.4 million in unfavorable impacts in the corresponding prior year.
People & Places Solutions
Revenues for the People & Places Solutions (P&PS) segment for the year ended October 1, 2021 were $8.38 billion, down $222.8 million, or 2.6%, from $8.60 billion for the prior year. The decrease in revenue was driven by softer market conditions in our advanced facilities business and one less week of activity during fiscal year ended October 1, 2021, as compared to the prior year. These items were partially offset by $176.8 million in favorable foreign currency translation in our international business for the year ended October 1, 2021, compared to $26.2 million in unfavorable impacts in the corresponding prior year.
Operating profit for the segment for the year ended October 1, 2021 was $780.4 million, an increase of $39.7 million, or 5.4%, from $740.7 million for the comparative period in 2020. The year-over-year increase is primarily related to lower spend on travel, discretionary operating expenditures and other operating expenditures and real estate transformation initiatives enacted in fiscal year 2020. Impacts on operating profit from favorable foreign currency translation were approximately $30.9 million for the year ended October 1, 2021, compared to $6.1 million in unfavorable impacts in the corresponding prior year. In addition, these were partially offset by $19.5 million in net charges related to a legal settlement for the year ended October 1, 2021.
PA Consulting
Revenues and operating profit for the PA Consulting segment for the year ended October 1, 2021 were $627.4 million and $151.1 million, respectively. There were no comparable periods in the prior year, given the transaction closed on March 2, 2021.
Other Corporate Expenses
Other corporate expenses were $340.1 million, $249.4 million and $264.4 million for the years ended October 1, 2021, October 2, 2020 and September 27, 2019, respectively. The increase from fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2021 was due primarily to higher intangible amortization expense from the PA Consulting investment and the Buffalo Group and John Wood Group nuclear business acquisitions, as well as impacts from Company benefit program enhancements. These increases were partly offset by employee related and other cost reductions across the Company's corporate functions.
Included in other corporate expenses in the above table are costs and expenses that relate to general corporate activities as well as corporate-managed benefit and insurance programs. Such costs and expenses include: (i) those elements of SG&A expenses relating to the business as a whole; (ii) those elements of our incentive compensation plans relating to corporate personnel whose other compensation costs are not allocated to the LOBs; (iii) the amortization of intangible assets acquired as part of business combinations; (iv) the quarterly variances between the Company’s actual costs of certain of its self-insured integrated risk and employee benefit programs and amounts charged to the LOBs; and (v) certain adjustments relating to costs associated with the Company’s international defined benefit pension plans. In addition, other corporate expenses may also include from time to time certain adjustments to contract margins (both positive and negative) associated with projects, as well as other items, where it has been determined that such adjustments are not indicative of the performance of the related LOB.
Restructuring and Other Charges
For discussion regarding restructuring and other charges, see Note 17- Restructuring and Other Charges to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Backlog Information
We include in backlog the total dollar amount of revenues we expect to record in the future as a result of performing work under contracts that have been awarded to us. Our policy with respect to Operations & Maintenance ("O&M") contracts, however, is to include in backlog the amount of revenues we expect to receive for one succeeding year, regardless of the remaining life of the contract. For national government programs (other than national government O&M contracts, which are subject to the same policy applicable to all other O&M contracts), our policy is to include in backlog the full contract award, whether funded or unfunded, excluding option periods. Because of variations in the nature, size, expected duration, funding commitments and the scope of services required by our contracts, the timing of when backlog will be recognized as revenues can vary greatly between individual contracts.
Consistent with industry practice, substantially all of our contracts are subject to cancellation or termination at the option of the client, including our U.S. government work. While management uses all information available to it to determine backlog, at any given time our backlog is subject to changes in the scope of services to be provided as well as increases or decreases in costs relating to the contracts included therein. Backlog is not necessarily an indicator of future revenues.
Because certain contracts (e.g., contracts relating to large Engineering, Procurement & Construction ("EPC") projects as well as national government programs) can cause large increases to backlog in the fiscal period in which we recognize the award, and because many of our contracts require us to provide services that span over several fiscal quarters (and sometimes over fiscal years), we evaluate our backlog generally on a year-over-year basis, but also on a sequential, quarter-over-quarter basis, where appropriate.
Please refer to Item 1A - Risk Factors, above, for a discussion of other factors that may cause backlog to ultimately convert into revenues at different amounts.
The following table summarizes our backlog for the years ended October 1, 2021, October 2, 2020 and September 27, 2019 (in millions):
The increase in backlog in Critical Mission Solutions for the years presented was primarily the result of the acquisition of Buffalo Group and conversion of the other robust CMS pipeline.
The increase in backlog in People & Places Solutions for the years presented was primarily the result of new awards in the U.K. and U.S. markets.
Backlog in PA Consulting as of October 1, 2021 was $303.6 million. The PA Consulting transaction closed on March 2, 2021.
Backlog relating to work to be performed either directly or indirectly for the U.S. federal government and its agencies totaled approximately $10.8 billion (or 40.5% of total backlog), $8.5 billion (or 35.7% of total backlog) and $8.8 billion (or 39.1% of total backlog) at October 1, 2021, October 2, 2020 and September 27, 2019, respectively. Most of our federal government contracts require that services be provided beyond one year. In general, these contracts must be funded annually (i.e., the amounts to be spent under the contract must be appropriated by the U.S. Congress to the procuring agency, and then the agency must allot these sums to the specific contracts).
We estimate that approximately $8.50 billion, or 31.9%, of total backlog at October 1, 2021 will be realized as revenues within the next fiscal year.
Consolidated backlog differs from the Company’s remaining performance obligations as defined by ASC 606 primarily because of our national government contracts (other than national government O&M contracts). Our policy is to include in backlog the full contract award, whether funded or unfunded excluding the option periods while our remaining performance obligations represent a measure of the total dollar value of work to be performed on contracts awarded and in progress. Additionally, the Company includes our proportionate share of backlog related to unconsolidated joint ventures which is not included in our remaining performance obligations.
For a discussion on the year ended October 2, 2020 compared to the year ended September 27, 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended October 2, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At October 1, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity consisted of $1.01 billion in cash and cash equivalents and $1.92 billion of available borrowing capacity under our $2.25 billion revolving credit agreement (the "Revolving Credit Facility"). We finance much of our operations and growth through cash generated by our operations.
The amount of cash and cash equivalents at October 1, 2021 represented an increase of $151.8 million from $862.4 million at October 2, 2020, the reasons for which are described below.
Our cash flow provided by operations of $726.3 million during fiscal 2021 was comparatively lower than the $806.8 million in cash flow provided by operations for the prior year. This change was due primarily to unfavorable impacts from net cash earnings driven by $261 million in cash used associated with PA Consulting post-completion compensation payments made during the year. These payments were offset in part by overall improved working capital performance, driven by favorability in accounts receivable collection trends partly offset by payments of certain costs deferred from the 2020 COVID assistance programs in the U.S and Europe.
Our cash used for investing activities for fiscal 2021 of $1.38 billion was comparatively higher than the $429.1 million cash used for investing activities for the prior year. The increase was due primarily to the Buffalo Group acquisition and our investment in PA Consulting during fiscal 2021, partially offset by proceeds received from the Company's disposal of the Worley and C3 investments and the final ECR sale working capital settlement. Investing activities during the prior year were largely associated with the acquisition of John Wood Group's nuclear business of $293.6 million.
Our cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended 2021 of $799.0 million resulted mainly from net proceeds from borrowings of $1.22 billion mainly in connection with the PA Consulting investment, offset by cash used for share repurchases of $274.9 million and $156.0 million in dividends to shareholders and non-controlling interests. Cash used for financing activities was $208.3 million in fiscal 2020 and resulted mainly from common stock repurchases of $337.3 million and dividend payments to both shareholders and non-controlling interests of $144.0 million, offset by net proceeds from borrowings of $265.3 million.
At October 1, 2021, the Company had approximately $140.4 million in cash and cash equivalents held in the U.S. and $873.9 million held outside of the U.S. (primarily in the U.K., the Eurozone, Australia, India, Japan and the United Arab Emirates), which is used primarily for funding operations in those regions. Other than the tax cost of repatriating funds to the U.S. (see Note 7- Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K), there are no material impediments to repatriating these funds to the U.S.
On November 19, 2021, Jacobs consummated its previously announced acquisition of BlackLynx ("BlackLynx"). Pursuant to and subject to the terms and conditions of Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”), Jacobs acquired all of BlackLynx's outstanding shares of common stock, in a transaction valued at up to $257.5 million, on a cash-free, debt-free basis, including base consideration of $250 million, and a potential earn-out payment of up to $7.5 million. The amount of any earnout payment will depend on BlackLynx achieving certain revenue and gross margin thresholds in calendar year 2022. The purchase price was paid in cash and is subject to customary post-closing adjustments.
On March 2, 2021, Jacobs completed the strategic investment of a 65% interest in PA Consulting, a UK-based leading innovation and transformation consulting firm. The total consideration paid by the Company was$1.7 billion, funded through cash on hand, a new term loan and draws on the Company's existing revolver. The remaining 35% interest is held by PA Consulting employees. See Note 14- PA Consulting Business Combination for more discussion on the investment and Note 9- Borrowings for more discussion on the financing for the transaction.
On January 20, 2021, the Company entered into an unsecured delayed draw term loan facility (the “2021 Term Loan Facility”) with a syndicate of financial institutions as lenders. Under the 2021 Term Loan Facility, the Company borrowed an aggregate principal amount of $200.0 million and £650.0 million. The proceeds of the term loans were used primarily to fund the investment in PA Consulting. The 2021 Term Loan Facility contains affirmative and negative covenants and events of default customary for financings of this type that are consistent with those included in the Revolving Credit Facility and the Company’s unsecured term loan facility dated March 25, 2020 (the “2020 Term Loan Facility”). The 2020 Term Loan Facility and the 2021 Term Loan Facility are together referred to as the "Term Loan Facilities".
On November 24, 2020, a subsidiary of Jacobs completed the acquisition of Buffalo Group, a leader in advanced cyber and intelligence solutions which allows Jacobs to further expand its cyber and intelligence solutions offerings to government clients. The Company paid total consideration of $190.1 million, which was comprised of approximately $182.4 million in cash to the former owners of Buffalo Group and contingent consideration of $7.7 million which was expected to be settled in fiscal 2022. See Note 15- Other Business Combinations for further discussion.
The Company had $263.8 million in letters of credit outstanding at October 1, 2021. Of this amount, $1.7 million was issued under the Revolving Credit Facility and $262.1 million was issued under separate, committed and uncommitted letter-of-credit facilities.
We believe we have adequate liquidity and capital resources to fund our projected cash requirements for the next twelve months based on the liquidity provided by our cash and cash equivalents on hand, our borrowing capacity and our continuing cash from operations. We further believe that our financial resources and discretionary spend controls will allow us to continue managing the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations for the foreseeable future. We will continue to evaluate the impact of the pandemic on our business and reassess accordingly.
We were in compliance with all of our debt covenants at October 1, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth certain information about our contractual obligations as of October 1, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)Determined based on borrowings outstanding at the end of fiscal 2021 using the interest rates in effect at that time, considering the effects of interest rate swap agreements, and for our outstanding long-term debt, concluding with the expiration date of the debt facilities as defined below.
(2)Assumes that future contributions will be consistent with amounts contributed in fiscal 2021, allowing for certain growth based on rates of inflation and salary increases, but limited to the amount recorded as of October 1, 2021. Actual contributions will depend on a variety of factors, including amounts required by local laws and regulations, and other funding requirements.
(3)Assumes that future payments will be consistent with amounts paid in fiscal 2021. Due to the non-qualified nature of the plans, and the fact that benefits are based in part on years of service, the payments included in the schedule were limited to the amount recorded as of October 1, 2021.
(4)Represents those liabilities estimated to be under firm contractual commitments as of October 1, 2021; primarily accounts payable, accrued payroll and accrued dividends.
Effects of Inflation and Changing Prices
The effects of inflation and changing prices on our business is discussed in Item 1A - Risk Factors, and is incorporated herein by reference.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the form of guarantees not reflected in our balance sheet that arise in the normal course of business. However, such off-balance sheet arrangements are not reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or resources. See Note 18- Commitments and Contingencies and Derivative Financial Instruments of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
New Accounting Pronouncements
ASU 2017-04, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019. ASU 2017-04 removed the second step of the goodwill impairment test, which requires a hypothetical purchase price allocation. An entity will now recognize a goodwill impairment charge for the amount by which a reporting unit's carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. The adoption of ASU 2017-04 had no impact on the Company's financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses ("ASC 326"): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments requires entities to use a current lifetime expected credit loss methodology to measure impairments of certain financial assets. Using this methodology will result in earlier recognition of losses than under the current incurred loss approach, which requires waiting to recognize a loss until it is probable of having been incurred. There are other provisions within the standard that affect how impairments of other financial assets may be recorded and presented, and that expand disclosures. This standard was effective beginning with the first fiscal quarter 2021. The adoption of ASU 326 did not have a material impact on the Company's financial position, results of operations or cash flows.