ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
GENERAL
For an understanding of the significant factors that influenced our performance during the fiscal year, we believe our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this annual report as indexed on page.
Comparisons under this heading refer to the 53-week period ended October 3, 2021 and 52-week period ended September 27, 2020 for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. A comparison of our results of operations and cash flows for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 can be found under Part II, “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 27, 2020.
Our MD&A consists of the following sections:
•Overview - a general description of our business and fiscal 2021 highlights.
•Results of Operations - an analysis of our consolidated statements of earnings for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources - an analysis of our cash flows, including capital expenditures, share repurchase activity, dividends, and known trends that may impact liquidity.
•Critical Accounting Estimates - a discussion of accounting policies that require critical judgments and estimates.
We have included in our MD&A certain performance metrics that management uses to assess company performance and which we believe will be useful in analyzing and understanding our results of operations. These metrics include:
•Changes in sales at restaurants open more than one year (“same-store sales”), system restaurant sales, franchised restaurant sales, and average unit volumes (“AUVs”). Same-store sales, restaurant sales, and AUVs are presented for franchised restaurants. Franchise sales represent sales at franchise restaurants and are revenues of our franchisees. We do not record franchise sales as revenues; however, our royalty revenues and percentage rent revenues are calculated based on a percentage of franchise sales. We believe franchise and system same-store sales, franchised and system-wide sales, and AUV information are useful to investors as they have a direct effect on the Company’s profitability.
•Adjusted EBITDA represents net earnings on a generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) basis excluding gains or losses from discontinued operations, income taxes, interest expense, net, gains on the sale of company-operated restaurants, impairment and other (gains) charges, net, depreciation and amortization, amortization of tenant improvement allowances and other, and pension settlement charges. We are presenting Adjusted EBITDA because we believe that it provides a meaningful supplement to net earnings of the Company's core business operating results, as well as a comparison to those of other similar companies. Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA, when viewed with the Company's results of operations in accordance with GAAP and the accompanying reconciliations within MD&A, provides useful information about operating performance and period-over-period change, and provides additional information that is useful for evaluating the operating performance of the Company's core business without regard to potential distortions. Additionally, management believes that Adjusted EBITDA permits investors to gain an understanding of the factors and trends affecting our ongoing cash earnings, from which capital investments are made and debt is serviced.
Same-store sales, system restaurant sales, franchised restaurant sales, AUVs, and Adjusted EBITDA are not measurements determined in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered in isolation, or as an alternative to earnings from operations, or other similarly titled measures of other companies.
OVERVIEW
Our Business
As of October 3, 2021, we operated and franchised 2,218 Jack in the Box quick-service restaurants, primarily in the western and southern United States, including one in Guam.
We derive revenue from retail sales at Jack in the Box company-operated restaurants and rental revenue, royalties (based upon a percent of sales), franchise fees and contributions for advertising and other services from franchisees. In addition, we recognize gains or losses from the sale of company-operated restaurants to franchisees, which are included as a line item within operating costs and expenses, net, in the accompanying consolidated statements of earnings.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has continued to have varying degrees of disruption on our business. Throughout the pandemic substantially all of our restaurants have remained open, with the majority of our dining rooms closed and locations operating in an off-premise capacity, leveraging our drive-thru, carryout and delivery capabilities. We have continued to follow the guidance of expert health authorities to ensure precautionary steps are taken to protect the health and safety of our employees and guests.
Our drive-thru, carryout, and delivery capabilities have positioned us to continue our strong systemwide sales growth in 2021; however, our business has been challenged by COVID-19 related labor availability and wage inflation. As a result of labor challenges, we and our franchisees have had to reduce hours of operations and keep dining rooms closed at certain locations.
While we have not had significant disruptions in our supply chain, we have experienced some product shortages and higher costs and inflationary pressures.
The pandemic has affected consumer behavior with increased focus on digital sales. We have seen significant growth in our digital sales and continue to support enhancements of our digital ordering and off-premise channels, such as delivery.
While we do not know the future impact COVID-19 will have on our business, we expect labor and supply chain challenges and inflation to continue into at least fiscal 2022.
Other Developments
As previously announced, a franchisee that operated 68 restaurants in the Midwest filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy in February 2021. Of the 68 restaurants, we sublease 50 of the locations to the franchisee and own the land and building for the remaining 18 locations. Through the bankruptcy proceedings, the franchisee may reject the franchise agreements and leases for a number of these locations, resulting in potential impairment costs related to future lease obligations.
On May 5, 2021 the franchisee filed a motion with the court rejecting three of the locations, two of which were permanently closed in fiscal 2020. On August 26, 2021, in response to a subsequent motion to reject two additional locations, the court authorized such rejections as of the dates previously agreed upon by the parties. On November 15, 2021, the franchisee filed an additional motion with the court rejected a total of 5 more locations. The franchisee’s remaining restaurants continue to operate with the franchisee remaining current with their obligations to us. The Company does not expect to acquire and operate any restaurants as part of the sale of these restaurants and our current expectation is the remaining restaurants will be transferred to one or more other franchise partners.
Financial Highlights for Fiscal 2021
•Systemwide sales for the year increased 13.1% as compared to 2020. The increase is inclusive of the favorable 53rd week in the fourth quarter of 2021, which resulted in incremental systemwide sales of $77.9 million. Excluding the 53rd week, systemwide sales in fiscal 2021 increased 11.0%.
•System same-store sales for the year increased 10.3%.
•Total revenues for the year increased 12.0%. The increase is inclusive of the favorable 53rd week in the fourth quarter of 2021, which resulted in incremental revenue of approximately $21.3 million.
•Earnings from operations for the year increased 25.7%.
•Net earnings and Diluted EPS increased 84.7% and 90.9%, respectively.
•Adjusted EBITDA increased in 2021 to $331.4 million from $274.2 million, or 21%. The increase is inclusive of the favorable 53rd week in the fourth quarter of 2021, which resulted in incremental Adjusted EBITDA of $5.6 million.
•Net units down 1.0% with 37 closures and 14 store openings during the year.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR FISCAL 2021 AND 2020
The following table presents certain income and expense items included in our consolidated statements of earnings as a percentage of total revenues, unless otherwise indicated. Percentages may not add due to rounding.
________________________
(1)As a percentage of company restaurant sales.
(2)As a percentage of franchise rental revenues.
(3)As a percentage of franchise royalties and other.
(4)As a percentage of franchise contributions for advertising and other services.
(5)As a percentage of earnings from continuing operations and before income taxes.
The following table summarizes changes in same-store sales for company-operated, franchised, and system restaurants:
The following table summarizes the changes in the number and mix of company and franchise restaurants:
The following table summarizes the restaurant sales for company-operated, franchised, and total systemwide restaurants (in thousands):
________________________
(1)Franchised restaurant sales represent sales at franchised restaurants and are revenues of our franchisees. System sales include company and franchised restaurant sales. We do not record franchised sales as revenues; however, our royalty revenues, marketing fees and percentage rent revenues are calculated based on a percentage of franchised sales. We believe franchised and system restaurant sales information is useful to investors as they have a direct effect on the Company's profitability.
Below is a reconciliation of Non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP measure, net earnings (in thousands):
Company Restaurant Operations
The following table presents company restaurant sales and costs as a percentage of the related sales (dollars in thousands):
Company restaurant sales increased $38.8 million, or 11.1%, in 2021 as compared with the prior year. In 2021, the increase was primarily driven by average check growth, menu price increases, an increase in the average number of restaurants and the impact of the 53rd week, partially offset by a decline in traffic. The following table presents the approximate impact of these items on company restaurant sales in 2021 (in millions):
Same-store sales at company-operated restaurants increased 6.1% in 2021 compared to a year ago. The following table summarizes the increases (decreases) in company-operated same-store sales:
________________________
(1)Includes price increases of 3.5% in 2021.
Food and packaging costs as a percentage of company restaurant sales decreased by 0.3% to 29.1% in 2021 from 29.4% a year ago, primarily due to favorable sales mix of 0.8% and menu price increases of 0.9%, partially offset by a 1.3% increase in commodities. Commodity costs increased in the current fiscal year by approximately 5.1% primarily due to increases in pork and beverages. For fiscal 2022, we expect annual commodity cost inflation to be up 6% to 7% compared with fiscal 2021.
Payroll and employee benefit costs as a percentage of company restaurant sales increased to 30.7% in 2021 compared with 30.5% a year ago primarily due to labor inflation, higher incentive compensation costs and a change in the mix of restaurants due to franchisee acquisitions. Labor inflation was approximately 7.2% in the current fiscal year. For fiscal 2022, we expect annual wage inflation to be up 8% to 10% compared with fiscal 2021.
Occupancy and other costs as a percentage of company restaurant sales increased to 15.9% in 2021 from 15.5% a year ago due primarily to higher costs for delivery fees as we grow our delivery sales mix, higher costs for utilities and the acquisition of 20 restaurants with lower than average sales volumes; partially offset by leverage from higher same-store sales.
Franchise Operations
The following table presents franchise revenues and costs in each fiscal year and other information we believe is useful in analyzing the change in franchise operating results (dollars in thousands):
________________________
(1) 2021 AUV is adjusted to exclude the 53rd week for the purpose of comparison to prior year.
Franchise rental revenues increased $26.0 million, or 8.1%, in 2021 compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher AUVs resulting in an increase in revenues from percentage rent. In 2021, additional rent revenue of approximately $6.5 million from a 53rd week also contributed to the increase.
Franchise royalties and other increased $26.4 million, or 14.8%, primarily due to higher royalties of $22.5 million as a result of higher AUVs and additional royalties of approximately $3.6 million from a 53rd week. Additionally, fees received in connection with the early termination of franchise agreements increased by $3.3 million.
Franchise contributions for advertising and other services increased $31.0 million, or 17.9%, primarily due to higher marketing contributions of $29.9 million, as a result of higher AUVs, additional contributions of approximately $3.5 million from a 53rd week, and a reduction in contribution percentages for March 2020 and April 2020 marketing fees in response to the pandemic which contributed to lower fees of $7.9 million in the prior year.
Franchise occupancy expenses, primarily rent, increased $4.9 million in 2021, primarily due to additional costs of approximately $4.0 million from a 53rd week.
Franchise support and other costs remained flat in 2021, primarily to lower bad debt expense of $1.7 million related to specific franchise situations that occurred in the prior year, offset by higher costs related to a franchise business conference and brand standard audits.
Franchise advertising and other service expenses increased $29.5 million, or 16.3% in 2021 primarily due to an increase in marketing contributions of $29.9 million.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization decreased $6.3 million in 2021 as compared with the prior year, primarily due to certain of our franchise building assets becoming fully depreciated.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses
The following table presents the increase (decrease) in SG&A expenses in 2021 compared with the prior year (in thousands):
Advertising costs represent company contributions to our marketing fund and are generally determined as a percentage of company-operated restaurant sales. Advertising costs, on a comparable 52-week basis, increased $2.1 million primarily due to higher company-operated restaurant sales and a decrease in the contribution percentage in the prior year.
Incentive compensation increased by $2.6 million in 2021 primarily due to higher achievement levels compared to the prior year for the Company’s annual incentive plan, partially offset by a $0.3 million decrease in stock-based compensation as a result of turnover at the executive level in the prior year.
The cash surrender value of our Company-owned life insurance (“COLI”) policies, net of changes in our non-qualified deferred compensation obligation supported by these policies, are subject to market fluctuations. The changes in market values had a positive impact of $6.2 million versus the prior year as a result of $9.1 million of gains recognized in the year compared to $2.9 million of gains in the prior year.
Litigation matters increased by $1.2 million in 2021 primarily due to a $3.8 million favorable settlement received in the prior year from a class action lawsuit related to credit card interchange fees, partially offset by $2.6 million lower costs on certain employee and other litigation matters. Refer to Note 16, Commitments and Contingencies, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Insurance costs decreased $1.4 million in 2021 versus the prior year primarily due to more favorable trends in the current year related to expected losses associated with workers’ compensation claims.
Impairment and Other Gains, Net
Impairment and other gains, net is comprised of the following (in thousands):
Impairment and other gains, net decreased $3.1 million in 2021 versus the prior year primarily due to lower gains on the disposition of property and equipment of $2.9 million. In 2021, gains related to the sale of restaurant properties versus a gain on the sale of one of our corporate office buildings in the prior year. Refer to Note 9, Impairment and Other (Gains) Charges, Net, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Gains on the Sale of Company-Operated Restaurants
In 2021 and 2020, no company-operated restaurants were sold to franchisees. Gains on the sale of company-operated restaurants in both periods pertain to meeting certain contingent consideration provisions included in restaurants sold in previous years.
Other Pension and Post-Retirement Expenses, Net
Other pension and post-retirement expenses, net decreased by $40.8 million in 2021 versus the prior year, primarily due to non-cash pension settlement charges of $39.2 million in the prior year. Refer to Note 12, Retirement Plans, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding these charges.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net, is comprised of the following (in thousands):
Interest expense, net, increased $0.7 million in 2021 primarily due to interest from the 53rd contributing an additional $1.2 million and lower interest income of $0.4 million; partially offset by lower average borrowings as a result of paying down our Variable Funding Notes in 2021.
Income Taxes
The income tax provisions reflect effective tax rates of 25.2% and 26.8% in fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. The major components of the year-over-year change in tax rates were a decrease in the impact of non-deductible compensation for certain officers, a decrease in nondeductible costs resulting from a California Private Attorney General Act lawsuit settled in the prior year, and an increase in non-taxable gains from the market performance of insurance products used to fund certain non-qualified retirement plans, partially offset by an adjustment to state taxes recorded in the second quarter of fiscal year 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
General
Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources are cash flows from operations and borrowings available under our securitized financing facility. Our cash requirements consist principally of working capital, general corporate needs, capital expenditures, income tax payments, debt service requirements, franchise tenant improvement allowance distributions, dividend payments, and obligations related to our benefit plans. We generally reinvest available cash flows from operations to invest in our business, service our debt obligations, pay dividends and repurchase shares of our common stock.
Our primary sources of short-term and long-term liquidity are expected to be cash flows from operations and available borrowings under our Variable Funding Notes. As of October 3, 2021, the Company had $73.6 million of cash and restricted cash on its balance sheet and $110.5 million of borrowing availability under its Variable Funding Notes.
Based upon current levels of operations and anticipated growth, we expect that cash flows from operations, combined with our securitized financing facility including our Variable Funding Notes, will be sufficient to meet our capital expenditure, working capital and debt service requirements for at least the next twelve months and the foreseeable future.
Cash Flows
The table below summarizes our cash flows from continuing operations activities for each of the last two fiscal years (in thousands):
Operating Activities. Operating cash flows increased $57.6 million compared with a year ago, primarily due to an increase in net income adjusted for non-cash items of $27.4 million and favorable changes in working capital of $30.2 million, primarily due to a favorable change in accounts receivable of $32.9 million, as a result of the repayment of franchise marketing and rent deferrals provided in the prior year, a favorable change in accrued liabilities of $24.8 million mainly from an increase in deferred rent income driven by collections of October rent in the 53rd week in fiscal 2021; partially offset by an unfavorable change in operating lease right-of-use assets and lease liabilities of $25.3 million due to payment of October rent in the 53rd week and the repayment of deferrals we received from our landlords in the prior year.
Pension and Postretirement Contributions - Our policy is to fund our pension plans at or above the minimum required by law. As of the date of our last actuarial funding valuation for our qualified pension plan, there was no minimum contribution funding requirement. In 2021 and 2020, we contributed $6.1 million and $6.2 million, respectively, to our pension and postretirement plans. We do not anticipate making any contributions to our qualified defined benefit pension plan in fiscal 2022. For additional information, refer to Note 12, Retirement Plans, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Investing Activities. Cash flows used in investing activities increased $50.1 million in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to $21.5 million higher capital expenditures, $15.9 million lower proceeds on sale and leaseback transactions, and $11.0 million lower proceeds received on the sale of property and equipment, primarily due to proceeds received on the sale of a corporate office building in the prior year.
Capital Expenditures - The composition of capital expenditures in each fiscal year is summarized in the table below (in thousands):
In 2021, capital expenditures increased by $21.5 million compared to a year ago primarily due to a $15.1 million increase in purchases of assets intended for sale and leaseback. In 2021 and 2020, we exercised our right of first refusal related to six and one leased restaurant properties, respectively.
We use sale and leaseback financing to lower the initial cash investment in our restaurants to the cost of the equipment, whenever possible. The following table summarizes the cash flow activity related to these transactions in each fiscal year (dollars in thousands):
Financing Activities. Cash flows used in financing activities increased by $256.3 million compared with a year ago, primarily due to our repayment during the second quarter of $107.9 million of 2020 borrowings on our Variable Funding Notes and an increase in stock repurchases of $44.4 million.
Repurchases of Common Stock - In fiscal 2021, the Company purchased 1.9 million shares of its common stock for an aggregate cost of $200.0 million. As of October 3, 2021, there was no remaining amount under share repurchase programs authorized by the Board of Directors.
On November 19, 2021, the Board of Directors authorized an additional $200.0 million stock buy-back program that expires on November 20, 2023.
Dividends - In fiscal 2021, the Board of Directors declared four quarterly cash dividends of $0.40 per share in the first and second quarter and $0.44 per share in the third and fourth quarter, totaling $37.6 million. Future dividends are subject to approval by our Board of Directors.
Long-Term Debt - As of October 3, 2021, our long-term debt consists of $1,290.3 million of total principal outstanding on the Class A-2 Notes (as defined below). Given the uncertainty arising from COVID-19, we took a precautionary measure and borrowed $107.9 under the Variable Funding Notes during the second quarter of 2020, which was fully repaid in the second quarter of 2021. As of October 3, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings and $110.5 million of available borrowing capacity under our Variable Funding Notes, net of letters of credit issued of $39.5 million.
On July 8, 2019, Jack in the Box Funding, LLC (the “Master Issuer”), a limited-purpose, bankruptcy-remote, wholly owned indirect subsidiary of the Company, completed its securitization transaction and issued $575.0 million of its Series 2019-1 3.982% Fixed Rate Senior Secured Notes, Class A-2-I (the “Class A-2-I Notes”), $275.0 million of its Series 2019-1 4.476% Fixed Rate Senior Secured Notes, Class A-2-II (the “Class A-2-II Notes”) and $450.0 million of its Series 2019-1 4.970% Fixed Rate Senior Secured Notes, Class A-2-III (the “Class A-2-III Notes”) and together with the Class A-2-I Notes and the Class A-2-II Notes, (the “Class A-2 Notes”), in an offering exempt from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. In connection with the issuance of the Class A-2 Notes, the Master Issuer also entered into a revolving financing facility of Series 2019-1 Variable Funding Senior Secured Notes, Class A-1 (the “Variable Funding Notes”), which allows for the drawing of up to $150.0 million under the Variable Funding Notes and the issuance of letters of credit. The Class A-2 Notes and the Variable Funding Notes are referred to collectively as the “Notes.”
Interest and principal payments on the Class A-2 Notes are payable on a quarterly basis. The quarterly principal payment of $3.25 million on the Class A-2 Notes may be suspended when the specified leverage ratio, which is a measure of outstanding debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization, adjusted for certain items (as defined in the Indenture), is less than or equal to 5.0x. Exceeding the leverage ratio of 5.0x does not violate any covenant related to the Class A-2 Notes. In 2021, the Company’s actual leverage ratio was under 5.0x, and as a result, quarterly principal payments were not required.
The legal final maturity date of the Class A-2 Notes is in August 2049, but it is expected that, unless earlier prepaid to the extent permitted under the Indenture, the anticipated repayment dates of the Class A-2-I Notes, the Class A-2-II Notes and the Class A-2-III Notes will be August 2023, August 2026, and August 2029, respectively (the “Anticipated Repayment Dates”). If the Master Issuer has not repaid or refinanced the Class A-2 Notes prior to the respective anticipated repayment date, additional interest will accrue pursuant to the Indenture.
Restricted Cash - In accordance with the terms of the Indenture, certain cash accounts have been established with the Indenture trustee for the benefit of the note holders and are restricted in their use. As of October 3, 2021, the Master Issuer had restricted cash of $18.2 million, which primarily represented cash collections and cash reserves held by the trustee to be used for payments of interest and commitment fees required for the Class A-1 and A-2 Notes.
Covenants and Restrictions - The Notes are subject to a series of covenants and restrictions customary for transactions of this type, including (i) that the Master Issuer maintains specified reserve accounts to be used to make required payments in respect of the Notes, (ii) provisions relating to optional and mandatory prepayments and the related payment of specified amounts, including specified make-whole payments in the case of the Class A-2 Notes under certain circumstances, (iii) certain indemnification payments in the event, among other things, the assets pledged as collateral for the Notes are in stated ways defective or ineffective and (iv) covenants relating to recordkeeping, access to information and similar matters. The Notes are also subject to customary rapid amortization events provided for in the Indenture, including events tied to failure to maintain stated debt service coverage ratios, the sum of gross sales for specified restaurants being below certain levels on certain measurement dates, certain manager termination events, an event of default, and the failure to repay or refinance the Class A-2 Notes on the applicable scheduled maturity date. The Notes are also subject to certain customary events of default, including events relating to non-payment of required interest, principal, or other amounts due on or with respect to the Notes, failure to comply with covenants within certain time frames, certain bankruptcy events, breaches of specified representations and warranties, failure of security interests to be effective, and certain judgments. As of October 3, 2021, we were in compliance with all of our debt covenant requirements and were not subject to any rapid amortization events.
Contractual Obligations
Our cash requirements greater than twelve months from contractual obligations and commitments include:
Debt Obligations and Interest Payments - Refer to Note 7, Indebtedness, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for further information of our obligations and the timing of expected payments.
Operating and Finance Leases - Refer to Note 8, Leases, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for further information of our obligations and the timing of expected payments.
Purchase Commitments - Purchase obligations includes non-cancelable purchase commitments related to information technology agreements and volume commitments for beverage products. Refer to Note 16, Commitments and Contingencies, for further detail of our obligations and the timing of expected future payments.
Benefit Obligations - Refer to Note 12, Retirement Plans, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding our obligations and the timing of expected payments under our non-qualified defined benefit plan and postretirement healthcare plans.
DISCUSSION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
We have identified the following as our most critical accounting estimates, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and results, and that require management’s most subjective and complex judgments. Information regarding our other significant accounting estimates and policies are disclosed in Note 1, Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Long-lived Assets - We review our long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and operating lease right-of-use assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors that we consider important individually or in combination trigger an impairment review include, but are not limited to, bankruptcy proceedings or other significant financial distress of a lessee, significant underperformance relative to historical or projected operating results, significant changes in our business and/or negative industry or economic trends, or our expectation to dispose of long-lived assets before the end of their estimated useful lives. Long-lived assets are grouped for recognition and measurement of impairment at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets. The impairment test for long-lived assets requires us to assess the recoverability of long-lived asset groups by comparing their net carrying value to the sum of undiscounted estimated future cash flows expected to be generated through leases and/or subleases or by our individual company-operated restaurants. If the carrying amount of a long-lived asset group exceeds the sum of related undiscounted future cash flows, we recognize an impairment loss by the amount that the carrying value of the assets exceeds fair value. Our estimates of cash flows used to assess impairment are subject to a high degree of judgment and may differ from actual cash flows due to, among other things, changes in our business plans, operating performance, and economic conditions.
Self-Insurance - We are self-insured for a portion of our losses related to workers’ compensation, general liability and other legal claims, and health benefits. In estimating our self-insurance accruals, we utilize independent actuarial estimates of expected losses and assumptions related to the loss development factors, which are based on statistical analysis of historical data. These assumptions are closely monitored and adjusted when warranted by changing circumstances. Should a greater number of claims occur compared to what was estimated, or should medical costs increase beyond what was expected, accruals might not be sufficient, and additional expense may be recorded.
Legal Accruals - The Company is subject to claims and lawsuits in the ordinary course of its business. A determination of the amount accrued, if any, for these contingencies is made after analysis of each matter. We continually evaluate such accruals and may increase or decrease accrued amounts as we deem appropriate. Because lawsuits are inherently unpredictable, and unfavorable resolutions could occur, assessing contingencies is highly subjective and requires judgment about future events. As a result, the amount of ultimate loss may differ from those estimates.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 1, Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the impact of new accounting pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements.