Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows of our company as of and for the periods presented below. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are the standard in Apple Enterprise Management, and our cloud software platform is the only vertically-focused Apple infrastructure and security platform of scale in the world. We help organizations, including businesses, hospitals, schools and government agencies, connect, manage and protect Apple products, apps and corporate resources in the cloud without ever having to touch the devices. With Jamf’s software, Apple devices can be deployed to employees brand new in the shrink-wrapped box, set up automatically and personalized at first power-on and administered continuously throughout the life of the device.
Jamf was founded in 2002, around the same time that Apple was leading an industry transformation. Apple transformed the way people access and utilize technology through its focus on creating a superior consumer experience. With the release of revolutionary products like the Mac, iPod, iPhone, and iPad, Apple built the world’s most valuable brand and became ubiquitous in everyday life.
We have built our company through a singular focus on being the primary solution for Apple in the enterprise. Through our long-standing relationship with Apple, we have accumulated significant Apple technical experience and expertise that give us the ability to fully and quickly leverage and extend the capabilities of Apple products, OSs and services. This expertise enables us to fully support new innovations and OS releases the moment they are made available by Apple. This focus has allowed us to create a best-in-class user experience for Apple in the enterprise.
We sell our SaaS solutions via a subscription model, through a direct sales force, online and indirectly via our channel partners, including Apple. Our multi-dimensional go-to-market model and cloud-deployed offering enable us to reach all organizations around the world, large and small, with our software solutions. As a result, we continue to see rapid growth and expansion of our customer base as Apple continues to gain momentum in the enterprise.
Response to COVID-19
With social distancing measures having been implemented to curtail the spread of COVID-19, we enacted a robust business continuity plan, including a global work-from-home policy for all of our employees. We believe our internal cloud-first technology platforms have allowed for a seamless transition to a remote working environment without any material impacts to our business, highlighting the resilience of our business model. Our product portfolio and platform has enabled our commercial customers to continue with their efforts to work remotely, our K-12 and higher-education customers to deliver distance learning and our health-care customers to provide quality care via a telehealth model, a solution that was conceptualized and released during the current pandemic. We believe that a business like ours is well-suited to navigate the current environment in which customers are focused on effectively conducting business remotely, while the underlying demand for our core products remains relatively unchanged.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic affects our business will depend on future developments in the United States and around the world, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the coronavirus and the actions required to contain and treat it, among others. Although the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and financial results remains uncertain, a continued and prolonged public health crisis such as the COVID-19 pandemic could have a material negative impact on our business, operating results and financial condition. See “Risk Factors - Risks Relating to Our
Business - The COVID-19 pandemic could materially adversely affect our business, operating results, financial condition and prospects” for additional information.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our historical financial performance has been, and we expect our financial performance in the future to be, driven by our ability to:
Attract new customers. Our ability to attract new customers is dependent upon a number of factors, including the effectiveness of our pricing and solutions, the features and pricing of our competitors' offerings, the effectiveness of our marketing efforts, the effectiveness of our channel partners in selling, marketing and deploying our software solutions and the growth of the market for Apple devices and services for SMBs and enterprises. Sustaining our growth requires continued adoption of our platform by new customers. We intend to continue to invest in building brand awareness as we further penetrate our addressable markets. We intend to expand our customer base by continuing to make significant and targeted investments in our direct sales and marketing to attract new customers and to drive broader awareness of our software solutions.
Expand within our customer base. Our ability to increase revenue within our existing customer base is dependent upon a number of factors, including their satisfaction with our software solutions and support, the features and pricing of our competitors’ offerings and our ability to effectively enhance our platform by developing new products and features and addressing additional use cases. Often our customers will begin with a small deployment and then later expand their usage more broadly within the enterprise as they realize the benefits of our platform. We believe that our “land and expand” business model allows us to efficiently increase revenue from our existing customer base. We intend to continue to invest in enhancing awareness of our software solutions, creating additional use cases, and developing more products, features, and functionality, which we believe are important factors to expand usage of our software solutions by our existing customer base. We believe our ability to retain and expand usage of our software solutions by our existing customer base is evidenced by our dollar-based net retention rate.
Sustain product innovation and technology leadership. Our success is dependent on our ability to sustain product innovation and technology leadership in order to maintain our competitive advantage. We believe that we have built a highly differentiated platform and we intend to further extend the adoption of our platform through additional innovation. While sales of subscriptions to our Jamf Pro product account for most of our revenue, we intend to continue to invest in building additional products, features and functionality that expand our capabilities and facilitate the extension of our platform to new use cases. Our future success is dependent on our ability to successfully develop, market and sell additional products to both new and existing customers. For example, in 2018, we introduced Jamf Connect to provide users with a seamless connection to corporate resources using a single identity and in 2019 we introduced Jamf Protect to extend Apple's security and privacy model to enterprise teams by creating unprecedented visibility into MacOS fleets through customized remote monitoring and threat detection and prevention.
Continue investment in growth. Our ability to effectively invest for growth is dependent upon a number of factors, including our ability to offset anticipated increases in operating expenses with revenue growth, our ability to spend our research and development budget efficiently or effectively on compelling innovation and technologies, our ability to accurately predict costs and our ability to maintain our corporate culture as our headcount expands. We plan to continue investing in our business so we can capitalize on our market opportunity. We intend to grow our sales team to target expansion within our midmarket and enterprise customers and to attract new customers. We expect to continue to make focused investments in marketing to drive brand awareness and enhance the effectiveness of our customer acquisition model. We also intend to continue to add headcount to our research and development team to develop new and improved products, features and functionality. Although these investments may increase our operating expenses and, as a result, adversely affect our operating results in the near term, we believe they will contribute to our long-term growth.
Continue international expansion. Our international growth in any region will depend on our ability to effectively implement our business processes and go-to-market strategy, our ability to adapt to market or cultural differences, the general competitive landscape, our ability to invest in our sales and marketing channels, the maturity and
growth trajectory of Apple devices and services by region and our brand awareness and perception. We plan to continue making investments in our international sales and marketing channels to take advantage of this market opportunity while refining our go-to-market approach based on local market dynamics. While we believe global demand for our platform will increase as international market awareness of Jamf grows, our ability to conduct our operations internationally will require considerable management attention and resources and is subject to the particular challenges of supporting a growing business in an environment of multiple languages, cultures, customs, legal and regulatory systems (including with respect to data transfer and privacy), alternative dispute systems and commercial markets. In addition, global demand for our platform and the growth of our international operations is dependent upon the rate of market adoption of Apple products in international markets.
Enhance our offerings via our partner network. Our success is dependent not only on our independent efforts to innovate, scale and reach more customers directly but also on the success of our partners to continue to gain share in the enterprise. With a focus on the user and being the bridge between critical technologies - with Apple and Microsoft as two examples - we feel we can help other market participants deliver more to enterprise users with the power of Jamf. We will continue to invest in the relationships with our existing, critical partners, nurture and develop new relationships and do so globally. We will continue to invest in developing “plus one” solutions and workflows that help tie our software solutions together with those delivered by others.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to our GAAP financial information, we review several operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions.
Number of Devices
We believe our ability to grow the number of devices on our software platform provides a key indicator of the growth of our business and our future business opportunities. We define a device at the end of any particular period as a device owned by a customer, which device has at least one Jamf product pursuant to an active subscription or support and maintenance agreement or that has a reasonable probability of renewal. We define a customer at the end of any particular period as an entity with at least one active subscription or support and maintenance agreement as of the measurement date or that has a reasonable probability of renewal. A single organization with separate subsidiaries, segments or divisions that use our platform may represent multiple customers as we treat each entity, subsidiary, segment or division that is invoiced separately as a single customer. In cases where customers subscribe to our platform through our channel partners, each end customer is counted separately. A single customer may have multiple Jamf products on a single device, but we still would only count that as one device.
The number of devices was 20.4 million and 15.7 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing a 29% year-over-year growth rate. We have seen particular strength in the growth rate of devices as COVID-19 has accelerated the demand for organizations to connect remotely, manage, and protect their Apple devices.
Annual Recurring Revenue
Annual Recurring Revenue (“ARR”) represents the annualized value of all subscription and support and maintenance contracts as of the end of the period. ARR mitigates fluctuations due to seasonality, contract term and the sales mix of subscriptions for term-based licenses and SaaS. ARR does not have any standardized meaning and is therefore unlikely to be comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue and deferred revenue and is not intended to be combined with or to replace either of those items. ARR is not a forecast and the active contracts at the end of a reporting period used in calculating ARR may or may not be extended or renewed by our customers.
Our ARR was $285.3 million and $208.9 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which is an increase of 37% year-over-year. The growth in our ARR is primarily driven by our high device expansion rates, our new logo acquisition and the upselling and cross selling of products into our installed base.
Dollar-Based Net Retention Rate
To further illustrate the “land and expand” economics of our customer relationships, we examine the rate at which our customers increase their subscriptions for our software solutions. Our dollar-based net retention rate measures our ability to increase revenue across our existing customer base through expanded use of our software solutions, offset by customers whose subscription contracts with us are not renewed or renew at a lower amount.
We calculate dollar-based net retention rate as of a period end by starting with the ARR from the cohort of all customers as of 12 months prior to such period end (“Prior Period ARR”). We then calculate the ARR from these same customers as of the current period end (“Current Period ARR”). Current Period ARR includes any expansion and is net of contraction or attrition over the last 12 months but excludes ARR from new customers in the current period. We then divide the total Current Period ARR by the total Prior Period ARR to arrive at the dollar-based net retention rate.
Our dollar-based net retention rates were 117% and 118% for the trailing twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our high dollar-based net retention rates are primarily attributable to an expansion of devices. We believe our ability to cross-sell our new solutions to our installed base, particularly Jamf Connect and Jamf Protect, will continue to support our high dollar-based net retention rates.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the non-GAAP measures of Non-GAAP Gross Profit, Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin, Non-GAAP Operating Income, Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin, Non-GAAP Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance and assists in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP information to supplement their GAAP results. The non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, and may be different from similarly-titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. A reconciliation is provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
Non-GAAP Gross Profit
Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin are supplemental measures of operating performance that are not prepared in accordance with GAAP and that do not represent, and should not be considered as, alternatives to gross profit or gross profit margin, as determined in accordance with GAAP. We define Non-GAAP Gross Profit as gross profit, adjusted for stock-based compensation expense and amortization expense. We define Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin as Non-GAAP Gross Profit as a percentage of total revenue.
We use Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends and to prepare and approve our annual budget. We believe Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin are useful measures to us and to our investors to assist in evaluating our core operating performance because it provides consistency and direct comparability with our past financial performance and between fiscal periods, as the metric eliminates the effects of variability of stock-based compensation expense and amortization of acquired developed technology, which are non-cash expenses that may fluctuate for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance. While the amortization expense of acquired developed technology is excluded from Non-GAAP Gross Profit, the revenue related to acquired developed technology is reflected in Non-GAAP Gross Profit as these assets contribute to our revenue generation.
Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin should not be considered as
replacements for gross profit or gross profit margin, as determined by GAAP, or as measures of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
A reconciliation of Non-GAAP Gross Profit to gross profit, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is as follows:
Non-GAAP Operating Income
Non-GAAP Operating Income and Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin are supplemental measures of operating performance that are not prepared in accordance with GAAP and that do not represent, and should not be considered as, alternatives to operating loss or operating loss margin, as determined in accordance with GAAP. We define Non-GAAP Operating Income as operating loss, adjusted for amortization, stock-based compensation, acquisition-related expense, acquisition-related earnout and costs associated with our secondary offering. We define Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin as Non-GAAP Operating Income as a percentage of total revenue.
We use Non-GAAP Operating Income and Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Non-GAAP Operating Income and Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin facilitate comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods, and when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, help provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations. While the amortization expense of acquired trademarks, customer relationships, and developed technology is excluded from Non-GAAP Operating Income, the revenue related to acquired trademarks, customer relationships, and developed technology is reflected in Non-GAAP Operating Income as these assets contribute to our revenue generation.
Non-GAAP Operating Income and Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, Non-GAAP Operating Income and Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin should not be considered as replacements for operating loss or operating loss margin, as determined by GAAP, or as measures of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
A reconciliation of Non-GAAP Operating Income to operating loss, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is as follows:
Non-GAAP Net Income
Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) is a supplemental measure of operating performance that is not prepared in accordance with GAAP and that does not represent, and should not be considered as, an alternative to net loss, as determined in accordance with GAAP. We define Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) as net loss, adjusted for amortization, stock-based compensation, foreign currency transaction loss, loss on extinguishment of debt, acquisition-related expense, acquisition-related earnout, costs associated with our secondary offering, discrete tax items and benefit for income taxes.
We use Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) facilitates comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods, and when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, helps provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations. While the amortization expense of acquired trademarks, customer relationships, and developed technology is excluded from Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss), the revenue related to acquired trademarks, customer relationships, and developed technology is reflected in Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) as these assets contribute to our revenue generation.
Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) should not be considered as a replacement for net loss, as determined by GAAP, or as a measure of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
A reconciliation of Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is as follows:
(1) With exception of the fourth quarter of 2020, the related tax effects of the adjustments to Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) were calculated using the respective statutory tax rates for applicable jurisdictions, which was not materially different from our annual effective tax rate of approximately 25%. In the fourth quarter of 2020, our annual effective tax rate was impacted by changes in valuation allowance and foreign currencies. Therefore, we used the annual effective tax rate of 15.4% in the fourth quarter of 2020 as this was materially different than our statutory rate.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental measure of operating performance that is not prepared in accordance with GAAP and that does not represent, and should not be considered as, an alternative to net loss, as determined in accordance with GAAP. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss, adjusted for interest expense, net, benefit for income taxes, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, foreign currency transaction loss, loss on extinguishment of debt, acquisition-related expense, acquisition-related earnout, and costs associated with our secondary offering.
We use Adjusted EBITDA to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA facilitates comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods, and when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, helps provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as a replacement for net loss, as determined by GAAP, or as a measure of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is as follows:
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
We recognize revenue under ASC 606 when or as performance obligations are satisfied. We derive revenue primarily from sales of SaaS subscriptions and support and maintenance contracts, and to a lesser extent, sales of on-premise subscriptions and perpetual licenses and services.
Subscription. Subscription revenue consists of sales of SaaS subscriptions and support and maintenance contracts. We sell our software solutions primarily with a one-year contract term. We typically invoice SaaS subscription fees and support and maintenance fees annually in advance and recognize revenue ratably over the term of the applicable agreement, provided that all other revenue recognition criteria have been satisfied. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we reclassified the license portion of on-premise subscription revenue from license revenue to subscription revenue in the consolidated statements of operations on a retroactive basis. See additional information in “Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Description of Business” to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The license portion of on-premise subscription revenue is recognized upfront, assuming all revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. See “Critical Accounting Policies” for more information. We expect subscription revenue to increase over time as we expand our customer base because sales to new customers are expected to be primarily SaaS subscriptions.
License. License revenue consists of revenue from on-premise perpetual licenses of our Jamf Pro product sold primarily to existing customers. We recognize license revenue upfront, assuming all revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. We expect license revenue to decrease because sales to new customers are primarily cloud-based subscription arrangements and therefore reflected in subscription revenue.
Services. Services revenues consist primarily of professional services provided to our customers to configure and optimize the use of our software solutions, as well as training services related to the operation of our software solutions. Our services are priced on a fixed fee basis and generally invoiced in advance of the service being delivered. Revenue is recognized as the services are performed. We expect services revenues to decrease as a percentage of total revenue as the demand for our services is not expected to grow at the same rate as the demand for our subscription solutions.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of subscription. Cost of subscription revenue consists primarily of employee compensation costs for employees associated with supporting our subscription and support and maintenance arrangements, our customer success function, and third-party hosting fees related to our cloud services. Employee compensation and related costs include cash compensation and benefits to employees and associated overhead costs. We expect cost of subscription revenue to increase in absolute dollars, but to remain relatively consistent as a percentage of subscription revenue, relative to the extent of the growth of our business.
Cost of services. Cost of services revenue consists primarily of employee compensation costs directly associated with delivery of professional services and training, costs of third-party integrators and other associated overhead costs. We expect cost of services revenue to decrease in absolute dollars relative to the decrease of our services business.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit, or revenue less cost of revenue, has been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including the mix of cloud-based subscription customers, the costs associated with supporting our cloud solution, the extent to which we expand our customer support team and the extent to which we can increase the efficiency of our technology and infrastructure though technological improvements. We expect our gross profit to increase in absolute dollars. We expect our gross margin to increase over time as compared to the rates we delivered prior to the impact of COVID, as subscription revenue becomes a larger proportion of revenue, and as we increase average ARR per device.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee compensation costs, sales commissions, costs of general marketing and promotional activities, travel-related expenses and allocated overhead. Sales commissions earned by our sales force are deferred and amortized over the period of benefit, which is estimated to be 5 years. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase on an absolute dollar basis as we expand our sales personnel and marketing efforts.
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs and allocated overhead. We will continue to invest in innovation so that we can offer our customers new solutions and enhance our existing solutions. See “Business - Research and Development” for more information. We expect such investment to increase on an absolute dollar basis as our business grows.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee compensation costs for corporate personnel, such as those in our executive, human resource, facilities, accounting and finance, legal and compliance, and information technology departments. In addition, general and administrative expenses include acquisition-related expenses which primarily consist of third-party expenses, such as legal and accounting fees, and adjustments to contingent consideration. General and administrative expenses also include costs incurred in secondary offerings. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase on a dollar basis as our business grows, particularly as we continue to invest in technology infrastructure and expand our operations globally. Also, we incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, and increased expenses for insurance, investor relations and accounting expenses.
Amortization. Amortization expense primarily consists of amortization of acquired trademarks, customer relationships and developed technology.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net consists primarily of interest payments on our outstanding borrowings under our credit facilities as well as the amortization of associated deferred financing costs. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Credit Facilities.”
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Upon closing of the IPO, we repaid $205.0 million of the principal amount of the Prior Term Loan Facility and recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $5.2 million for the prepayment penalty and write off of debt issuance costs.
Foreign Currency Transaction Gain (Loss)
Our reporting currency is the U.S. dollar. The functional currency of all our international operations is the U.S. dollar. The assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of our foreign operations are remeasured in accordance with ASC Topic 830, Foreign Currency Matters. Remeasurement adjustments are recorded as foreign currency transaction gains (losses) in the consolidated statement of operations.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit consists primarily of income taxes related to U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business.
Other Income
Other income consists primarily of sublease rental income. The sublease was terminated in the second quarter of 2020.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated:
(1) Includes stock-based compensation as follows:
(2) Includes depreciation expense as follows:
(3) Includes acquisition-related expense as follows:
General and administrative also includes a Digita earnout benefit (expense) of $1.0 million and $(0.2) million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of total revenue for the periods indicated:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Revenue
Total revenue increased by $65.4 million, or 32%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Overall revenue increased as a result of higher subscription revenue, partially offset by lower services and license revenue. Subscription revenue accounted for 93% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 86% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in subscription revenue was driven by device expansion, the addition of new customers and cross-selling. Services revenue has decreased as COVID-19
impacted our in-person trainings, and our product enhancements have reduced customer reliance on our services in order to utilize our products. License revenue decreased as a result of shifting customers to our SaaS model as opposed to on-premise perpetual licenses.
Total revenue increased by $57.5 million, or 39%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Overall revenue increased as a result of higher subscription revenue partially offset by slightly lower services and license revenue. The increase in subscription revenue was driven by the addition of new customers as well as an increase in device expansion within our installed customer base. Services revenue has decreased as our product enhancements have reduced the reliance our customers need to place on our services in order to utilize our products. License revenue decreased as a result of shifting customers to our SaaS model as opposed to on-premise perpetual licenses.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased by $4.8 million, or 8%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 driven by an increase in cost of subscription revenue and amortization expense, partially offset by lower services cost of revenue. Cost of subscription revenue increased $7.8 million primarily due to an increase of $4.1 million in employee compensation costs related to higher headcount to support the growth in our subscription customer base, an increase of $2.4 million in third party hosting fees as we increased capacity to support our growth, an increase of $0.9 million in computer hardware and software costs to support the growth of the business and a $0.5 million increase in stock-based compensation expense. Amortization expense increased $0.5 million due to intangibles added to our balance sheet as the result of acquisitions. Cost of services revenue decreased $3.5 million as a result of lower services revenue.
Cost of revenue increased by $6.7 million, or 14%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 driven by an increase in cost of subscription revenue and amortization expense partially offset by lower services cost of revenue. Cost of subscription revenue increased $7.5 million due to an increase of $3.6 million in employee compensation costs related to higher headcount to support the growth in our subscription customer base, an increase of $2.4 million in third party hosting fees as we increased capacity to support our growth and an increase of $1.5 million in costs to support the growth of the business. Amortization expense increased $1.3 million due to intangibles added to our balance sheet as the result of acquisitions. Cost of services revenue decreased $2.0 million due to deploying more cost effective delivery of services, which includes the use of third-party integrators.
Total gross margin was 77%, 73% and 66% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, as our revenue expanded faster than the costs required to deliver the revenue.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $25.2 million, or 36%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $17.8 million in employee compensation costs driven by headcount growth, a $5.1 million increase in marketing costs, an increase of $2.8 million in computer hardware and software costs to support the growth of the business and a $1.3 million increase in stock-based compensation expense reflecting the IPO grant, partially offset by a $2.6 million decrease in travel-related expenses reflecting less travel due to COVID-19. Marketing costs increased primarily due to increases in demand generation programs, advertising, and brand awareness campaigns focused on new customer acquisition, as well as an increase in costs related to our annual user conference.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $19.0 million, or 37%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $13.2 million in employee compensation costs related to headcount growth. Marketing costs increased by $2.8 million primarily due to increases in demand generation programs, advertising and brand awareness campaigns focused on new customer acquisition. The remainder of the cost increase related to costs to support the growth in business and headcount of approximately $3.0 million.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses increased by $9.6 million, or 22%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $6.7 million in employee compensation costs due to higher headcount, an increase of $1.1 million in outside services, an increase of $1.3 million in computer hardware and software costs to support the growth of the business and a $1.1 million increase in stock-based compensation expense reflecting the IPO grant, partially offset by a $0.7 million decrease in travel-related expenses reflecting less travel due to COVID-19.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses increased by $11.3 million, or 36%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $8.8 million in employee compensation costs due to higher headcount and an increase of $0.8 million in computer hardware and software costs to support the growth of the business. The remainder of the cost increase related to costs to support the growth in business and headcount of approximately $1.7 million.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased by $19.9 million, or 62%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $6.3 million in employee compensation costs driven by higher headcount to support our continued growth, $6.1 million in additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, a $5.2 million increase in acquisition-related expenses, a $1.2 million increase in stock-based compensation expense and a $0.8 million increase in allowance for bad debt and returns, partially offset by a $1.0 million reduction to contingent consideration. The remainder of the cost increase is primarily related to costs to support the growth in business and headcount.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased by $9.7 million, or 44%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $3.5 million in employee compensation costs primarily related to higher headcount to support our continued growth and an increase of $3.0 million in costs of professional services comprised primarily of legal and accounting fees driven by the 2019 acquisitions of ZuluDesk and Digita and general growth in the Company. In addition, charitable
contributions increased by $0.9 million. The remainder of the cost increase related to costs to support the growth in business and headcount of approximately $2.3 million.
Amortization Expense. Amortization expense increased by $0.2 million, or 1%, for the year ended December 31, 20120 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to additional intangibles that were acquired in 2020 and July 2019.
Amortization Expense. Amortization expense increased by $0.9 million, or 4%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was due to additional intangibles that were acquired in 2019.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net decreased by $10.7 million, or 50%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 reflecting the repayment of the Prior Term Loan Facility, as well as a lower interest rate prior to repayment.
Interest expense, net increased by $3.2 million, or 18%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily driven by the additional borrowing of $30.0 million under the Prior Term Loan Facility in 2019 to fund the acquisition of ZuluDesk, partially offset by a lower interest rate in 2019 compared to 2018.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt of $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consists of a prepayment penalty of $2.0 million and write off of debt issuance costs of $3.2 million in connection with the early repayment of the Prior Term Loan Facility.
Foreign Currency Transaction Loss
Foreign currency transaction loss decreased by $0.5 million, or 42%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the loss was driven by a favorable impact from the remeasurement of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in Euros and Australian dollars compared to the prior year.
Foreign currency transaction loss increased by $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in the loss was driven primarily by the weakening of the U.S. dollar
relative to the Euro on significant Euro denominated intercompany loans that were utilized to fund the acquisition of ZuluDesk.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net decreased by $0.1 million, or 59%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in Other income, net was due to the termination of our sublease in the second quarter of 2020.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit was $8.3 million and $10.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 26.7% and 23.7%, respectively. The key components of the Company’s income tax benefit primarily consist of state and federal income taxes, federal research and development credits, valuation allowances and stock compensation. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was higher than the prior year due to the impact of stock compensation, the net operating loss carryback and interest limitation changes related to the CARES Act, research and development credits, the final GILTI high-tax exclusion regulation released on July 20, 2020 and a change in valuation allowance on foreign deferred tax assets related to a merger of subsidiaries. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by $2.9 million of discrete income tax benefit primarily related to the loss on debt extinguishment, stock compensation, and the impact of the net operating loss carryback and interest limitation changes related to the CARES Act.
Income tax benefit was $10.1 million and $12.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively. The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were 23.7% and 25.1%, respectively. The key components of the Company’s income tax benefit primarily consist of state and federal income taxes, federal research and development credits and GILTI provisions. The effective rate in 2019 was lower than 2018 due to higher permanent differences and a valuation allowance for foreign deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $194.9 million, which were held for working capital purposes, as well as the available balance of our New Revolving Credit Facility, described further below. Our cash equivalents are comprised of money market funds and U.S. Treasuries with original or remaining maturities at the time of purchase of three months or less. Our positive cash flows from operations enable us to make continued investments in supporting the growth of our business. We expect that our operating cash flows, in addition to our cash and cash equivalents, will enable us to continue to make such investments in the future.
On July 24, 2020, we closed our IPO through which we issued and sold 13,500,000 shares of common stock at the IPO Price. In connection with the IPO, we raised approximately $319.0 million, after deducting the underwriting
discount and offering expenses payable by us. Concurrently with our IPO, we issued and sold 85,880 shares of our common stock in a private placement to certain of our named executive officers, certain of our other employees and our independent directors at the IPO Price for aggregate consideration of approximately $2.2 million.
Upon closing of the IPO, the Company repaid $205.0 million of the principal amount of the Prior Term Loan Facility and paid $3.4 million of accrued interest and $2.0 million of prepayment penalty. The Company also wrote off $3.2 million of remaining debt issuance costs upon repayment of the debt. The Company recorded a loss on debt extinguishment of $5.2 million for the prepayment penalty and write off of debt issuance costs in the third quarter of 2020.
We believe our cash and cash equivalents, our New Revolving Credit Facility and cash provided by sales of our software solutions and services will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced products and services offerings, and the continuing market acceptance of our products. In the future, we may use cash to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights.
We are a holding company and we derive all of our operating income from our subsidiaries. As a result, our cash flow is dependent on the performance of our subsidiaries and the ability of those entities to distribute funds to us. See Item 5, “Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities - Dividend Policy ” for a discussion of our dividend policy, including restrictions on our ability to pay dividends and distributions to us.
A majority of our customers pay in advance for subscriptions and support and maintenance contracts, a portion of which is recorded as deferred revenue. Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of billed fees for our subscriptions, which is later recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. As of December 31, 2020, we had deferred revenue of $206.0 million, of which $160.5 million was recorded as a current liability and is expected to be recorded as revenue in the next 12 months, provided all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
Credit Facilities
On November 13, 2017, we entered into the Prior Credit Agreement with a syndicate of lenders, comprised of the $175.0 million Prior Term Loan Facility and the $15.0 million Prior Revolving Credit Facility, in each case with a maturity date of November 13, 2022. Pursuant to the Amendment Agreement No. 1, dated as of January 30, 2019, the Prior Term Loan Facility was increased to $205.0 million. Upon closing of the IPO, the Company repaid the outstanding principal balance of the Prior Term Loan Facility, including accrued and unpaid interest thereon, and the Prior Credit Agreement was terminated.
On July 27, 2020, we entered into the New Credit Agreement, which provides for an initial revolving credit facility of $150.0 million, and which amount may be increased or decreased under specific circumstances, with a $25.0 million letter of credit sublimit and a $50.0 million alternative currency sublimit. In addition, the New Credit Agreement provides for the ability of the Company to request incremental term loan facilities, in a minimum amount of $5.0 million for each facility. The maturity date of the New Credit Agreement is July 27, 2025. The New Credit Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, affirmative covenants, reporting obligations, negative covenants and events of default. We were in compliance with such covenants as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.0 million of letters of credit outstanding under our New Revolving Credit Facility. In the third quarter of 2020, the Company recorded debt issuance costs of $1.3 million, which is amortized to interest expense over the term of the New Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, debt issuance costs of $1.1 million are included in other assets in the consolidated balance sheets.
The interest rates applicable to revolving borrowings under the New Credit Agreement are, at the Company’s option, either (i) a base rate, which is equal to the greater of (a) the Prime Rate, (b) the Federal Funds Effective Rate plus 0.5% and (c) the Adjusted LIBO Rate (subject to a floor) for a one month interest period (each term as defined in the
New Credit Agreement) plus 1%, or (ii) the Adjusted LIBO Rate (subject to a floor) equal to the LIBO Rate for the applicable interest period multiplied by the Statutory Reserve Rate, plus in the case of each of clauses (i) and (ii), the Applicable Rate. The Applicable Rate (i) for base rate loans range from 0.25% to 1.0% per annum and (ii) for LIBO Rate loans range from 1.25% to 2.0% per annum, in each case, based on the Senior Secured Net Leverage Ratio (as such term is defined in the New Credit Agreement). Base rate borrowings may only be made in dollars. The Company pays a commitment fee during the term of the New Credit Agreement ranging from 0.20% to 0.35% per annum of the average daily undrawn portion of the revolving commitments based on the Senior Secured Net Leverage Ratio.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $52.7 million reflecting our net loss of $22.8 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $51.6 million and net cash inflows of $23.9 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and intangible assets, amortization of deferred contract costs, amortization of debt issuance costs, provision for bad debt expense and returns, loss on extinguishment of debt and share-based compensation, partially offset by deferred taxes and a $1.0 million adjustment to our Digita earnout. The primary drivers of net cash inflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities included a $65.1 million increase in deferred revenue, an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $9.4 million and an increase in other liabilities of $1.9 million, partially offset by a $24.6 million increase in deferred contract costs, a $23.2 million increase in accounts receivable and a $4.1 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $11.9 million reflecting our net loss of $32.6 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $35.8 million and net cash inflows of $8.7 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and intangible assets, amortization of deferred contract costs, amortization of debt issuance costs and share-based compensation, partially offset by deferred taxes. The primary drivers of changes in operating assets and liabilities related to a $37.0 million increase in deferred revenue and an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $7.5 million, partially offset by increases in accounts receivable of $14.7 million, deferred contract costs of $17.0 million, and prepaid expenses and other assets of $4.6 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash provided by operating activities was $9.4 million, reflecting our net loss of $36.3 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $27.7 million and net cash inflows of $18.0 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of share-based compensation and depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and intangible assets, and amortization of deferred contract costs partially offset by deferred taxes. The primary drivers of the changes in operating assets and
liabilities related to a $32.5 million increase in deferred revenue partially offset by a $13.2 million increase in deferred contract costs.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $6.9 million driven by purchases of $4.4 million in equipment and leasehold improvements to support our higher headcount with additional office space and hardware and software and the acquisition of Mondada of $2.5 million, net of cash acquired.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $47.4 million driven by the acquisition of ZuluDesk and Digita of $40.2 million, net of cash acquired, and purchases of $7.2 million in equipment and leasehold improvements to support our higher headcount with additional office space and hardware and software.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in investing activities was $5.8 million primarily driven by the acquisition of Orchard & Grove for $2.1 million in cash and purchases of $2.9 million in equipment and leasehold improvements to support higher headcount and additional office space and hardware and software.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $116.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to proceeds of $326.3 million from the IPO after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, $3.0 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options and $2.2 million of proceeds from the private placement, partially offset by the repayment of $205.0 million principal amount of our Prior Term Loan Facility, the payment of debt extinguishment costs of $2.0 million, the payment of offering costs of $7.3 million and the payment of debt issuance costs of $1.3 million related to the New Credit Agreement.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $28.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to increased borrowings on our Prior Credit Facilities of $40.0 million for the ZuluDesk acquisition. Subsequent to the acquisition, we repaid $10.0 million of our Prior Credit Facilities.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $1.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2018 was due to proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of December 31, 2020, our principal commitments consist of obligations under operating leases for office space and noncancelable minimum annual commitments with AWS for hosting services and other vendors for support software.
The following table sets forth the amounts of our significant contractual obligations and commitments with definitive payment terms as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Other obligations represent a noncancelable minimum annual commitment with AWS for hosting services and other support software.
The table above does not include potential earn-out consideration payable in connection with our 2019 acquisition of Digita. In connection with that acquisition, we agreed to an earn-out arrangement providing for up to $15.0 million payable to the seller, subject to meeting certain conditions.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, channel partners, vendors, lessors, business partners and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us or from intellectual property infringement, misappropriation or other violation claims made by third parties. See “Risk Factors - We have indemnity provisions under our contracts with our customers, channel partners and other third parties, which could have a material adverse effect on our business.” In addition, in connection with the completion of our IPO, we entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain executive officers that will require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers or employees. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, or consolidated statements of cash flows.
JOBS Act
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the provisions of the JOBS Act. For as long as we are an “emerging growth company,” we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies,” including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of SOX, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, exemptions from the requirements of holding advisory “say-on-pay” votes on executive compensation and shareholder advisory votes on golden parachute compensation.
The JOBS Act also permits an emerging growth company like us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards on a non-delayed basis.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements. The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. We base our estimates on experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from those estimates, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Our critical accounting policies are those that materially affect our consolidated financial statements and involve difficult, subjective or complex judgments by management. A thorough understanding of these critical accounting policies is essential when reviewing our consolidated financial statements. We believe that the critical accounting policies listed below are the most difficult management decisions as they involve the use of significant estimates and assumptions as described above. Refer to “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more detailed information regarding our critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenue from the sales of software licenses and maintenance, hosted software and related professional services. We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606, which provides a five-step model for recognizing revenue from contracts with customers as follows:
● Identify the contract with a customer
● Identify the performance obligations in the contract
● Determine the transaction price
● Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
● Recognize revenue when or as performance obligations are satisfied
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment.
When our contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations, the contract transaction price is allocated on a relative stand-alone selling price (“SSP”) basis to each performance obligation. The Company typically determines SSP based on observable selling prices of its products and services. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, such as with software licenses that are never sold on a stand-alone basis, SSP is determined using information that may include market conditions and other observable inputs. In addition, for software products where the pricing is also determined to be highly variable or highly uncertain, SSP is established using the residual approach. However, the Company does not currently use the residual approach for any of its performance obligations, as pricing was not determined to be highly variable or highly uncertain. SSP is typically established as ranges and the Company typically has more than one SSP range for individual products and services due to the stratification of those products and services by customer class, channel type and purchase quantity, among other circumstances.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company applies the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”) in its accounting and reporting for stock-based compensation. ASC 718 requires all stock-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the income statement based on their fair values. All service-based options outstanding under the Company’s option plans have exercise prices equal to the fair value of the Company’s stock on the grant date, as determined by an independent third party. The fair value of these options is determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Compensation cost for restricted stock units (“RSUs”) is determined based on the fair market value of the Company’s stock at the date of the grant. Stock-based compensation expense for service-based options and RSUs is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the required service period. Forfeitures are accounted for when they occur.
The Company also grants performance-based awards to certain executives that vest and become exercisable when Vista’s realized cash return on its investment in the Company equals or exceeds $1.515 billion upon a change in control of the Company (“Termination Event”). The terms of the agreement do not specify a performance period for the occurrence of the Termination Event. The contractual term of the awards is 10 years. These options are also referred to as return target options. The Company uses a Modified Black-Scholes option pricing model which uses Level 3 inputs for fair value measurement. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the vesting conditions for these options had not been met, and accordingly, no compensation expense was recorded.
In conjunction with the IPO, the vesting conditions of these options were modified to also vest following an IPO and registration and sale of shares by Vista provided that Vista achieves a cash return on its equity investment in the
Company equaling or exceeding $1.515 billion. In accordance with ASC 718, we calculated the fair value of these options on the modification date. The value of these options on the date of modification was $33.0 million. As the awards are not currently considered probable of meeting vesting requirements no expense has been recognized, and the timing of any future expense recognition is unknown.
Application of these approaches involves the use of estimates, judgment and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, including those regarding our future expected revenue, expenses, cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable public companies and the probability of future events.
Common Stock Valuation
Prior to the IPO, our Board established the fair value of the shares of common stock underlying our stock-based awards. These estimates were based in part upon valuations provided by third-party valuation firms.
Because there was no public market for our common stock prior to the IPO, our Board exercised reasonable judgment and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation (the “AICPA Guide”). The factors considered by our Board in estimating the fair value of our common stock prior to the IPO included the following:
● Contemporaneous valuations performed regularly by unrelated third-party specialists;
● Our historical operating and financial performance;
● Likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as the consummation of an IPO or the sale of our company given prevailing market conditions and the nature and history of our business;
● Market multiples of comparable companies in our industry;
● Market multiples of current acquisitions in our industry;
● Stage of development;
● Industry information such as market size and growth;
● The lack of marketability of our securities because we are a private company; and
● General macroeconomic conditions.
In valuing our common stock prior to the IPO, our Board determined the value using both the income and the market approach valuation methods. The income approach estimates value based on the expectation of future cash flows that a company will generate. These future cash flows are discounted to their present values using a discount rate based on our weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”). To derive our WACC, a cost of equity was developed using the Capital Asset Pricing Model and comparable company betas, and a cost of debt was determined based on our estimated cost of borrowing. The costs of debt and equity were then weighted based on our actual capital structure. The market approach estimates value based on an estimate of IPO value or a comparison of our company to comparable public companies in a similar line of business. From the comparable companies, a representative market multiple was determined and subsequently applied to our financial results to estimate our enterprise value. Also, our market approach factored in multiples on recent acquisitions in our industry.
Application of these approaches involved the use of estimates, judgment and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, including those regarding our future expected revenue, expenses, cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable public companies and the probability of future events. Changes in any or
all of these estimates and assumptions would impact our valuations at each valuation date and could have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
Following the completion of our IPO, it is no longer necessary to determine the fair value of our common stock as our shares are traded in the public market.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized principally for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts, using currently enacted tax rates. The measurement of a deferred tax asset is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. Significant judgment is required in evaluating the need for and magnitude of appropriate valuation allowances. The realization of our deferred tax assets is dependent on generating future taxable income and the reversal of existing temporary differences. Changes in tax laws and assumptions with respect to future taxable income could result in adjustment to these allowances.
The Company recognizes a tax benefit for uncertain tax positions only if the Company believes it is more likely than not that the position will be upheld on audit based solely on the technical merits of the tax position. The Company evaluates uncertain tax positions after the consideration of all available information.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired in business combinations. The Company evaluates goodwill for impairment in accordance with ASC 350, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, which requires goodwill to be either qualitatively or quantitatively assessed for impairment annually (or more frequently if impairment indicators arise) for each reporting unit. The Company has one reporting unit. The Company performs its annual impairment testing of goodwill as of October 1 of each year and in interim periods if events occur that would indicate that it is more likely than not the fair value of the reporting unit is less than carrying value. If the Company’s reporting unit carrying amount exceeds its fair value an impairment charge will be recorded based on that difference. The impairment charge will be limited to the amount of goodwill currently recognized in the Company’s single reporting unit. There is inherent subjectivity involved in estimating future cash flows, which can have a material impact on the amount of any potential impairment. Changes in estimates of future cash flows could result in a write-down of the asset in a future period.
Other Intangibles, Net
Other intangible assets include customer relationships, developed technology and trademarks acquired in our previous acquisitions, have definite lives, and are amortized over a period ranging from two to twelve years on a straight-line basis. Intangible assets are tested for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset (asset group) may not be recoverable. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying amount of an asset exceeds the estimated undiscounted cash flows generated by the asset. The amount of the impairment loss recorded is calculated by the excess of the asset’s carrying value of its fair value. There is inherent subjectivity involved in estimating future cash flows, which can have a material impact on the amount of any potential impairment. Changes in estimates of future cash flows could result in a write-down of the asset in a future period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of our recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting standards not yet adopted, see “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.