ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For a description of our significant accounting policies and an understanding of the significant factors that influenced our performance during the year ended January 2, 2021, this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” (hereafter referred to as “MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements, including the related notes, appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (this “Form 10-K”) for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021.
Amounts are stated in thousands of dollars expect share and per share amounts.
Note about Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 10-K includes statements that constitute “forward-looking statements.” These forward-looking statements are often characterized by the terms “may,” “believes,” “projects,” “intends,” “plans,” “expects,” or “anticipates,” and do not reflect historical facts. Specific forward-looking statements contained in this portion of the Form 10-K include, but are not limited to: (i) statements relating to our initial product candidate, JAN101, including statements relating to the commencement of Phase 2b clinical trials for the treatment of PAD in 2021 and the results of those trials, (ii) statements that are based on current projections and expectations about the markets in which we operate, (iii) statements relating to the sale of the Company’s Recycling business, (iv) statements about current projections and expectations of general economic conditions, (v) statements about specific industry projections and expectations of economic activity, (vi) statements relating to our future operations and prospects, (vii) statements about future results and future performance, (viii) statements that the cash on hand and additional cash generated from operations together with potential sources of cash through issuance of debt or equity will provide the Company with sufficient liquidity for the next 12 months, and (ix) statements that the outcome of pending legal proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on business, financial position and results of operations, cash flow or liquidity.
Forward-looking statements involve risks, uncertainties and other factors, which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors and risks that could affect our results, future performance and capital requirements and cause them to materially differ from those contained in the forward-looking statements include those identified in this Form 10-K under Item 1A “Risk Factors”, as well as other factors that we are currently unable to identify or quantify, but that may exist in the future.
In addition, the foregoing factors may generally affect our business, results of operations and financial position. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date the statements were made. We do not undertake and specifically decline any obligation to update any forward-looking statements. Any information contained on our website www.janone.com or any other websites referenced in this Form 10-K are not part of this Form 10-K.
Our Company
JanOne is focused on finding treatments for conditions that cause severe pain and bringing to market drugs with non-addictive pain-relieving properties. In addition, through our subsidiaries ARCA Recycling, Inc., Customer Connexx LLC, and ARCA Canada Inc., JanOne is engaged in the business of recycling major household appliances in North America by providing turnkey appliance recycling and replacement services for utilities and other sponsors of energy efficiency programs. In addition, through its GeoTraq Inc. (“GeoTraq”) subsidiary, we are engaged in the development, design and, ultimately, we expect the sale of wireless transceiver modules with technology that provides LBS directly from global Mobile IoT networks
We operate three reportable segments:
•
Biotechnology: Our biotechnology segment is focused on finding treatments for conditions that cause severe pain and bringing to market drugs with non-addictive pain-relieving properties.
•
Recycling: Our recycling segment is a turnkey appliance recycling program. We receive fees charged for recycling, replacement and additional services for utility energy efficiency programs and have established 18 Regional Processing Centers (“RPCs”) for this segment throughout the United States and Canada
•
Technology: GeoTraq is in the process of developing technology to enable low cost, location-based products and services.
Reporting Period. We report on a 52-or 53-week fiscal year. Our 2020 fiscal year ended on January 2, 2021 (“fiscal 2020”). Our 2019 fiscal year ended on December 28, 2019 (“fiscal 2019”).
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion of the financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of any contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Management regularly reviews its estimates and assumptions, which are based on historical factors and other factors believed to be relevant under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions, estimates or conditions.
Critical accounting policies are defined as those that are reflective of significant judgments and uncertainties and potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. ARCA’s critical accounting policies include intangible impairment under ASC 350, revenue recognition under ASC 606, and going concern under ASC 205.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain statement of operations items from continuing operations and as a percentage of revenue, for the periods indicated:
The following tables set forth revenues for key product and service categories, percentages of total revenue and gross profits earned by key product and service categories and gross profit percent as compared to revenues for each key product category indicated:
Revenue
Revenue remained relatively constant for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019. Replacement Appliance revenue increased $1,953 or 14.3% due to higher volumes from two customers, offset by a decrease in Recycling and Byproducts revenue of $3,183 or 14.8% due to the temporary closure of our facilities as a result of COVID-19 and decreased volumes from our customers.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue decreased $2,271, or 8.3% for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019, primarily due to cost cutting efforts and the temporary closure of our facilities due to COVID-19.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense decreased $2,394 or 11.8%, for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019, primarily due to a temporary reduction in employees, cost cutting measures and other activities related to the closure of our facilities due to COVID-19.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense net decreased $976 or 65.9%, for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 primarily due to the decrease in the related party debt balance.
Impairment Charges
On December 9, 2019, ApplianceSmart, Inc. (“ApplianceSmart”), a former subsidiary of the Company, filed a voluntary petition in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York seeking relief under Chapter 11 of Title 11 of the United States Code. As a result, the Company has recorded an impairment charge of $2,992 for the amount owed by ApplianceSmart to the Company as of December 28, 2019. There were no similar impairment charges for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021.
See Note 4 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a complete discussion of the ApplianceSmart Note.
Gain (Loss) on Litigation Settlement
As of January 2, 2021, the Company recorded a net gain on litigation settlement of $418 comprised of the $800 gain on settlement of litigation with a former service provider (discussed below), partially offset by a loss on settlement of outstanding payables of $382.
On October 4, 2018, the Company initiated litigation against a former professional services provider (“PSP”), in Illinois state court, as well as a private arbitration proceeding that was scheduled to be held in Minneapolis, Minnesota, arising from PSP’s rendering of certain professional services to the Company during the period from 2011 through 2014. PSP filed a counterclaim in the arbitration seeking an award of its legal fees and costs arising from that proceeding. The parties subsequently agreed to consolidate their respective claims into the arbitration. The Company’s arbitration demand, as amended, sought an award of more than $50 and other relief. On March 23, 2020, the parties entered into a settlement agreement, whereby, without any admission of liability, they exchanged mutual releases, agreed to dismiss their respective claims with prejudice, and PSP agreed to pay $800 to the Company to, among other things, assist it with certain of its costs and obligations that related to various issues underlying the arbitration proceeding.
On November 15, 2016, the Company served an arbitration demand on Haier US Appliance Solutions, Inc., dba GE Appliances (“GEA”), alleging breach of contract and interference with prospective business advantage. On April 18, 2017, GEA served a counterclaim regarding alleged obligations under the parties’ recycling agreement. On December 12, 2017, the court stayed GEA’s complaint in favor of the arbitration. Under the terms of the Company’s transaction with Recleim LLC (“Recleim”), Recleim is obligated to pay GEA on the Company’s behalf the amounts claimed by GEA in the arbitration and in the lawsuit pending in Kentucky. Those amounts have been paid into escrow pending the outcome of the arbitration. Arbitration proceedings were held in October and November 2019. On March 5, 2020, the arbitrator ruled in part in favor of the Company and in part in favor of GEA, and, as a result, the Company recorded a gain on litigation settlement of $694.
See Note 15 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a complete litigation discussion.
Other Income
Other income was $15 for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to $1,048 the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 primarily due to the discussion below.
Sears Holdings Management Corp - Logistics Services
On February 18, 2019, the Company informed Sears Holdings Management Corp - Logistics Services (“Sears”) that Sears may have overcharged ARCA Recycling $642 and that it planned on filing a proof of claim with the trustee in the Sears’ bankruptcy against Sears for the overcharged amount. The Company requested that Sears provide contractual written proof to the contrary supporting their claim for invoices submitted in excess of the contractually agreed upon amounts for transportation services. Sears provided transportation services to ARCA Recycling in fiscal years 2013 through 2018. ARCA Recycling recorded $559 as outstanding and un-paid accounts payable as of December 28, 2019. The Company wrote off the overcharged amount of $559 as other income in the consolidated results for the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019.
Segment Performance
We report our business in the following segments: Biotechnology, Recycling and Technology. We identified these segments based on a combination of business type, customers serviced and how we divide management responsibility. Our revenues and profits are driven through our recycling centers, e-commerce, individual sales reps and our internet services for our recycling and technology segment. We expect revenues and profits for our biotechnology segment to be driven by the development of pharmaceuticals that treat the root cause of pain but are non-opioid painkillers. We include Corporate expenses within the Recycling segment.
Operating loss by operating segment, is defined as loss before net interest expense, other income and expense, provision for income taxes.
Biotechnology Segment
Our biotechnology segment commenced operations in September 2019, and, as a result, incurred expenses of $1,038 and $1,738 related to employee costs and the operating license issued during the fourth quarter of 2019 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Recycling Segment
The recycling segment consists of ARCA Recycling, Customer Connexx, and ARCA Canada. Revenue remained relatively flat for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019. Replacement Appliance revenue increased $1,953 or 14.3% due to higher volumes from two customers, offset by a decrease in Recycling and Byproducts revenue of $3,183 or 14.8% due to the temporary closure of our facilities as a result of COVID-19 and decreased volumes from our customers.
Cost of revenue decreased $2,271, or 8.3% for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019, primarily due to cost cutting efforts and the temporary closure of our facilities due to COVID-19.
Operating loss for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021, decreased $3,225 or 50.4% as compared to the prior year period. This represents an increase in gross profit of $1,041 and a decrease in selling, general and administrative expense of $2,184. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expense is primarily attributable to due to a temporary reduction in employees, cost cutting measures and other activities related to the closure of our facilities due to COVID-19.
Technology Segment
The technology segment consists of GeoTraq. Results for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 include a loss of $4,086 which approximated the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 loss of $4,996. The loss represents intangible asset amortization expense and other selling general and administrative expense for each period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of January 2, 2021, we had total cash on hand of $379. As we continue to prepare to begin late-stage clinical development with our pharmaceutical product, JAN101, and potentially pursue strategic transactions to expand and grow our business, we regularly monitor capital market conditions and may raise additional funds through borrowings or public or private sales of debt or equity securities. The amount, nature and timing of any borrowings or sales of debt or equity securities will depend on our operating performance and other circumstances; our then-current commitments and obligations; the amount, nature and timing of our capital requirements; any limitations imposed by our current credit arrangements; and overall market conditions.
In December 2019, the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) surfaced in Wuhan, China. The World Health Organization declared a global emergency on January 30, 2020, and most countries initiated travel restrictions limiting travel to other countries and lock-downs within their borders. While various vaccines have recently been introduced into the marketplace, the impacts of variant strains of the COVID-19 virus is still unknown. The widespread health crisis has adversely affected the global economy, resulting in an economic downturn that could impact demand for our products. To date, the outbreak had a material adverse impact on our operations. For example, several customers in our appliance recycling and appliance replacement business have previously suspended our ability to pick up and or replace their customers’ appliances resulting in decreased revenues for both recycling and replacement business. The future impact of the outbreak is highly uncertain and cannot be predicted and there is no assurance that the outbreak will not have another material adverse impact on the future results of the Company. The extent of the impact, if any, will depend on future developments, including actions taken to contain the coronavirus. A key task for the Company in 2021 is to begin late-stage clinical development with its pharmaceutical product, JAN101. However, the COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted clinical trials in 2020, delaying recruitment in most non-COVID-19 clinical trials and even eliminating recruitment in some trials. While clinical sites have largely resumed conducting non-COVID-19 clinical trials, the backlog of subjects may adversely affect our ability to recruit for its trial, leading to longer and more expensive trials. In addition, the unknown effectiveness of the COVID-19 vaccines, particularly concerning variant strains of COVID-19, could lead to clinical sites terminating patient recruitment again during the course of the study.
On May 1, 2020, the Company entered into a promissory note (the “Promissory Note”) with Texas Capital Bank, N.A. that provides for a loan in the amount of $1,872 (the “PPP Loan”) pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The PPP Loan matures on April 27, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum. Monthly amortized principal and interest payments are deferred for six months after the date of disbursement. The Promissory Note contains events of default and other provisions customary for a loan of this type. The Paycheck Protection Program provides that the use of PPP Loan amount shall be limited to certain qualifying expenses and may be partially or wholly forgiven in accordance with the requirements set forth in the CARES Act. The Company has applied for forgiveness of a portion of the loan in accordance with the terms of the CARES Act to the extent applicable.
As of the period ending September 26, 2020, the Company received advance payments authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission and processed through two California utilities for the purposes of sustaining the workforce during the COVID 19 pandemic shutdown. The use of these funds was limited to labor and labor benefits for impacted employees. Portions of these advances are forgivable if certain conditions are met the specifics which have not been finalized. Advance payments that are not forgiven will need to be paid back in full by December 31, 2021. Total funding received under this program as of September 26, 2020 amounted to $1,168. As of January 2, 2021, $142 was forgiven, leaving a balance remaining of $1,026.
On January 29, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional investors (the “Purchasers”) for the sale by the Company in a registered direct offering (the “Offering”) of 571,428 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (the “Common Stock”), at a purchase price per share of Common Stock of $10.50.
On February 2, 2021, the Offering closed and the Company received gross proceeds of approximately $6,000, before deducting placement agent fees and other offering expenses. The Company is utilizing the net proceeds for general working capital.
Based on our current operating plans, we believe that available cash balances, funds available under our factoring agreement with Prestige Capital Finance, LLC (“Prestige Capital”), and or other refinancing of existing indebtedness will provide sufficient liquidity to fund our operations, our continued investments in store openings and remodeling activities for at least the next 12 months.
Cash Flows
During the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021, cash used in operations was $617, compared to cash used in operations of $3,510 during the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019. The decrease in cash used in operations was primarily due to the decrease in net loss, discussed above, offset by noncash decrease impairment charges of $2,992 and a decrease in deferred income taxes of $3,009. Additionally, changes in working capital accounts affecting operating cash flows were as follows: a decrease in accounts receivable of $3,745 and accounts payable and accrued expenses of $3,023.
Cash used in investing activities was $834 for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 was attributable to purchases of property and equipment and intangibles. Cash provided by investing activities of $345 for fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 was primarily attributable the net payments received on a note receivable from ApplianceSmart of $845, offset by the purchases of property and equipment of $212 and intangible assets of $288.
Cash provided by financing activities was $1,404 for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 was related to proceeds from short term debt of $3,469 primarily associated with the Payroll Protection Program and advances from certain customers for future services and payment of $1,500 on its related party note. Cash provided by financing activities was $2,462 for the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 was primarily related to the $2,500 proceeds on the related party note.
Sources of Liquidity
We utilize cash on hand and factor on occasion certain accounts receivable invoices to cover normal and seasonal fluctuations in cash flows and to support our various growth initiatives. Our cash and cash equivalents are carried at cost and consist primarily of demand deposits with commercial banks. On March 26, 2018, the Company entered into a purchase and sale agreement with Prestige Capital, whereby from time to time the Company can factor certain accounts receivable to Prestige Capital up to a maximum advance and outstanding balance of $11,000. Discount fees ultimately paid depend upon how long an invoice and related amount is outstanding from ARCA Recycling’s customer. Prestige Capital has been granted a security interest in all ARCA Recycling’s accounts receivable. The current purchase and sale agreement with Prestige Capital automatically renews every six months unless terminated by the parties.
We acknowledge that we continue to face a challenging competitive environment as we continue to focus on our overall profitability, including managing expenses. We reported a net loss of $8,498 and $11,964 in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In addition, the Company has total current assets of $6,941 and total current liabilities $20,597 resulting in a net negative working capital of $13,656.
In Item 1A. Risk Factors, management has addressed and evaluated the risk factors that could materially and adversely affect the entity’s business, financial condition and results of operations, cash flows and liquidity. The Company has determined the risk factors do not materially affect the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued.
Based on the above, management has concluded that the Company is not aware and did not identify any other conditions or events that would cause the Company to not be able to continue business as a going concern for the next twelve months.
Future Sources of Cash; New Acquisitions, Products and Services
We may require additional debt financing and/or capital to finance new acquisitions, refinance existing indebtedness or consummate other strategic investments in our business. Any financing obtained may further dilute or otherwise impair the ownership interest of our existing stockholders.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
At January 2, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements, commitments or guarantees that require additional disclosure or measurement.