ITEM 7
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our discussions below in this Item 7 should be read along with Janel’s audited financial statements and related notes thereto as of September 30, 2021 and 2020 and for each of the two years in the period ended September 30, 2021 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
INTRODUCTION
Janel is a holding company with subsidiaries in three business segments: Logistics (previously known as Global Logistics Services), Manufacturing and Life Sciences. In the fourth quarter of 2021, our former Global Logistics Services segment was renamed “Logistics”; this change related to the name only and had no impact on the Company’s previously reported historical financial position, results of operations, cash flow or segment level results.
The Company strives to create shareholder value primarily through three strategic priorities: supporting its businesses’ efforts to make investments and to build long-term profits; allocating Janel’s capital at higher risk-adjusted rates of return; and attracting and retaining exceptional talent. Management at the holding company level focuses on significant capital allocation decisions and corporate governance. Janel expects to grow through its subsidiaries’ organic growth and by completing acquisitions. We plan to either acquire businesses within our existing segments or expand our portfolio into new strategic segments. Our acquisition strategy focuses on reasonably-priced companies with strong and capable management teams, attractive existing business economics and stable and predictable earnings power.
COVID-19
We continue to navigate operating the Company in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, which continues to have widespread implications. On the one hand, we have seen improvements in the broader economy, and our results for fiscal 2021 improved significantly compared to the prior fiscal year. That said, there remains uncertainty regarding how the ongoing nature of the COVID-19 pandemic will impact the overall economy and the Company’s results in particular. While many countries have begun the process of vaccinating their residents against COVID-19, the large scale and challenging logistics of distributing the vaccines, as well as uncertainty over the efficacy of the vaccines against new variants of the virus, may hinder any economic recovery as well as our operations in the future.
Even after the COVID-19 pandemic subsides, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic may last for a significant period of time thereafter and may continue to adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts us will depend on numerous evolving factors and future developments that we are not able to predict, including the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business, and individuals’ actions in response to the pandemic; and the impact on economic activity including the possibility of recession or financial market instability. These factors may adversely impact consumer, business, and government spending as well as customers’ ability to pay for our services on an ongoing basis. This uncertainty also affects management’s accounting estimates and assumptions, which could result in greater variability in a variety of areas that depend on these estimates and assumptions, including receivables and forward-looking guidance.
Year Ended September 30, 2021 Acquisitions
On September 21, 2021, the Company completed a business combination whereby it acquired all of the membership interests of Expedited Logistics and Freight Services, LLC. (“ELFS”) and related subsidiaries, which we include in our Logistics segment.
On December 31, 2020, the Company completed a business combination whereby it acquired substantially all of the assets and certain liabilities of W.R. Zanes & Co. of LA., Inc. (“W.R. Zanes”), which we include in our Logistics segment.
On December 4, 2020, the Company completed a business combination whereby it acquired all of the membership interests of ImmunoChemistry Technologies, LLC. (“ICT”), which we include in our Life Sciences segment.
Year Ended September 30, 2020 Acquisitions
On July 23, 2020, the Company acquired all of the outstanding common stock of Atlantic Customs Brokers, Inc. (“ACB”), which we include in our Logistics segment.
Results of Operations - Janel Corporation
Our results of operations and period-over-period change are discussed in the following section. The tables and discussion should be read in conjunction with the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes thereto appearing in Item 8.
Refer to Item 7. “Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended September 30, 2020, filed on January 13, 2021, for a comparison of fiscal year 2020 results of operations to the fiscal year 2019 results of operations, which specific discussion is incorporated herein by reference.
Our condensed consolidated results of operations are as follows:
Financial Summary
Fiscal years ended September 30,
(in thousands)
Consolidated revenues for the year ended September 30, 2021 were $146,419, or 77.6% higher than fiscal 2020. Revenues increased across all three segments due to a recovery from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic experienced in the prior fiscal year as well as acquisitions. Operating income for fiscal 2021 was $3,951 compared to an operating loss of ($1,724) for fiscal 2020, an increase of $5,675, as a result of the economic recovery experienced across all of our segments, partially offset by higher spending in the corporate segment. Adjusted operating income for fiscal 2021 increased to $5,894 versus $376 in the prior fiscal year.
The Company’s net income for the year ended September 30, 2021 totaled $5,203 or $5.26 per diluted share, compared to net loss of approximately ($1,725) or ($1.98) per diluted share for the year ended September 30, 2020. Net income increased as a result of the recovery from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the prior fiscal year and the benefit from the forgiveness of our PPP Loan.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of operating income to adjusted operating income:
Adjusted Operating Income
Fiscal years ended September 30,
(in thousands)
BUSINESS PERFORMANCE
Results of Operations - Logistics
Fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020
Revenue
Total revenue in fiscal 2021 was $125,863 as compared to $68,492 in fiscal 2020, an increase of $57,371 or 83.7%. The increase in revenue was primarily driven by the rise in transportation rates as a result of capacity issues globally as well as an increase in volume as a result of a recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic compared to the prior fiscal year. Three acquisitions accounted for 15% of the growth. Our volume as measured by twenty-foot equivalent units (“TEUs”) grew 30%, metric tons and custom entries grew 1% and 28%, respectively.
Gross Profit
Gross profit in fiscal 2021 was $19,724, an increase of $4,629, or 30.7%, as compared to $15,095 in fiscal 2020. This increase was mainly the result of a recovery in business compared with the depressed levels in the prior fiscal year which drove organic gross profit growth. Three acquisitions accounted for the balance of the growth. Our gross profit margin declined to 16.0% in fiscal 2021 compared to 22.0% in fiscal 2020 largely due to an increase in transportation rates.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses from continuing operations in fiscal 2021 were $16,656, as compared to $14,992 in fiscal 2020. The increase of $1,664, or 11.1%, was mainly due to additional expenses from acquired businesses and investment to support business growth. As a percentage of gross revenue, selling, general and administrative expenses were 13.2% and 21.8% for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Income from Operations
Operating income increased to $3,068 in fiscal 2021 compared to $103 in fiscal 2020. Income from operations increased as a result of the economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic compared to the prior fiscal year and contributions from three acquisitions. Our operating margin as a percentage of gross profit was 15.5% in fiscal 2021 compared to 0.7% in fiscal 2020.
Results of Operations - Manufacturing
Financial Summary
Fiscal years ended September 30,
(in thousands)
Fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020
Revenue
Total revenue was $8,564 in
fiscal 2021 compared with $7,319 in fiscal 2020, an increase of 17%. The revenue increase reflected a broad increase across the business relative to the COVID-19 related slowdown in the prior fiscal year.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $4,581 and $3,990 for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. Gross profit margin for the Manufacturing segment during fiscal 2021 was 53.5%, as compared to 54.5%, in fiscal 2020. The year-over-year decrease in gross profit margin was generally due to mix of business.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the Manufacturing segment were $2,696 and $2,505 for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. As a percentage of gross revenue, selling, general and administrative expenses were 31.5% and 34.2% for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. The decrease in expenses relative to revenue reflected positive operating leverage on higher volumes.
Income from Operations
Operating income for fiscal 2021 was $1,885 compared to $1,485 in fiscal 2020, representing a 26.9% increase compared to the prior year. The increase was due to favorable operating leverage as revenue recovered.
Results of Operations - Life Sciences
Financial Summary
in thousands
(Fiscal years ended September 30,)
Fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020
Revenue
Total revenue was $11,992 in
fiscal 2021 compared with $6,618 in fiscal 2020. Increase revenue of $5,374 is primarily related to academic research recovery from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Acquired revenue of $1,290 added the balance of revenue growth.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $8,128 and $4,436 for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. Gross profit margin of 67.0% remained flat between fiscal 2021 and the prior fiscal year. The gross profit margin was impacted by the amortization of non-cash acquired inventory expenses of $708 and $876 for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the Life Sciences segment were $4,469 and $3,870 for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The year-over-year increase was largely due to acquired businesses. As a percentage of gross revenue, selling, general and administrative expenses were 37.3% and 58.5% for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Income from Operations
The Life Sciences business earned $3,659 and $566 in income from operations for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in operating income reflected positive operating leverage from the increase in revenue as a result of the recovery from the impact of the COVID-19-related shut downs experienced in the prior fiscal year and, to a lesser extent, contribution from acquisitions. The difference in operating margin of 30.5% in fiscal 2021 compared with 8.6% in fiscal 2020 was largely due to favorable leverage from the business recovery as research labs reopened during fiscal 2021.
Results of Operations - Corporate and Other
Below is a reconciliation of income from operations segments to net (loss) available to common stockholders:
Total Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses increased by $783 to $4,661, or 20.2%, in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was due primarily to higher accounting related professional expense, increased merger and acquisition expenses and increases in amortization of intangible expenses partially offset by lower stock-based compensation. We incur merger and acquisition deal-related expenses and intangible amortization at the corporate level rather than at the segment level.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the consolidated company increased $68, or 13.1%, to $589 in fiscal 2021 from $521 in fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher average debt balances to support our acquisition efforts and higher working capital within Logistics to support business growth partially offset by lower interest rates.
Income Tax Expense
On a consolidated basis, the Company recorded an income tax expense
of $961 in fiscal 2021, as compared to an income tax benefit of $505 in fiscal 2020. The increase in expense was primarily due to an increase in pretax income and the estimated deductible expense related to the expected loan forgiveness amount under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan received in the third quarter. In 2016, a deferred tax asset was established to reflect a net operating loss carryforward, which the Company has begun using, and expects to continue to use, through ongoing profitability.
Preferred Stock Dividends
Preferred stock dividends include the Company’s Series C Stock and dividends accrued but not paid. For the year ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, preferred stock dividends were $766 and $675, respectively.
The increase of $91, or 13.5%, was the result of a higher number of shares of Series C Stock outstanding and an increase in dividend rate as of January 1, 2021 to 8%.
Dividends accrued but not paid on the Company’s Series C Stock were $2,427 and $1,661 as of September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net income (loss) Available to Common Shareholders
Net income (loss) available to common shareholders was $4,437 or $4.48 per diluted share for fiscal 2021 and ($2,400) or ($2.75) per diluted share for fiscal 2020. The increase in net income was primarily due higher revenues, partially offset by higher selling, general and administrative expenses across our businesses in both periods and an increase in the dividend rate with respect to the Series C Stock as of January 1, 2021 to 8%.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
General
Our ability to satisfy liquidity requirements, including satisfying debt obligations and fund working capital, day-to-day operating expenses and capital expenditures, depends upon future performance, which is subject to general economic conditions, competition and other factors, some of which are beyond Janel’s control. Our Logistics segment depends on commercial credit facilities to fund day-to-day operations as there is a difference between the timing of collection cycles and the timing of payments to vendors.
As a customs broker, our Logistics segment makes significant cash advances for a select group of our credit-worthy customers. These cash advances are for customer obligations such as the payment of duties and taxes to customs authorities primarily in the United States. Increases in duty rates could result in increases in the amounts we advance on behalf of our customers. Cash advances are a “pass through” and are not recorded as a component of revenue and expense. The billings of such advances to customers are accounted for as a direct increase in accounts receivable from the customer and a corresponding increase in accounts payable to governmental customs authorities. These “pass through” billings can influence our traditional credit collection metrics. For customers that meet certain criteria, we have agreed to extend payment terms beyond our customary terms. Management believes that it has established effective credit control procedures and has historically experienced relatively insignificant collection problems.
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted our liquidity and cash flows. As discussed in greater detail in note 9 to the consolidated financial statements, on April 19, 2020, we entered into a loan agreement with Santander and executed a U.S. Small Business Administration note pursuant to which we borrowed $2,726 from Santander pursuant to the PPP under The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, Section 7(a)(36) of the Small Business Act in order to be able to continue to cover our payroll costs, group health care benefits, mortgage payments, rent and utilities. The duration and magnitude of the pandemic is not reasonably estimable at this point, and if the pandemic persists, our liquidity and capital resources could be further negatively impacted. During fiscal 2021, the Company applied for and received forgiveness for its PPP Loan.
Subsidiaries depend on commercial credit facilities to fund day-to-day operations as there is a difference between the timing of collection cycles and the timing of payments to vendors. Generally, we do not make significant capital expenditures.
Janel’s cash flow performance for the 2021 fiscal year may not necessarily be indicative of future cash flow performance.
As of September 30, 2021, and compared with the prior fiscal year, the Company’s cash and cash equivalents increased by $2,885, or 86%, to $6,234 from $3,349 as of September 30, 2020. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, Janel’s net working capital deficiency (current assets less current liabilities) increased by $4,412, from ($10,372) at September 30, 2020 to ($14,784) at September 30, 2021.
Cash flows from continuing operating activities
Net cash used in continuing operating activities for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 was $201 and $554, respectively. The decrease in cash used in operations for the year ended September, 2021 was driven principally by higher profits, partially offset by PPP loan forgiveness, timing of cash collections for accounts receivables and cash payments on accounts payables for the year ended September 30, 2021.
Cash flows from investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities, mainly for the acquisition of subsidiaries, was $16,108 for fiscal 2021 and $1,544 for fiscal 2020. The fiscal 2021 amount was associated with two Logistics and one Life Sciences acquisition, and the fiscal 2020 amount was associated with one Logistics and two Life Sciences acquisitions. The Company also used $234 for the acquisition of property and equipment for the year ended September 30, 2021 compared to $1,297 for the year ended September 30, 2020.
Cash flows from financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $19,194 for fiscal 2021 and $3,284 for fiscal 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities in fiscal 2021 primarily included proceeds from an increase in our line of credit which financed our acquisition of ELFS and proceeds from the sale of Series C Preferred, partially offset by repayments on our term loan and notes payables to related party. Net cash provided by financing activities in fiscal 2020 primarily included proceeds from our PPP loan, deferred payments for the ACB acquisition and proceeds from stock option exercises, proceeds from sale of Series C Preferred, offset by repurchase of Series C Preferred.
Credit Facilities
Logistics
Santander Bank Facility
On October 17, 2017, the Janel Group subsidiaries (collectively the “Janel Group Borrowers”), with the Company as a guarantor, entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Santander Loan Agreement”) with Santander Bank, N.A. (“Santander”) with respect to a revolving line of credit facility (the “Santander Facility”). As amended in March 2018, November 2018, March 2020, July 2020 and December 2020, the Santander Facility provided that the Janel Group Borrowers can borrow up to $17,000 limited to 85% of the Janel Group Borrowers’ aggregate outstanding eligible accounts receivable, subject to adjustment as set forth in the Santander Loan Agreement. Interest accrued on the Santander Facility at an annual rate equal to, at the Janel Group Borrowers’ option, prime plus 0.50%, or LIBOR (30, 60 or 90 day) plus 2.25% subject to a LIBOR floor of 75 basis points. The Janel Group Borrowers’ obligations under the Santander Facility were secured by all of the assets of the Janel Group Borrowers, while the Santander Loan Agreement contained customary terms and covenants. The Santander Facility was set to mature on October 17, 2022, unless earlier terminated or renewed. As a result of its terms, the Santander Facility is classified as a current liability on the consolidated balance sheet.
On September 21, 2021, Janel Group, ELFS and ELFS Brokerage, LLC, each wholly-owned subsidiaries of the Company, jointly and severally, individually and collectively as borrowers (collectively with Janel, the “Borrowers”), the Company and Expedited Logistics and Freight services, LLC, an Oklahoma limited liability company, as loan party obligors, and Santander Bank, N.A., as lender, entered into an Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement (as amended and restated, the “Loan Agreement”) that amended and restated the Santander Loan Agreement.
The Loan Agreement provides for, among other things, the following modifications to the Santander Loan Agreement: (1) ELFS and ELFS Brokerage, LLC were added as borrowers; (2) the maximum revolving facility amount available was increased from $17.0 million to $30.0 million (limited to 85% of the borrowers’ eligible accounts receivable borrowing base and reserves, subject to adjustments set forth in the Loan Agreement); (3) the maturity date was extended from October 12, 2022 to September 21, 2026; (4) interest accrues at an annual rate equal to LIBOR (30, 60 or 90 day) plus 2.25% subject to a LIBOR floor of 75 basis points at close, with a potential LIBOR floor reduction to 25 basis points upon certain conditions; and (5) the Company was provided the option of making Series C preferred payments or distributions if specified conditions are met.
At September 30, 2021, outstanding borrowings under the Santander Facility were $29,637, representing 98.8% of the $30,000 available thereunder, and interest was accruing at an effective interest rate of 3.00%.
At September 30, 2020, outstanding borrowings under the Santander Facility were $8,447, representing 49.7% of the $17,000 available thereunder, and interest was accruing at an effective interest rate of 2.40%.
The Company was in compliance with the covenants defined in the Santander Loan Agreement at both September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020.
Working Capital Requirements
Through September 30, 2021, the Logistics segments cash needs were met by the Santander Facility and cash on hand. As of September 30, 2021, the Logistics segment had, subject to collateral availability, $181 available for future borrowings under its $30,000 Santander Facility and $4,177 in cash.
The Company believes that its current financial resources will be sufficient to finance the operations and obligations (current and long-term liabilities) of the Logistics segment for the short- and long-term. However, the actual working capital needs of the Logistics segment will depend upon numerous factors, including operating results, the costs associated with growing the Logistics segment, either organically or through acquisitions, competition and availability under the Loan Agreement, none of which can be predicted with certainty. If cash flow and available credit are not sufficient to fund working capital, the operations of the Logistics segment will be materially negatively impacted.
Manufacturing
First Merchants Bank Credit Facility
On March 21, 2016, as amended in August 2019 and July 2020, Indco executed a Credit Agreement (the “First Merchants Credit Agreement”) with First Merchants Bank with respect to a $5,500 term loan, a $1,000 (limited to the borrowing base and reserves) revolving loan and a $680 mortgage loan (together, the “First Merchant Facility”). Interest accrues on the term loan at an annual rate equal to the one-month LIBOR plus either 2.75% (if Indco’s total funded debt to EBITDA ratio is less than 2:1), or 3.5% (if Indco’s total funded debt to EBITDA ratio is greater than or equal to 2:1).
Interest accrues on the revolving loan at an annual rate equal to the one-month LIBOR plus 2.75%. Interest accrues on the mortgage loan at an annual rate of 4.19%. Indco’s obligations under the First Merchants Bank Facility are secured by all of Indco’s real property and other assets and are guaranteed by Janel. Additionally, Janel’s guarantee of Indco’s obligations is secured by a pledge of Janel’s Indco shares. The term loan and revolving loan portions of the First Merchants Facility will expire on August 30, 2024, and the mortgage loan will mature on July 1, 2025 (subject to earlier termination as provided in the First Merchants Credit Agreement), unless renewed or extended.
As of September 30, 2021, there were no outstanding borrowings under the revolving loan, $2,713 of borrowings under the term loan, and $655 of borrowing under the mortgage loan with interest accruing on the term loan and mortgage loan at an effective interest rate of 2.83% and 4.19%, respectively.
As of September 30, 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings under the revolving loan, $4,349 of borrowings under the term loan, and $676 of borrowing under the mortgage loan with interest accruing on the term loan and mortgage loan at an effective interest rate of 3.66% and 4.19%, respectively.
Indco was in compliance with the covenants defined in the First Merchants Credit Agreement at both September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020.
Working Capital Requirements
Manufacturing’s cash needs are currently met by the term loan and revolving credit facility under the First Merchants Credit Agreement and cash on hand. As of September 30, 2021, Manufacturing had $1,000 available under its $1,000 revolving facility subject to collateral availability and $910 in cash. The Company believes that the current financial resources will be sufficient to finance Manufacturing operations and obligations (current and long-term liabilities) for the long and short term. However, actual working capital needs will depend upon numerous factors, including operating results, the cost associated with growing Manufacturing either organically or through acquisitions, competition and availability under the revolving credit facility, none of which can be predicted with certainty. If cash flow and available credit are not sufficient to fund working capital, Manufacturing’s operations will be materially negatively impacted.
Life Sciences
First Northern Bank of Dixon
On June 21, 2018, Antibodies Incorporated (“Antibodies”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (by succession), entered into a Business Loan Agreement (the “First Northern Loan Agreement”), subsequently amended November 2019 and October 2, 2020, with First Northern Bank of Dixon (“First Northern”), with respect to a $2,235 term loan (the “First Northern Term Loan”) which bears interest at an annual rate of 4.00% and matures on November 14, 2029. In addition, Antibodies has a $500 revolving credit facility with First Northern which currently bears interest at the annual rate of 4.0%, and matures on October 5, 2021 (the “First Northern Revolving Loan”). Antibodies also entered into two separate business loan agreements with First Northern: a $125 term loan in connection with a potential expansion of solar generation capacity on the Antibodies property (“First Northern Solar Loan”) bearing interest at the annual rate of 4.43% (subject to adjustment in five years) and maturing on November 14, 2029; and a $60 term loan in connection with a potential expansion of generator capacity on the Antibodies property (“Generator Loan”) bearing interest at the annual rate of 4.25% and maturing on November 5, 2025. There were no outstanding borrowings under the Generator Loan as September 30, 2021 and 2020.
As of September 30, 2021, the total amount outstanding under the First Northern Term Loan was $2,139, of which $2,084 is included in long-term debt and $55 is included in current portion of long-term debt, with interest accruing at an effective interest rate of 4.18%.
As of September 30, 2021, the total amount outstanding under the First Northern Solar Loan was $105, of which $101 is included in long-term debt and $4 is included in current portion of long-term debt, with interest accruing at an effective interest rate of 4.43%.
As of September 30, 2020, the total amount outstanding under the First Northern Term Loan was $2,192, of which $2,139 is included in long-term debt and $53 is included in current portion of long-term debt, with interest accruing at an effective interest rate of 4.18%.
As of September 30, 2020, the total amount outstanding under the First Northern Solar Loan was $81, of which $76 is included in long-term debt and $5 is included in current portion of long-term debt, with interest accruing at an effective interest rate of 4.43%.
The Company was in compliance with the covenants defined in the First Northern Loan Agreement at September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020.
Working Capital Requirements
Life Sciences cash needs are currently met by the First Northern Loan Agreement and cash on hand of $994. The Company believes that the current financial resources will be sufficient to finance Life Sciences operations and obligations (current and long-term liabilities) for the long and short term. However, actual working capital needs will depend upon numerous factors, including operating results, the cost associated with growing Life Sciences either organically or through acquisitions, competition and availability under the revolving credit facility, none of which can be predicted with certainty. If cash flow and available credit are not sufficient to fund working capital, Life Sciences operations will be materially negatively impacted.
CURRENT OUTLOOK
The results of operations in the Logistics, Manufacturing and Life Sciences segments are affected by the general economic cycle, particularly as it influences global trade levels and specifically the import and export activities of our Logistics segment’s various current and prospective customers. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic may remain prevalent for a significant period of time and may continue to adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided. Historically, the Company’s annual results of operations have been subject to seasonal trends which have been the result of, or influenced by, numerous factors including climate, national holidays, consumer demand, economic conditions, the growth and diversification of the segment’s international network and service offerings, and other similar and subtle forces.
The Company cannot accurately forecast many of these factors, nor can it estimate accurately the relative influence of any particular factor and, as a result, there can be no assurance that historical patterns, if any, will continue in future periods.
The Company’s subsidiaries are implementing business strategies to grow revenue and profitability for fiscal 2022 and beyond. Our Logistics strategy calls for additional branch offices, introduction of new revenue streams for existing locations, sales force expansion, additional acquisitions, and a continued focus on implementing lean methodologies to contain operating expenses.
Our Manufacturing and Life Sciences segments expect to introduce new product lines and wider distribution and promotion of their products with internet sales efforts. In addition to supporting its subsidiaries’ growth plans, the Company may seek to grow Janel by entering new business segments through acquisition.
Certain elements of the Company’s profitability and growth strategy, including proposals for acquisition and accelerating revenue growth, are contingent upon the availability of adequate financing on terms acceptable to the Company.
Without adequate equity and/or debt financing, the implementation of significant aspects of the Company’s strategic growth plan may be deferred beyond the originally anticipated timing, and the Company’s operations may be materially negatively impacted.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our accounting policies are described in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, included herein includes a summary of the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Our financial statements are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), which require us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the year. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We consider the following policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing our financial statements and the uncertainties that could impact our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
Business Combinations and Related Acquired Intangible Assets and Goodwill. We record all tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination at fair value as of the acquisition date in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 805 Business Combinations. Acquisition date fair value represents the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants as measured on the acquisition date. The valuations are based on information that existed as of the acquisition date. During the measurement period, which shall not exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may adjust provisional amounts recorded for assets acquired and liabilities assumed to reflect new information that we have subsequently obtained regarding facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date. Such fair value assessments require judgments and estimates, which may cause final amounts to differ materially from original estimates.
As part of acquisitions of businesses, we acquired certain identifiable intangible assets, which are valued as of the acquisition date using a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) model. Key assumptions in the DCF model include (i) future revenues, (ii) earnings before interest, taxes depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) and (iii) the weighted average cost of capital discount rate. Estimated future revenues include assumptions about our ability to renew contracts in a competitive bidding process. A decrease in revenues or gross and EBITDA margins may adversely affect the value of identifiable intangible assets. The discount rate focuses on rates of return for equity and debt and is calculated using public information from selected guideline companies. The magnitude of the discount rate reflects the perceived risk of an investment. A change in the estimated risk of the acquired company cash flows would change the discount rate, which in turn could significantly affect the valuation of acquired identifiable intangible assets.
The excess amount of the aggregated purchase consideration paid over the fair value of the net of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment annually or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change, such as material deterioration in performance that would indicate an impairment may exist. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we changed the date of our annual impairment test of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets from September 30 to July 1. When evaluating goodwill for impairment, we may first perform a qualitative assessment (“step zero” of the impairment test) to determine whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit is impaired. If we decide not to perform a qualitative assessment, or if we determine that it is more likely than not the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its the fair value, then we perform a quantitative assessment (“step one” of the impairment test) and calculate the estimated fair value of the reporting unit. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds the estimated fair value, an impairment charge would be recorded to reduce the carrying amount to its estimated fair value. The decision to perform a qualitative impairment assessment in a given year is influenced by a number of factors, including the significance of the excess of the reporting units’ estimated fair value over carrying amount at the last quantitative assessment date, the amount of time in between quantitative fair value assessments, and the date of our acquisitions.
No indicators of impairment were identified from the date of our annual impairment test through September 30, 2021.
A qualitative assessment is performed for intangibles and long-lived assets to determine if there are any indicators that the carrying amount might not be recovered. A quantitative analysis may be performed in order to test the intangibles and long-lived assets for impairment. If a quantitative analysis is necessary, an income approach, specifically a relief from royalty method, is used to estimate the fair value of the intangibles and long-lived assets. Principal factors used in the relief from royalty method that require judgment are projected net sales, discount rates, royalty rates and terminal growth assumptions.
The estimated fair value of each intangible and long-lived assets is compared to its carrying amount to determine if impairment exists. If the carrying amount of a intangibles and long-lived assets exceeds the estimated fair value, an impairment charge would be recorded to reduce the carrying amount of the intangibles and long-lived assets. No indicators of impairment of our intangibles and long-lived assets were identified from the date of our annual impairment test through September 30, 2021.
RECENT ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
The recent accounting standards is discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements contained in this report.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
While we prepare our financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we also utilize and present certain financial measures, in particular adjusted operating income, which is not based on or included in U.S. GAAP (we refer to these as “non-GAAP financial measures”).
Organic Growth
Our non-GAAP financial measure of organic growth represents revenue growth excluding revenue from acquisitions within the preceding 12 months. The organic growth presentation provides useful period-to-period comparison of revenue results as it excludes revenue from acquisitions that would not be included in the comparable prior period.
Adjusted Operating Income
As a result of our acquisition strategy, our net income includes material non-cash charges relating to the amortization of customer-related intangible assets in the ordinary course of business as well as other intangible assets acquired in our acquisitions. Although these charges may increase as we complete more acquisitions, we believe we will be growing the value of our intangible assets such as customer relationships. Because these charges are not indicative of our operations, we believe that adjusted operating income is a useful financial measure for investors because it eliminates the effect of these non-cash costs and provides an important metric for our business that is more representative of the actual results of our operations.
Adjusted operating income (which excludes the non-cash impact of amortization of intangible assets, stock-based compensation and cost recognized on the sale of acquired inventory valuation) is used by management as a supplemental performance measure to assess our business’s ability to generate cash and economic returns.
Adjusted operating income is a non-GAAP measure of income and does not include the effects of preferred stock dividends, interest and taxes.
We believe that organic growth and adjusted operating income provide useful information in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as management. However, organic growth and adjusted operating income are not financial measures calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP and should not be considered as a substitute for total revenue, operating income or any other operating performance measures calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Using these non-GAAP financial measures to analyze our business has material limitations because the calculations are based on the subjective determination of management regarding the nature and classification of events and circumstances that users of the financial statements may find significant.
In addition, although other companies in our industry may report measures titled organic growth, adjusted operating income or similar measures, such non-GAAP financial measures may be calculated differently from how we calculate our non-GAAP financial measures, which reduces their overall usefulness as comparative measures. Because of these limitations, you should consider organic growth and adjusted operating income alongside other financial performance measures, including total revenue, operating income and our other financial results presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP.