Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We are one of the leading providers of worldwide manufacturing services and solutions. We provide comprehensive electronics design, production and product management services to companies in various industries and end markets. We derive substantially all of our revenue from production and product management services (collectively referred to as “manufacturing services”), which encompass the act of producing tangible components that are built to customer specifications and are then provided to the customer.
We have two reporting segments: Electronics Manufacturing Services (“EMS”) and Diversified Manufacturing Services (“DMS”), which are organized based on the economic profiles of the services performed, including manufacturing capabilities, market strategy, margins, return on capital and risk profiles. Our EMS segment is focused around leveraging IT, supply chain design and engineering, technologies largely centered on core electronics, utilizing our large scale manufacturing infrastructure and our ability to serve a broad range of end markets. Our EMS segment is a high volume business that produces product at a quicker rate (i.e. cycle time) and in larger quantities and includes customers primarily in the 5G, wireless and cloud, digital print and retail, industrial and semi-cap, and networking and storage industries. Our DMS segment is focused on providing engineering solutions, with an emphasis on material sciences, technologies and healthcare. Our DMS segment includes customers primarily in the automotive and transportation, connected devices, healthcare and packaging, and mobility industries.
As of September 1, 2020, certain customers were realigned within our operating segments. Our operating segments, which are the reporting segments, continue to consist of the DMS and EMS segments. Customers within the automotive and transportation and smart home and appliances industries are now presented within the DMS segment. Prior period disclosures are restated to reflect the realignment.
Our cost of revenue includes the cost of electronic components and other materials that comprise the products we manufacture; the cost of labor and manufacturing overhead; and adjustments for excess and obsolete inventory. As a provider of turnkey manufacturing services, we are responsible for procuring components and other materials. This requires us to commit significant working capital to our operations and to manage the purchasing, receiving, inspecting and stocking of materials. At times, we collect deposits from our customers related to the purchase of inventory in order to effectively manage our working capital. Although we bear the risk of fluctuations in the cost of materials and excess scrap, our ability to purchase components and materials efficiently may contribute significantly to our operating results. While we periodically negotiate cost of materials adjustments with our customers, rising component and material prices may negatively affect our margins. Net revenue from each product that we manufacture consists of an element based on the costs of materials in that product and an element based on the labor and manufacturing overhead costs allocated to that product. Our gross margin for any product depends on the mix between the cost of materials in the product and the cost of labor and manufacturing overhead allocated to the product.
Our operating results are impacted by the level of capacity utilization of manufacturing facilities; indirect labor costs; and selling, general and administrative expenses. Operating income margins have generally improved during periods of high production volume and high capacity utilization. During periods of low production volume, we generally have reduced operating income margins.
We monitor the current economic environment and its potential impact on both the customers we serve as well as our end markets and closely manage our costs and capital resources so that we can try to respond appropriately as circumstances change.
We have consistently utilized advanced circuit design, production design and manufacturing technologies to meet the needs of our customers. To support this effort, our engineering staff focuses on developing and refining design and manufacturing technologies to meet specific needs of specific customers. Most of the expenses associated with these customer-specific efforts are reflected in our cost of revenue. In addition, our engineers engage in research and development (“R&D”) of new technologies that apply generally to our operations. The expenses of these R&D activities are reflected in the research and development line item within our Consolidated Statement of Operations.
An important element of our strategy is the expansion of our global production facilities. The majority of our revenue and materials costs worldwide are denominated in U.S. dollars, while our labor and utility costs in operations outside the U.S. are denominated in local currencies. We economically hedge certain of these local currency costs, based on our evaluation of the potential exposure as compared to the cost of the hedge, through the purchase of foreign currency exchange contracts. Changes
in the fair market value of such hedging instruments are reflected within the Consolidated Statement of Operations and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
See Note 13 - “Concentration of Risk and Segment Data” to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic, which began to impact us in January 2020, has continued to affect our business and the businesses of our customers and suppliers. Travel and business operation restrictions arising from virus containment efforts of governments around the world have continued to impact our operations in Asia, Europe and the Americas. Essential activity exceptions from these restrictions have allowed us to continue to operate but virus containment efforts have resulted in additional direct costs.
During the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, we incurred approximately $142 million in direct costs associated with the COVID-19 outbreak, primarily due to incremental and idle labor costs and the procurement of personal protection equipment for our employees globally. This increase in costs was partially offset by governmental subsidies, such as lower payroll taxes or social insurance in certain countries, related to COVID-19 incentives.
The impact on our suppliers has led to supply chain constraints, including difficulty sourcing materials necessary to fulfill customer production requirements and challenges in transporting completed products to our end customers.
Summary of Results
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain key operating results and other financial information (in millions, except per share data):
Key Performance Indicators
Management regularly reviews financial and non-financial performance indicators to assess the Company’s operating results. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities are largely affected by our working capital requirements, which are dependent on the effective management of our sales cycle as well as timing of payments. Our sales cycle measures how quickly we can convert our manufacturing services into cash through sales. We believe the metrics set forth below are useful to investors in measuring our liquidity as future liquidity needs will depend on fluctuations in levels of inventory, accounts receivable and accounts payable.
The following table sets forth, for the quarterly periods indicated, certain of management’s key financial performance indicators:
(1)The sales cycle is calculated as the sum of days in accounts receivable and days in inventory, less the days in accounts payable; accordingly, the variance in the sales cycle quarter over quarter is a direct result of changes in these indicators.
(2)Inventory turns (annualized) are calculated as 360 days divided by days in inventory.
(3)Days in accounts receivable is calculated as accounts receivable, net, divided by net revenue multiplied by 90 days. During the three months ended August 31, 2021, the increase in days in accounts receivable from the three months ended August 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in accounts receivable, primarily driven by higher sales and the timing of collections. During the three months ended August 31, 2021, the decrease in days in accounts receivable from the prior sequential quarter was driven primarily by the timing of collections.
(4)Days in inventory is calculated as inventory and contract assets divided by cost of revenue multiplied by 90 days. During the three months ended August 31, 2021, the increase in days in inventory from the three months ended August 31, 2020 was primarily to support expected sales levels in the first quarter of fiscal year 2022 and supply-chain constraints as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. During the three months ended August 31, 2021, the increase in days in inventory from the prior sequential quarter was primarily driven by supply-chain constraints as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
(5)Days in accounts payable is calculated as accounts payable divided by cost of revenue multiplied by 90 days. During the three months ended August 31, 2021, the increase in days in accounts payable from the three months ended May 31, 2021 and August 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in materials purchases and timing of payments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions based upon historical experience and various other factors and circumstances. Management believes that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable under the circumstances; however, actual results may vary from these estimates and assumptions under different future circumstances. We have identified the following critical accounting policies that affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements. For further discussion of our significant accounting policies, refer to Note 1 - “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
For our over time customers, we believe the measure of progress which best depicts the transfer of control is based on costs incurred to date, relative to total estimated cost at completion (i.e., an input method). This method is a faithful depiction of the transfer of goods or services because it results in the recognition of revenue on the basis of our to-date efforts in the satisfaction of a performance obligation relative to the total expected efforts in the satisfaction of the performance obligation. We believe that the use of an input method best depicts the transfer of control to the customer, which occurs as we incur costs on our contracts. The transaction price of each performance obligation is generally based upon the contractual stand-alone selling price of the product or service.
Certain contracts with customers include variable consideration, such as periodic cost of materials adjustments, rebates, discounts, or returns. We recognize estimates of this variable consideration that are not expected to result in a significant revenue reversal in the future, primarily based on the most likely level of consideration to be paid to the customer under the specific terms of the underlying programs.
Inventory Valuation
We purchase inventory based on forecasted demand and record inventory at the lower of cost and net realizable value. Management regularly assesses inventory valuation based on current and forecasted usage, customer inventory-related contractual obligations and other lower of cost and net realizable value considerations. If actual market conditions or our customers’ product demands are less favorable than those projected, additional valuation adjustments may be necessary.
Long-Lived Assets
We review property, plant and equipment and amortizable intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of property, plant and equipment is measured by comparing its carrying value to the undiscounted projected cash flows that the asset(s) or asset group(s) are expected to generate. If the carrying amount of an asset or an asset group is not recoverable, we recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying amount of the long-lived asset or asset group over its respective fair value, which is generally determined as either the present value of estimated future cash flows or the appraised value. The impairment analysis is based on significant assumptions of future results made by management, including revenue and cash flow projections. Circumstances that may lead to impairment of property, plant and equipment include unforeseen decreases in future
performance or industry demand and the restructuring of our operations resulting from a change in our business strategy or adverse economic conditions.
We have recorded intangible assets, including goodwill, in connection with business acquisitions. Estimated useful lives of amortizable intangible assets are determined by management based on an assessment of the period over which the asset is expected to contribute to future cash flows. The fair value of acquired amortizable intangible assets impacts the amounts recorded as goodwill.
We perform a goodwill impairment analysis on an annual basis and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The Company may elect to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit is impaired. If the qualitative assessment is not performed or if the Company determines that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value, the recoverability of goodwill is measured at the reporting unit level by comparing the reporting unit’s carrying amount, including goodwill, to the fair value of the reporting unit. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, goodwill is considered impaired and a loss is recognized in the amount equal to that excess.
We perform an indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment analysis on an annual basis and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The Company may elect to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible is impaired. If the qualitative assessment is not performed or if the Company determines that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible exceeds the carrying value, the recoverability is measured by comparing the carrying amount to the fair value. If the carrying amount of the indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its fair value, the indefinite-lived intangible asset is considered impaired.
We completed our annual impairment analysis for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021. The qualitative assessment was used for all reporting units and we determined that it is more likely than not that the fair values of our reporting units and the indefinite-lived intangible assets are in excess of the carrying values and that no impairment existed as of the date of the impairment analysis.
Income Taxes
We estimate our income tax provision in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate, a process that includes estimating exposures related to examinations by taxing authorities. We must also make judgments regarding the ability to realize deferred tax assets. The carrying value of our net deferred tax assets is based on our belief that it is more likely than not that we will generate sufficient future taxable income in certain jurisdictions to realize these deferred tax assets. A valuation allowance has been established for deferred tax assets that we do not believe meet the “more likely than not” criteria. We assess whether an uncertain tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return meets the threshold for recognition and measurement in the Consolidated Financial Statements. Our judgments regarding future taxable income as well as tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return may change due to changes in market conditions, changes in tax laws or other factors. If our assumptions and consequently our estimates change in the future, the valuation allowances and/or tax reserves established may be increased or decreased, resulting in a respective increase or decrease in income tax expense. For further discussion related to our income taxes, refer to Note 15 - “Income Taxes” to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 19 - “New Accounting Guidance” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recent accounting guidance.
Results of Operations
Refer to Item 7. "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" section contained in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020 for the results of operations discussion for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended August 31, 2019.
Net Revenue
Generally, we assess revenue on a global customer basis regardless of whether the growth is associated with organic growth or as a result of an acquisition. Accordingly, we do not differentiate or separately report revenue increases generated by acquisitions as opposed to existing business. In addition, the added cost structures associated with our acquisitions have historically been relatively insignificant when compared to our overall cost structure.
The distribution of revenue across our segments has fluctuated, and will continue to fluctuate, as a result of numerous factors, including the following: fluctuations in customer demand; efforts to diversify certain portions of our business; business growth from new and existing customers; specific product performance; and any potential termination, or substantial winding down, of significant customer relationships.
(1)As of September 1, 2020, certain customers were realigned within our operating segments. Our operating segments, which are the reporting segments, continue to consist of the DMS and EMS segments. Customers within the automotive and transportation and smart home and appliances industries are now presented within the DMS segment. Prior period disclosures are restated to reflect the realignment.
2021 vs. 2020
Net revenue increased during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020. Specifically, the DMS segment net revenue increased 17% due to: (i) a 6% increase in revenues from existing customers within our mobility business as our ability to meet customer demand during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, was greatly diminished due to COVID-19 containment efforts in China, (ii) a 4% increase in revenues from existing customers within our connected devices business, (iii) a 4% increase in revenues from existing customers in our automotive and transportation business and (iv) a 3% increase in revenues from existing customers within our healthcare and packaging businesses. The EMS segment net revenue decreased 1% due primarily to a decrease in revenues from existing customers in our cloud business, which began transitioning to a consignment model in fiscal year 2021.
2020 vs. 2019
Net revenue increased during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended August 31, 2019. Specifically, the EMS segment revenues increased 9% primarily due to (i) a 10% increase in revenues from existing customers within our 5G, wireless and cloud business and (ii) a 3% increase in revenues from existing customers within our industrial and capital equipment business. The increase is partially offset by (i) a 2% decrease from existing customers within our networking and storage business and (ii) a 2% decrease in revenues from existing customers within our digital print and retail business. DMS segment revenues increased 7% due to (i) an 8% increase in revenues from new and existing customers in our healthcare and packaging businesses and (ii) a 1% increase in revenues from existing customers in our automotive and transportation business. The increase is partially offset by a 2% decrease in revenue from customers within our connected devices business.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, revenue by segment expressed as a percentage of net revenue:
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, foreign source revenue expressed as a percentage of net revenue:
Gross Profit
2021 vs. 2020
Gross profit as a percentage of net revenue increased for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, primarily due to: (i) product mix and improved profitability across various businesses and (ii) a decrease of $72 million in incremental and idle labor costs associated with travel disruptions and governmental restrictions, largely related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling, General and Administrative
2021 vs. 2020
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020. The increase is predominantly due to (i) a $48 million increase due to higher salary and salary related expenses and (ii) a $19 million increase in stock-based compensation expense due to anticipated achievement levels for certain performance-based stock awards, a higher stock price for awards granted during fiscal year 2021 and a higher stock price for cash-settled awards. The increase is partially offset by a $29 million decrease primarily due to lower acquisition and integration charges related to our strategic collaboration with a healthcare company.
Research and Development
2021 vs. 2020
Research and development expenses remained relatively consistent as a percent of net revenue during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020.
Amortization of Intangibles
2021 vs. 2020
Amortization of intangibles decreased during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020 primarily due to certain intangible assets that were fully amortized during fiscal year 2020.
Restructuring, Severance and Related Charges
Following is a summary of our restructuring, severance and related charges:
(1)As the Company continued to optimize its cost structure and improve operational efficiencies, $57 million of employee severance and benefit costs was incurred in connection with a reduction in the worldwide workforce during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020. The remaining amount primarily relates to the 2020 Restructuring Plan, which was complete as of August 31, 2021.
(2)Primarily relates to the 2017 Restructuring Plan, which was complete as of August 31, 2019.
(3)Includes $0 million, $62 million and $21 million recorded in the EMS segment, $9 million, $76 million and $3 million recorded in the DMS segment and $1 million, $19 million and $2 million of non-allocated charges for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Except for asset write-off costs, all restructuring, severance and related charges are cash costs.
See Note 14 - “Restructuring, Severance and Related Charges” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of restructuring, severance and related charges for the 2020 Restructuring Plans.
(Gain) Loss on Securities
2021 vs. 2020
The change in (gain) loss on securities during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, is due to cash proceeds received in connection with the sale of an investment partially offset by: (i) an impairment charge of $36 million during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020 related to our investment in the Senior Non-Convertible Preferred Stock of iQor Holdings, Inc. (“iQor”) as a result of iQor’s bankruptcy filing and (ii) an impairment charge of $12 million during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020 in connection with the sale of an investment in the optical networking segment.
Other (Income) Expense
2021 vs. 2020
The change in other (income) expense during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, is primarily due to: (i) $24 million related to a decrease in fees associated with lower utilization of both our trade accounts receivable sales and securitization programs during fiscal year 2021, (ii) $10 million primarily related to lower net periodic benefit costs in fiscal year 2021, (iii) $7 million of costs incurred during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020 related to the redemption of the 5.625% Senior Notes due 2020 and (iv) $1 million arising from an increase in other income.
Interest Income
2021 vs. 2020
Interest income decreased during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, due to lower interest rates, partially offset by increased interest income on higher cash equivalents (investments that are readily convertible to cash with maturity dates of 90 days or less).
Interest Expense
2021 vs. 2020
Interest expense decreased during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021, compared to the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, primarily due to lower interest rates and lower borrowings on our credit facilities, partially offset by additional borrowings on our commercial paper program and senior debt issuances.
Income Tax Expense
2021 vs. 2020
The effective income tax rate decreased for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021, compared to the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, primarily due to: (i) higher income before income tax for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021, driven in part by decreased restructuring charges in tax jurisdictions with minimal related income tax benefit and (ii) a $21 million income tax expense associated with the re-measurement of deferred tax assets related to the extension of a non-U.S. tax incentive recorded during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP (Core) Financial Measures
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations include certain non-GAAP financial measures as identified in the reconciliation below. The non-GAAP financial measures disclosed herein do not have standard meaning and may vary from the non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies or how we may calculate those measures in other instances from time to time. Non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Also, our “core” financial measures should not be construed as an inference by us that our future results will be unaffected by those items that are excluded from our “core” financial measures.
Management believes that the non-GAAP “core” financial measures set forth below are useful to facilitate evaluating the past and future performance of our ongoing manufacturing operations over multiple periods on a comparable basis by excluding the effects of the amortization of intangibles, stock-based compensation expense and related charges, restructuring, severance and related charges, distressed customer charges, acquisition and integration charges, loss on disposal of subsidiaries, settlement of receivables and related charges, impairment of notes receivable and related charges, goodwill impairment charges, business interruption and impairment charges, net, (gain) loss on securities, income (loss) from discontinued operations, gain (loss) on sale of discontinued operations and certain other expenses, net of tax and certain deferred tax valuation allowance charges. Among other uses, management uses non-GAAP “core” financial measures to make operating decisions, assess business performance and as a factor in determining certain employee performance when evaluating incentive compensation.
We determine the tax effect of the items excluded from “core” earnings and “core” diluted earnings per share based upon evaluation of the statutory tax treatment and the applicable tax rate of the jurisdiction in which the pre-tax items were incurred, and for which realization of the resulting tax benefit, if any, is expected. In certain jurisdictions where we do not expect to realize a tax benefit (due to existing tax incentives or a history of operating losses or other factors resulting in a valuation allowance related to deferred tax assets), a reduced or 0% tax rate is applied.
We are reporting “core” operating income, “core” earnings and cash flows to provide investors with an additional method for assessing operating income and earnings, by presenting what we believe are our “core” manufacturing operations. A significant portion (based on the respective values) of the items that are excluded for purposes of calculating “core” operating income and “core” earnings also impacted certain balance sheet assets, resulting in a portion of an asset being written off without a corresponding recovery of cash we may have previously spent with respect to the asset. In the case of restructuring, severance and related charges, we may make associated cash payments in the future. In addition, although, for purposes of calculating “core” operating income and “core” earnings, we exclude stock-based compensation expense (which we anticipate continuing to incur in the future) because it is a non-cash expense, the associated stock issued may result in an increase in our outstanding shares of stock, which may result in the dilution of our stockholders’ ownership interest. We encourage you to consider these matters when evaluating the utility of these non-GAAP financial measures.
Adjusted free cash flow is defined as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities plus cash receipts on sold receivables less net capital expenditures (acquisition of property, plant and equipment less proceeds and advances from the sale of property, plant and equipment). We report adjusted free cash flow as we believe this non-GAAP financial measure is useful to investors in measuring our ability to generate cash internally and fund future growth and to provide a return to shareholders.
Included in the tables below are a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures as provided in our Consolidated Financial Statements:
Reconciliation of U.S. GAAP Financial Results to Non-GAAP Measures
(1)As the Company continued to optimize its cost structure and improve operational efficiencies, $57 million of employee severance and benefit costs was incurred in connection with a reduction in the worldwide workforce during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020. The remaining amount primarily related to the 2020 Restructuring Plan.
(2)Relates to accounts receivable and inventory charges for certain distressed customers.
(3)Following the adoption of Accounting Standards Update 2017-07, Compensation - Retirement Benefits (Topic 715) (“ASU 2017-07”), pension service cost is recognized in cost of revenue and all other components of net periodic benefit cost, including return on plan assets, are presented in other expense. We are reclassifying the pension components in other expense to core operating income as we assess operating performance, inclusive of all components of net periodic benefit cost, with the related revenue. There is no impact to core earnings or diluted core earnings per share for this adjustment.
(4)Charges, net of insurance proceeds, for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2021 and 2020, relate to a flood that impacted our facility in Huangpu, China.
(5)Charges related to our strategic collaboration with Johnson & Johnson Medical Devices Companies (“JJMD”).
(6)Relates to an impairment of an investment with iQor and the sale of an investment in the optical networking segment during fiscal year 2020.
(7)The fiscal year ended August 31, 2019 includes a $13 million income tax benefit for the effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (“Tax Act”) recorded during the three months ended November 30, 2018.
Adjusted Free Cash Flow
(1)In fiscal year 2019, the adoption of Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2016-15, "Classification of Certain Cash Receipts and Cash Payments" resulted in a reclassification of cash flows from operating activities to investing
activities for cash receipts for the deferred purchase price receivable on asset-backed securitization transactions. The adoption of this standard does not reflect a change in the underlying business or activities.
Quarterly Results (Unaudited)
The following table sets forth certain unaudited quarterly financial information for the three months ended August 31, 2021 and 2020. In the opinion of management, this information has been presented on the same basis as the audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere, and all necessary adjustments (consisting primarily of normal recurring accruals) have been included in the amounts stated below to present fairly the unaudited quarterly results when read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto. The operating results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for any future period.
(1)Includes direct costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic of $23 million and $22 million for the three months ended August 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2)Includes the impairment of an investment with iQor during the three months ended August 31, 2020.
Acquisitions and Expansion
During fiscal year 2018, the Company and JJMD entered into a framework agreement to form a strategic collaboration and expand our existing relationship. The strategic collaboration expands our medical device manufacturing portfolio, diversification and capabilities.
On October 26, 2020, under the terms of the framework agreement, we completed the fourth closing of our acquisition of certain assets of JJMD. The aggregate purchase price paid for the fourth closing was approximately $19 million in cash. Total assets acquired of $30 million and total liabilities assumed of $11 million were recorded at their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date.
The acquisition of the JJMD assets was accounted for as a business combination using the acquisition method of accounting. The Company is currently evaluating the fair value of the assets and liabilities related to the fourth closing. The preliminary estimates and measurements are, therefore, subject to change during the measurement period for assets acquired, liabilities assumed and tax adjustments. The results of operations were included in our condensed consolidated financial results beginning on October 26, 2020 for the fourth closing. We believe it is impracticable to provide pro forma information for the acquisition of the JJMD assets.
Refer to Note 16 - “Business Acquisitions” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe that our level of liquidity sources, which includes available borrowings under our revolving credit facilities and commercial paper program, additional proceeds available under our global asset-backed securitization program and under our uncommitted trade accounts receivable sale programs, cash on hand, cash flows provided by operating activities and the access to the capital markets, will be adequate to fund our capital expenditures, the payment of any declared quarterly dividends, any share repurchases under the approved program, any potential acquisitions and our working capital requirements for the next 12 months. We continue to assess our capital structure and evaluate the merits of redeploying available cash.
Certain of our trade accounts receivable sale programs expire or are subject to termination provisions within fiscal year 2022. While we expect to renew such trade accounts receivable sale programs, market conditions, including the implications of the COVID-19 pandemic, at the time our current programs expire may create challenges in doing so, such as incurring a higher cost of capital.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
As of August 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.6 billion in cash and cash equivalents, of which a significant portion was held by our foreign subsidiaries. Most of our foreign cash and cash equivalents as of August 31, 2021 could be repatriated to the United States without potential tax expense.
Notes Payable and Credit Facilities
Following is a summary of principal debt payments and debt issuance for our notes payable and credit facilities:
(1)On April 14, 2021, we issued $500 million of publicly registered 1.700% Senior Notes due 2026 (the “1.700% Senior Notes”). We used the net proceeds for general corporate purposes, including repayment of the prior $300 million Term Loan Facility.
(2)On April 28, 2021, we entered into an amendment (the “Amendment”) to our senior unsecured credit agreement dated as of January 22, 2020 (the “Credit Facility”). The Amendment, among other things, (i) increased the commitments available under the three-year revolving credit facility (the “Three-Year Revolving Credit Facility”) from $700 million to $1.2 billion, (ii) instituted certain sustainability-linked adjustments to the interest rates applicable to borrowings under the Credit Facility and (iii) primarily extended the termination date of the Three-Year Revolving Credit Facility to January 22, 2024, and of the Five-Year Revolving Credit Facility of $2.0 billion to January 22, 2026.
(3)As of August 31, 2021, we had $3.8 billion in available unused borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facilities. The Credit Facility acts as the back-up facility for commercial paper outstanding, if any. We have a borrowing capacity of up to $1.8 billion under our commercial paper program. Borrowings with an original maturity of 90 days or less are recorded net within the statement of cash flows, and have been excluded from the table above.
In the ordinary course of business, we have letters of credit and surety bonds with banks and insurance companies outstanding of $75 million as of August 31, 2021. Unused letters of credit were $76 million as of August 31, 2021. Letters of credit and surety bonds are generally available for draw down in the event we do not perform.
We have a shelf registration statement with the SEC registering the potential sale of an indeterminate amount of debt and equity securities in the future to augment our liquidity and capital resources.
Our Senior Notes and our credit facilities contain various financial and nonfinancial covenants. A violation of these covenants could negatively impact our liquidity by restricting our ability to borrow under the notes payable and credit facilities and potentially causing acceleration of amounts due under these notes payable and credit facilities. As of August 31, 2021 and 2020, we were in compliance with our debt covenants. Refer to Note 7 - “Notes Payable and Long-Term Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
Asset-Backed Securitization Programs
Global asset-backed securitization program - Effective August 20, 2021, the global asset-backed securitization program (formerly referred to as the North American asset-backed securitization program) terms were amended to: (i) add a foreign
entity to the program, (ii) increase the maximum amount of net cash proceeds available at any one time from $390 million to $600 million and (iii) extend the expiration date of the program to November 25, 2024. As of August 31, 2021, we had up to $24 million in available liquidity under our global asset-backed securitization program.
Certain entities participating in the global asset-backed securitization program continuously sell designated pools of trade accounts receivable to a special purpose entity, which in turn sells certain of the receivables at a discount to conduits administered by an unaffiliated financial institution on a monthly basis. In addition, the foreign entity participating in the global asset-backed securitization program sells certain receivables at a discount to conduits administered by an unaffiliated financial institution on a daily basis.
The special purpose entity in the global asset-backed securitization program is a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company and is included in our Consolidated Financial Statements. Certain unsold receivables covering up to the maximum amount of net cash proceeds available under the domestic, or U.S., portion of our global asset-backed securitization program are pledged as collateral to the unaffiliated financial institution as of August 31, 2021.
Foreign asset-backed securitization program - We terminated the foreign asset-backed securitization program on June 28, 2021. In connection with the termination, we paid approximately $167 million in cash, which consisted of: (i) $68 million for the remittance of collections received prior to June 28, 2021, in our role as servicer of sold receivables and (ii) a repurchase of $99 million of all previously sold receivables, at fair value, that remained outstanding as of June 28, 2021. As of August 31, 2021, we have substantially collected the repurchased receivables from customers.
The special purpose entity in the foreign asset-backed securitization program is a separate bankruptcy-remote entity that is winding down as a result of the termination of the foreign-asset backed securitization program. We are deemed the primary beneficiary of this special purpose entity as we have both the power to direct the activities of the entity that most significantly impact the entity’s economic performance and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive the benefits that could potentially be significant to the entity from the transfer of the trade accounts receivable into the special purpose entity. Accordingly, the special purpose entity associated with the foreign asset-backed securitization program is included in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
The foreign asset-backed securitization program contained a guarantee of payment by the special purpose entity, in an amount approximately equal to the net cash proceeds under the program. As a result of the termination of the foreign asset-backed securitization program, all outstanding amounts have been settled with the unaffiliated financial institution as of August 31, 2021. As such, no liability has been recorded for obligations under the guarantee.
Global and foreign asset-backed securitization programs - We continue servicing the receivables sold and in exchange receive a servicing fee under the global asset-backed securitization program. Servicing fees related to each of the asset-backed securitization programs recognized during the fiscal years ended August 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were not material. We do not record a servicing asset or liability on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as we estimate that the fee received to service these receivables approximates the fair market compensation to provide the servicing activities.
Refer to Note 8 - “Asset-Backed Securitization Programs” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further details on the programs.
Trade Accounts Receivable Sale Programs
Following is a summary of the trade accounts receivable sale programs with unaffiliated financial institutions. Under the programs we may elect to sell receivables and the unaffiliated financial institutions may elect to purchase, at a discount, on an ongoing basis:
(1)Maximum amount of trade accounts receivable that may be sold under a facility at any one time.
(2)The program will be automatically extended through December 5, 2025 unless either party provides 30 days notice of termination.
(3)Any party may elect to terminate the agreement upon 30 days prior notice.
(4)The program will be automatically extended through January 25, 2023 unless either party provides 30 days notice of termination.
(5)Any party may elect to terminate the agreement upon 15 days prior notice.
(6)The program will be automatically extended through August 10, 2023 unless either party provides 30 days notice of termination.
(7)The program will be automatically extended through August 21, 2023 unless either party provides 30 days notice of termination.
(8)The program will be automatically extended through December 5, 2024 unless either party provides 30 days notice of termination.
(9)The program will be automatically extended through April 11, 2025 unless either party provides 30 days notice of termination.
During the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021, we sold $4.7 billion of trade accounts receivable under these programs and we received cash proceeds of $4.7 billion. As of August 31, 2021, we had up to $2.0 billion in available liquidity under our trade accounts receivable sale programs.
Capital Expenditures
For Fiscal Year 2022, we anticipate our net capital expenditures will be approximately $830 million. In general, our capital expenditures support ongoing maintenance in our DMS and EMS segments and investments in capabilities and targeted end markets. The amount of actual capital expenditures may be affected by general economic, financial, competitive, legislative and regulatory factors, among other things.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth selected consolidated cash flow information (in millions):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 was primarily due to increased accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities, non-cash expenses, net income, and decreased contract assets, partially offset by increased inventories, accounts receivable, and prepaid expenses and other current assets. The increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities is primarily due to the timing of purchases and cash payments. The decrease in contract assets is primarily due to the timing of billings to our customers. The increase in inventories is primarily to support expected sales levels in the first quarter of fiscal year 2022 and supply chain constraints due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in accounts receivable is primarily driven by higher sales and the timing of collections. The increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets is primarily driven by the timing of payments.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 consisted primarily of capital expenditures principally to support ongoing business in the DMS and EMS segments and expenditures in connection with the acquisition of certain assets of JJMD and the acquisition of Ecologic Brands, Inc., partially offset by proceeds and advances from the sale of property, plant and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 was primarily due to (i) payments for debt agreements, (ii) the repurchase of our common stock, (iii) dividend payments, (iv) the purchase of the noncontrolling interests, and (v) treasury stock minimum tax withholding related to vesting of restricted stock. Net cash used in financing activities was partially offset by (i) borrowings under debt agreements and (ii) net proceeds from the exercise of stock options and issuance of common stock under the employee stock purchase plan.
Dividends and Share Repurchases
Following is a summary of the dividends and share repurchases for the fiscal years indicated below (in millions):
(1)The difference between dividends declared and dividends paid is due to dividend equivalents for unvested restricted stock units that are paid at the time the awards vest.
(2)Excludes commissions.
We currently expect to continue to declare and pay regular quarterly dividends of an amount similar to our past declarations. However, the declaration and payment of future dividends are discretionary and will be subject to determination by our Board of Directors each quarter following its review of our financial performance and global economic conditions.
In September 2019, the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $600 million of our common stock as part of a two-year capital allocation framework (“the 2020 Share Repurchase Program”). As of August 31, 2021, 14.1 million shares had been repurchased for $600 million and no authorization remains under the 2020 Share Repurchase Program.
In July 2021, the Board of Directors approved an authorization for the repurchase of up to $1.0 billion of our common stock (“the 2022 Share Repurchase Program”). As of August 31, 2021, 0.7 million shares had been repurchased for $42 million and $958 million remains available under the 2022 Share Repurchase Program.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of August 31, 2021 are summarized below. As disclosed below, while we have certain non-cancelable purchase order obligations for property, plant and equipment, we generally do not enter into non-cancelable purchase orders for materials until we receive a corresponding purchase commitment from our customer. Non-cancelable purchase orders do not typically extend beyond the normal lead time of several weeks, at most. Purchase orders beyond this time frame are typically cancellable.
(1)Consists of interest on notes payable and long-term debt outstanding as of August 31, 2021. Certain of our notes payable and long-term debt pay interest at variable rates. We have applied estimated interest rates to determine the value of these expected future interest payments.
(2)Excludes $72 million of payments related to leases signed but not yet commenced. Additionally, certain leases signed but not yet commenced contain residual value guarantees and purchase options not deemed probable.
(3)As of August 31, 2021, the future minimum lease payments exclude $155 million of residual value guarantees that could potentially come due in future periods. The Company does not believe it is probable that any amounts will be owed under these guarantees. Therefore, no amounts related to the residual value guarantees are included in the lease payments used to measure the right-of-use assets and lease liabilities.
(4)Consists of purchase commitments entered into as of August 31, 2021 primarily for property, plant and equipment and software pursuant to legally enforceable and binding agreements.
(5)Includes the estimated company contributions to funded pension plans during fiscal year 2022 and the expected benefit payments for unfunded pension and postretirement plans from fiscal years 2022 through 2031. These future payments are not recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets but will be recorded as incurred.
(6)Includes (i) a $21 million capital commitment, (ii) a $9 million obligation related to a new human resource system and (iii) $30 million related to the one-time transition tax as a result of the Tax Act that will be paid in annual installments through fiscal year 2026.
(7)As of August 31, 2021, we have $1 million and $151 million recorded as a current and a long-term liability, respectively, for uncertain tax positions. We are not able to reasonably estimate the timing of payments, or the amount by which our liability for these uncertain tax positions will increase or decrease over time, and accordingly, this liability has been excluded from the above table.