ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
The Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic
The unprecedented coronavirus ("COVID-19") pandemic and the related travel restrictions and physical distancing measures implemented throughout the world have significantly reduced demand for air travel. Beginning in March 2020, large public events were canceled, governmental authorities began imposing restrictions on non-essential activities, businesses suspended travel, and popular leisure destinations temporarily closed to visitors. Certain countries have imposed bans on international travelers for specified periods or indefinitely.
Demand for air travel began to weaken at the end of February 2020. The pace of decline accelerated throughout March into April 2020 and demand remained depressed throughout the rest of 2020. This decline in demand has had a material adverse impact on our operating revenues and financial position. Our operating revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 declined by 63.5% year-over-year. Although demand began to improve as the year progressed, it remained significantly lower than in prior years. The exact timing and pace of the recovery is uncertain given the significant impact of the pandemic on the overall U.S. and global economy. Some states have experienced a resurgence of COVID-19 cases after reopening and as a result, certain other states have implemented travel restrictions or advisories for travelers from such states. We have also seen a similar resurgence of COVID-19 cases in other countries and we expect to continue to see fluctuations in the numbers of cases, which we believe will result in actions by governmental authorities restricting activities. We expect the demand environment to remain depressed until the majority of the U.S. population is vaccinated against COVID-19 and the medical community lifts the current physical distancing guidelines. Our response to the pandemic and the measures we take to secure additional liquidity may be modified as we have more clarity on the timing of demand recovery.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, since March 2020 we have implemented the following measures to focus on the safety of our customers, our crewmembers, and our business.
Customers and Crewmembers
The safety of our customers and crewmembers continues to be a priority. As the COVID-19 pandemic has developed, we have taken steps to promote physical distancing and implemented new procedures that reflect the recommendations of health experts, including the following:
•Introduced "Safety from the Ground Up", an initiative with a multi-layer approach that encompasses enhanced safety and cleaning measures on our flights, at our airports, and in our offices;
•Instituted temperature checks for our customer-facing and support-center crewmembers;
•Updated our sick leave policy to provide up to 14 days of paid sick leave for crewmembers who were diagnosed with COVID-19 or were required to quarantine;
•Partnered with Northwell Direct to provide a comprehensive set of COVID-19 services and programs to support our crewmembers;
•Implemented a framework for internal contact tracing, crewmember notification, and a return to work clearance process for all crewmembers, wherever they may be located;
•Required face coverings for all crewmembers while boarding, in flight, and when physical distancing cannot be maintained;
•Administered more frequent disinfecting of common surfaces and areas with high touchpoints in our facilities;
•Enhanced daily and overnight cleaning of our aircraft and all facilities, using electrostatic spraying of disinfectant in the cabins of aircraft parked overnight at selected focus cities;
•Required customers to wear face coverings during check-in, boarding, and inflight;
•Limited the number of seats sold on most flights through January 7, 2021;
•Suspended group boarding and implemented a back-to-front boarding process to minimize passing in the aisle;
•Eliminated layovers for crewmembers in New York City and worked with crew transportation companies to ensure physical distancing;
•Implemented jump seat buffers on our flights to further promote physical distancing measures;
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
•Provided enhanced flexibility to our customers by waiving change and cancel fees for customers with existing bookings made through March 31, 2021, while also extending the expiration date of travel credits issued between February 27, 2020 and June 30, 2020 for flight purchases to 24 months; and
•Announced our partnership with Vault Health to provide discounted at-home COVID-19 testing to customers with pending travel plans.
Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic drove a significant decline in demand beginning in the second half of March 2020. We have significantly reduced our capacity to a level that maintains essential services to align with demand. Our capacity for the year ended December 31, 2020 declined by 48.8% year-over-year. For the first quarter of 2021, we expect capacity to be down by at least 40%, as compared to the first quarter of 2019. As a result of the significant reduction in demand expectations and lower capacity, we have temporarily parked a portion of our fleet.
The reductions in demand and in our capacity have resulted in a significant reduction to our revenue. As a result, we have, and will continue to implement cost saving initiatives to reduce our overall level of cash spend. Some of the initiatives we have undertaken include:
•Adjustments in flying capacity to align with the expected demand.
•Temporary consolidations of our operations in certain cities that contain multiple airport locations.
•Renegotiated service rates with business partners and extended payment terms.
•Instituted a company-wide hiring freeze.
•Implemented salary reductions for a portion of our crewmembers, including our officers throughout 2020 and into 2021.
•Offered crewmembers voluntary time off and separation programs, with most departures for the separation program occurring during the third quarter of 2020.
We believe the unprecedented impact of COVID-19 on the demand for air travel and the corresponding decline in revenue will continue to have an adverse impact on our results of operations, operating cash flow, and financial condition. Given this situation, we have taken actions to increase liquidity, strengthen our financial position, and conserve cash. Some of the actions we have taken since the onset of the pandemic through December 31, 2020 include:
•Executed a $1.0 billion 364-day delayed draw term loan agreement in March 2020 and immediately drew down on the facility for the full amount available. This term loan facility was repaid during the third quarter.
•Borrowed on our existing $550 million revolving credit facility in April 2020.
•Executed a $150 million pre-purchase arrangement of TrueBlue® points with our co-brand credit card partner in April 2020.
•Suspended non-critical capital expenditure projects.
•Amended our purchase agreement with Airbus which changed the timing of our Airbus A321 and A220 deliveries in May and October 2020 resulting in approximately $2.0 billion of reduction in aircraft capital expenditures through 2022.
•Suspended share repurchases.
•Obtained $963 million of government funding under the Payroll Support Program of The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), which is discussed further below.
•Executed a $750 million term loan credit facility and immediately drew down on the facility for the full amount available in June 2020.
•Entered into $563 million of sale-leaseback transactions; which is discussed further below.
•Completed public placements of equipment notes in an aggregate principal amount of $923 million secured by 49 Airbus A321 aircraft in August 2020, which is discussed further in Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements. The net proceeds were primarily used to repay the outstanding borrowings under our 364-day delayed draw term loan facility that was due to be repaid in March 2021.
•Entered into a Loan and Guarantee agreement, as amended, with the United States Department of the Treasury ("Treasury") under the Loan Program of the CARES Act which gives us access to loans in an aggregate principal
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
amount of up to $1.9 billion until May 28, 2021, which is discussed further below. We drew down $115 million under the Loan Program on September 29, 2020.
•Completed the public offering of 42 million shares of our common stock for net proceeds of $583 million in December 2020.
As a result of these activities, we had cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of approximately $3.1 billion at December 31, 2020.
We continue to evaluate future financing opportunities in an effort to build additional levels of liquidity.
We lowered our cash burn from approximately $18 million per day at the end of March 2020 to an average of approximately $6.7 million per day during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Preparing for Recovery
As the COVID-19 pandemic progresses, we have taken a number of steps to position the Company for recovery when demand for air travel eventually returns.
In June 2020, we announced the addition of 30 new domestic routes to serve customers in markets where leisure and visiting friends and relatives travel were showing signs of strength. These new routes include daily nonstop Mint® service from Newark Liberty International Airport to both Los Angeles International Airport and San Francisco International Airport. While the timeline for recovery remains uncertain, these new routes offer us the opportunity to generate revenue, bring aircraft back into service that would otherwise sit idle, and add more flying opportunities of our crewmembers and customers. We believe adding more destinations in these key markets will make us more relevant to travelers and increase customer loyalty.
In July 2020, we announced plans for a multi-year west coast expansion from southern California which includes moving our primary base of operations from Long Beach Airport to Los Angeles International Airport. We plan to grow our operations at Los Angeles International Airport from the average current level of 20 flights per day to approximately 70 flights per day by 2025.
Also in July 2020, we announced our intention to enter into a strategic relationship with American Airlines Group Inc. ("American"). This arrangement, once fully implemented, will include an alliance agreement with reciprocal code sharing on domestic and international routes from or connecting through New York (John F. Kennedy International Airport ("JFK"), LaGuardia Airport, and Newark Liberty International Airport) and Boston, excluding JetBlue's future European transatlantic flying. We believe this partnership will create more capacity, seamless connectivity for travelers in the northeast, and offer more choices for customers across the networks of both airlines. In addition, we believe this relationship will also accelerate our recovery as the travel industry adapts to new trends as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Pursuant to federal law, American and JetBlue submitted this proposed alliance arrangement to the Department of Transportation ("DOT") for review. After American, JetBlue and the DOT agreed to a series of commitments, the DOT terminated its review of the proposed alliance. The commitments include growth commitments to ensure capacity expansion, slot divestitures at JFK and at Reagan National Airport near Washington, D.C. and antitrust compliance measures. Beyond this agreement with the DOT, American and JetBlue will also be limiting their coordination on certain city pair markets within the scope of the alliance. In addition to the DOT review, the Department of Justice and the New York Attorney General, the Massachusetts Attorney General, and the Attorneys General of certain other state and local jurisdictions are investigating this proposed alliance, which are ongoing. American and JetBlue intend to cooperate with those investigations, but are proceeding with plans to implement this alliance.
In September 2020, we announced plans to launch 24 new routes aimed at immediately capturing traffic on a variety of new, nonstop routes as demand increases. These routes will introduce new non-stop destinations from our focus cities and expand our Mint® service in Newark and Los Angeles.
In December 2020, we announced plans to introduce service in four new destinations as part of a broader plan to add 24 new nonstop routes in the first half of 2021. These new destinations include Miami and Key West in Florida; Guatemala City, Guatemala; and Los Cabos, Mexico. The new services are aimed at capturing traffic where we anticipate customer demand.
2020 Results
For the year end December 31, 2020:
•System capacity decreased by 48.8% year over year.
•We generated $3.0 billion in operating revenue, a decrease of $5.1 billion compared to 2019, primarily due to a 66.6% decrease in revenue passengers.
•Operating revenue per available seat mile (RASM) decreased by 28.7% to 9.04 cents.
•Operating expense decreased by 36.0% to $4.7 billion.
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
•Operating expense per available seat mile (CASM) increased by 25.1% to 14.29 cents.
•Our 2020 and 2019 results included the effects of special items. Excluding fuel and related taxes, special items, as well as operating expenses related to our non-airline businesses, our operating expense(1) decreased by 20.4% to $4.3 billion.
•Excluding fuel and related taxes, special items, as well as operating expenses related to our non-airline businesses, our cost per available seat mile (CASM ex-fuel)(1) increased by 55.4% to 13.12 cents.
•Our operating margin was (58.0)% in 2020 compared to 9.9% in 2019. Excluding special items, our adjusted operating margin(1) were (67.5)% and 10.1% for full year 2020 and 2019, respectively.
•Reported a net loss of $(1.4) billion in 2020 compared to net income of $569 million in 2019.
•Our reported (loss) per share for full year 2020 was $(4.88) compared to reported earnings per diluted share of $1.91 in 2019. Excluding special items, our adjusted (loss) per share(1) was $(5.65) for full year 2020. Our adjusted earnings per diluted share(1) for full year 2019 was $1.90.
•During 2020, we took delivery of seven Airbus A321neo aircraft and our first Airbus A220 aircraft. We expect our first Airbus A220 aircraft to enter into service in early 2021.
Outlook for 2021
The length and severity of the reduction in demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic is uncertain; accordingly, we expect the adverse impact to continue in the first quarter of 2021 and beyond. The exact timing and pace of the recovery is uncertain given the significant impact of the pandemic on the overall U.S. and global economy. We expect the demand environment to remain depressed until the majority of the U.S. population is vaccinated against COVID-19 and the medical community lifts the current physical distancing guidelines. Our response to the pandemic and the measures we take to secure additional liquidity may be modified as we have more clarity in the timing of demand recovery.
We will continue to monitor customer behaviors as they evolve throughout the pandemic. We plan to make strategic adjustments to our network, as necessary, to maximize revenue potential and accelerate recovery.
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
2020 Compared to 2019
Overview
We reported a net (loss) of $(1.4) billion, an operating (loss) of $(1.7) billion and operating margin of (58.0)% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This compares to net income of $569 million, operating income of $800 million, and operating margin of 9.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our (loss) per share was $(4.88) for 2020 compared to earnings of $1.91 per diluted share for 2019.
Our 2020 and 2019 reported results included the effects of special items. Adjusting for these one-time items(1), our adjusted net (loss) was $(1.6) billion, operating (loss) was $(2.0) billion, and our adjusted operating margin was (67.5)% for 2020. This compares to adjusted net income of $568 million, operating income of $814 million, and an operating margin of 10.1% for 2019. Excluding one-time items(1), our adjusted (loss) per share was $(5.65) for 2020 compared to adjusted earnings per diluted share of $1.90 for 2019.
Operating Revenues
Passenger revenue accounted for 92.4% of our total operating revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition to seat revenue, passenger revenue includes revenue from our ancillary product offerings such as Even More® Space. Revenue generated from international routes, including Puerto Rico, accounted for 36.1% of our total operating revenues in 2020. Passenger revenue, including certain ancillary fees directly related to passenger tickets, is recognized when the transportation is provided. Passenger revenue from unused tickets and passenger credits are recognized in proportion to flown revenue based on estimates of expected expiration or when the likelihood of the customer exercising his or her remaining rights becomes remote. We measure capacity in terms of available seat miles, which represents the number of seats available for passengers multiplied by the number of miles the seats are flown. Yield, or the average amount one passenger pays to fly one mile, is calculated by dividing Passenger revenue by Revenue passenger miles. We attempt to increase Passenger revenue primarily by increasing our yield per flight which produces higher revenue per available seat mile. Our objective is to optimize our fare mix to increase our overall average fare while continuing to provide our customers with competitive fares.
In 2020, the decrease in Passenger revenue was primarily driven by the unprecedented decline in demand for travel tied to COVID-19 and its effects. We saw a 66.6% decline in revenue passengers compared to 2019. Fee revenue decreased by $324 million as a result of the lack of flying, representing a 55.4% decline from prior year. Revenue from our Even More® Space seats, which was our largest ancillary product in 2019, decreased by $197 million, or 65.6% year-over-year.
Other revenue is primarily comprised of the marketing component of the sales of our TrueBlue® points. It also includes revenue from the sale of vacation packages, ground handling fees received from other airlines, and rental income.
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
Operating Expenses
Aircraft Fuel and Related Taxes
Aircraft fuel and related taxes represented 13.5% of our total operating expenses in 2020 compared to 25.3% in 2019. The average fuel price decreased 26.8% in 2020 to $1.53 per gallon. Our fuel consumption decreased by 53.4%, or 473 million gallons, due to capacity reductions in response to lower demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We recognized fuel hedge losses of $7 million and $5 million, in 2020 and 2019, respectively. These losses were recorded in Aircraft fuel and related taxes. We are unable to predict the potential loss from hedge accounting, which is determined on a derivative-by-derivative basis, due to the volatility in the forward markets for these commodities. We have no outstanding fuel hedges as of December 31, 2020.
Salaries, Wages and Benefits
Salaries, wages and benefits decreased $288 million, or 12.4% in 2020. This decrease was driven primarily by the actions taken as a result of decreased demand for air travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Beginning in March 2020, we instituted a company-wide hiring freeze, implemented salary reductions for a portion of our crewmembers, including officers, offered voluntary time off programs to our crewmembers, and reduced work hours for all other management workgroups. In June 2020, we announced voluntary separation programs to our crewmembers, with most departures occurring in the third quarter. We had approximately 20,000 crewmembers as of December 31, 2020 as compared to approximately 22,500 crewmembers at December 31, 2019. During 2020, the average number of full-time equivalent crewmembers decreased by 16.6% and the average tenure of our crewmembers was 8 years.
Landing Fees and Other Rents
Landing fees and other rents include landing fees, which are at premium rates in the heavily trafficked northeast corridor of the U.S. through which a large number of our flights operate. Other rents primarily consist of rent for airports in our BlueCities. Landing fees and other rents decreased $116 million, or 24.4%, in 2020 primarily due to capacity reductions in response to the significant decline in demand beginning in the second half of March 2020 amid the COVID-19 pandemic.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization primarily include depreciation for our owned and finance leased aircraft, engines, and inflight entertainment systems. Depreciation and amortization increased $10 million, or 1.8%, primarily driven by a 3.4% increase in the average number of aircraft operating in 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. We placed nine Airbus A321neo aircraft into service and bought out the lease of one Airbus A321 aircraft in 2020. In addition, we also completed the cabin restyle on 21 Airbus A320 aircraft.
Maintenance, Materials and Repairs
Maintenance, materials and repairs are generally expensed when incurred unless covered by a long-term flight hour services contract. The average age of our aircraft in 2020 was 11.3 years which is relatively young compared to our competitors. However, as our fleet ages our maintenance costs will increase significantly, both on an absolute basis and as a percentage of our unit costs, as older aircraft require additional, more expensive repairs over time. We had an average of 8.6 additional total operating aircraft in 2020 compared to 2019.
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
In 2020, Maintenance, materials and repairs decreased by $178 million, or 28.8% compared to 2019. The decrease is primarily driven by the COVID-19 related reduction in flying and timing of heavy maintenance visits and engine maintenance.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses consist of the following categories: outside services (including expenses related to fueling, ground handling, skycap, security, and janitorial services), insurance, personnel expenses, professional fees, onboard supplies, shop and office supplies, bad debts, communication costs, and taxes other than payroll and fuel taxes.
In 2020, other operating expenses decreased by $344 million, or 31.0%, compared to 2019, due to capacity reductions in response to the significant decline in demand beginning in the second half of March 2020 coupled with the benefits from cost saving initiatives implemented amid the COVID-19 pandemic.
Special Items
In 2020, special items included the following:
•Contra-expense of $685 million, which represents the amount of CARES Act payroll support grants utilized during the period.
•Contra-expense of $36 million related to the recognition of Employee Retention Credits provided by the CARES Act.
•Impairment charges of $273 million on our Embraer E190 fleet.
•Losses of $106 million related to sale-leaseback transactions.
•One-time costs of $59 million, consisting of severance and health benefits, in connection with our voluntary separation programs.
Special items in 2019 consisted of $6 million of one-time costs related to the Embraer E190 fleet transition and $8 million of one-time costs related to the implementation of our pilots' collective bargaining agreement.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate was 28.5% in 2020, compared to 25.9% in 2019. The CARES Act permits net operating loss (NOL) carryovers and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021. In addition, the CARES Act allows NOLs incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back to each of the five preceding taxable years to generate a refund of previously paid incomes taxes. As a result, the Company’s effective tax rate includes an income tax benefit related to the anticipated refunds from tax losses generated during 2020 that are permitted to be carried back to certain years when the U.S. federal income tax rate was 35%.
2019 Compared to 2018
Overview
We reported net income of $569 million, operating income of $800 million and operating margin of 9.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This compares to net income of $189 million, operating income of $266 million and operating margin of 3.5% for the year ended December 31, 2018. Diluted earnings per share were $1.91 for 2019 compared to $0.60 for 2018.
Our 2019 and 2018 reported results included the effects of special items. Adjusting for these one-time items(1), our adjusted net income was $568 million, operating income was $814 million, and our adjusted operating margin was 10.1% for 2019. This compares to adjusted net income of $488 million, operating income of $701 million, and operating margin of 9.2% for 2018. Excluding one-time items(1), diluted earnings per share were $1.90 and $1.55 for 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
Operating Revenues
Passenger revenue accounted for over 96.2% of our total operating revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition to seat revenue, passenger revenue includes revenue from our ancillary product offerings such as Even More® Space. Revenue generated from international routes, including Puerto Rico, accounted for 30.4% of our total operating revenues in 2019. Passenger revenue, including certain ancillary fees directly related to passenger tickets, is recognized when the transportation is provided. Passenger revenue from unused tickets and passenger credits are recognized in proportion to flown revenue based on estimates of expected expiration or when the likelihood of the customer exercising his or her remaining rights becomes remote. We measure capacity in terms of available seat miles, which represents the number of seats available for passengers multiplied by the number of miles the seats are flown. Yield, or the average amount one passenger pays to fly one mile, is calculated by dividing Passenger revenue by Revenue passenger miles. We attempt to increase Passenger revenue primarily by increasing our yield per flight which produces higher revenue per available seat mile. Our objective is to optimize our fare mix to increase our overall average fare while continuing to provide our customers with competitive fares.
In 2019, the increase in passenger revenue was mainly attributable to a 1.4% increase in revenue passengers and a 4.1% increase in average fare. Fee revenue increased by $76 million as a result of changes in our baggage and change fee policies. Our largest ancillary product was Even More® Space, generating approximately $301 million in revenue, an increase of over 10% compared to 2018.
Other revenue is primarily comprised of the marketing component of the sales of our TrueBlue® points. It also includes revenue from the sale of vacation packages, ground handling fees received from other airlines, and rental income.
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
Operating Expenses
Aircraft Fuel and Related Taxes
Aircraft fuel and related taxes represented 25% of our total operating expenses in 2019 compared to 26% in 2018. The average fuel price decreased 6.7% in 2019 to $2.09 per gallon. This was partially offset by a 4.3% increase in our fuel consumption of approximately 36 million gallons. Additional fuel consumption was mainly due to our increase in the average number of operating aircraft.
We recognized fuel hedge losses of $5 million and $2 million, in 2019 and 2018, respectively. These losses were recorded in Aircraft fuel and related taxes.
Salaries, Wages and Benefits
Salaries, wages and benefits represented approximately 32% of our total operating expenses in 2019 compared to 28% in 2018. The increase in salaries, wages and benefits was primarily driven by the incremental costs of the new pilots' collective bargaining agreement which became effective on August 1, 2018. Our crewmember headcount also increased year-over-year. During 2019, the average number of full-time equivalent crewmembers increased by 4% and the average tenure of our crewmembers was 7 years.
Landing Fees and Other Rents
Landing fees and other rents include landing fees, which are at premium rates in the heavily trafficked northeast corridor of the U.S. where approximately 76% of our operations resided in 2019. Other rents primarily consisted of rent for airports in our BlueCities. Landing fees and other rents increased $12 million, or 2.6%, in 2019 primarily due to our increased number of departures.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization primarily include depreciation for our owned and finance leased aircraft, engines, and inflight entertainment systems. Depreciation and amortization increased $56 million, or 12.1%, primarily driven by a 2.8% increase in the average number of aircraft operating in 2019 compared to the same period in 2018. We placed five Airbus A321 aircraft into service and bought out the lease of one Airbus A320 aircraft in 2019. In addition, we also completed the cabin restyle on 42 Airbus A320 aircraft.
Maintenance, Materials and Repairs
Maintenance, materials and repairs are generally expensed when incurred unless covered by a long-term flight hour services contract. The average age of our aircraft in 2019 was 10.6 years which was relatively young compared to our competitors. However, as our fleet ages our maintenance costs will increase significantly, both on an absolute basis and as a percentage of our unit costs, as older aircraft require additional, more expensive repairs over time. We had an average of 6.8 additional total operating aircraft in 2019 compared to 2018.
In 2019, Maintenance, materials and repairs decreased by $6 million, or 1.0% compared to 2018. The decrease is attributable to lower cost structures achieved through the Structural Cost Program and timing of heavy maintenance visits.
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses consist of the following categories: outside services (including expenses related to fueling, ground handling, skycap, security, and janitorial services), insurance, personnel expenses, professional fees, onboard supplies, shop and office supplies, bad debts, communication costs, and taxes other than payroll and fuel taxes.
In 2019, other operating expenses increased by $46 million, or 4.2%, compared to 2018, primarily due to an increase in airport services and passenger onboard supplies resulting from an increased number of departures and customers flown.
Special Items
Special items in 2019 consisted of $6 million of one-time costs related to the Embraer E190 fleet transition and $8 million of one-time costs related to the implementation of our pilots' collective bargaining agreement. Special items in 2018 consisted of $362 million of impairment and one-time costs related to the Embraer E190 fleet transition, and $73 million of one-time costs related to the ratification of our pilots' collective bargaining agreement.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate was 25.9% in 2019, compared to 13.9% in 2018. Our 2018 effective tax rate included a benefit of $28 million related to implementation of various provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The airline business is capital intensive. Our ability to successfully execute our growth plans is largely dependent on the continued availability of capital on attractive terms. In addition, our ability to successfully operate our business depends on maintaining sufficient liquidity. We believe we have adequate resources from a combination of cash and cash equivalents and investment securities on-hand. During 2020, we have executed a significant number of financing transactions to ensure that we have adequate levels of liquidity to navigate through the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2020, we had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $1.9 billion and short-term investments of $1.1 billion. We took numerous important steps throughout 2020 to strengthen our balance sheet. We believe our actions will position us to successfully navigate through the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. Our adjusted debt to capitalization ratio(1) at December 31, 2020 was 57%.
We believe a healthy liquidity position is a crucial element of our ability to weather any part of the economic cycle while continuing to execute on our plans for profitable growth and increased returns. Our goal is to continue to be diligent with our liquidity, maintain financial flexibility, and be prudent with capital spending.
Analysis of Cash Flows
We had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $1.9 billion as of December 31, 2020. This compares to $959 million and $474 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We held both short and long-term investments in 2020, 2019 and 2018. Our short-term investments totaled $1.1 billion as of December 31, 2020 compared to $369 million and $413 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities totaled approximately $(683) million in 2020, compared to cash provided by operating activities of $1.5 billion and $1.2 billion in 2019 and 2018, respectively. The $2.1 billion decrease in cash flows from operating activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was principally driven by the unprecedented decline in demand for travel caused by COVID-19. The $249 million increase in cash flows from operations in 2019 compared to 2018 was principally driven by an increase in operating margin.
Investing Activities
During 2020, capital expenditures related to our purchase of flight equipment included $426 million for the purchase of seven new Airbus A321neo aircraft, our first Airbus A220 aircraft, and the buyout of one Airbus A321 aircraft lease, $76 million for flight equipment deposits, $151 million for flight equipment work-in-progress, and $15 million for spare part purchases. Other property and equipment capital expenditures included ground equipment purchases and facilities improvements for $123 million. Investing activities also included the net purchase of $767 million in investment securities.
We executed $563 million of sale-leaseback transactions in 2020. Of these transactions, $209 million qualified as sales for accounting purposes and the related proceeds are classified within investing activities.
During 2019, capital expenditures related to our purchase of flight equipment included $478 million for the purchase of six new Airbus A321neo aircraft and the buyout of one Airbus A320 aircraft lease, $224 million for flight equipment deposits, $249 million for flight equipment work-in-progress, and $48 million for spare part purchases. Other property and equipment
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
capital expenditures included ground equipment purchases and facilities improvements for $158 million. Investing activities also included the net purchase of $40 million in investment securities.
During 2018, capital expenditures related to our purchase of flight equipment included $519 million for the purchase of 10 new Airbus A321 aircraft and the buyout of two aircraft leases, $206 million for flight equipment deposits, $163 million for flight equipment work-in-progress, and $130 million for spare part purchases. Other property and equipment capital expenditures included ground equipment purchases and facilities improvements for $97 million. Investing activities also included the net purchase of $28 million in investment securities.
We currently anticipate 2021 capital expenditures to be approximately $1.0 billion. We plan to restrict non-aircraft capital expenditures to those with the highest returns.
Financing Activities
Financing activities during 2020 primarily consisted of net proceeds of $2.2 billion from drawdowns of our credit facilities and the execution of a number of financing transactions which include the following:
•$981 million from our 364-day delayed draw term loan facility with Morgan Stanley Senior Funding Inc. as administrative agent;
•$717 million from our term loan facility with Barclays Bank PLC as administrative agent, and
•$550 million from our revolving credit facility with Citibank N.A. as administrative agent.
Also included in financing activities are:
•Net proceeds of $913 million from the public placements of equipment notes;
•Net proceeds of $583 million from the public offering of 42 million shares of our common stock;
•$354 million of sale-leaseback transactions which did not qualify as sales for accounting purposes;
•Net proceeds of $259 million and $19 million from the issuance of unsecured term loan and warrants, respectively, in connection with the Payroll Support Program under the CARES Act;
•Net proceeds of $105 million and $9 million from the issuance of secured term loan and warrants, respectively, in connection with the Loan Program under the CARES Act; and
•$36 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to our crewmember stock purchase plan.
These proceeds are partially offset by the payoff of our 364-day delayed draw term loan facility for $1.0 billion, scheduled maturities of $372 million relating to debt and finance lease obligations, $12 million of which were associated with scheduled rent payments on sale-leaseback aircraft that did not qualify as sales for accounting purposes, and the acquisitions of treasury shares of $167 million, of which $160 million related to our accelerated share repurchases, or ASRs. Our share repurchase program has been suspended since March 31, 2020.
Financing activities during 2019 consisted of the net issuance of $981 million of debt, $764 million of which relates to the offering of our Enhanced Equipment Trust Certificates, Series 2019-1 ("2019-1 EETC") in November, partially offset by the scheduled repayment of $323 million in debt and finance lease obligations. In addition, we acquired $542 million in treasury shares of which $535 million related to ASRs during 2019. During this period, we received $51 million in proceeds from the issuance of stock related to employee share-based compensation.
Financing activities during 2018 consisted of the net issuance of $687 million of debt partially offset by the scheduled repayment of $222 million relating to debt and finance lease obligations. In addition, we acquired $382 million in treasury shares of which $375 million related to ASRs during 2018. During this period, we received $48 million in proceeds from the issuance of stock related to employee share-based compensation.
In March 2019, we filed an automatic shelf registration statement with the SEC. Under this shelf registration statement, we may offer and sell from time to time common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units, subscription rights, and pass-through certificates. We may utilize this shelf registration statement, or a replacement filed with the SEC, in the future to raise capital to fund the continued development of our products and services, the commercialization of our products and services, to repay indebtedness, or for other general corporate purposes. The warrants issued in connection with the Payroll Support Program and Loan Program of the CARES Act were made, and any issuances of our underlying common stock are expected to be made, in reliance on the exemption from the registration afforded by Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), for transactions not involving a public offering.
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
None of our lenders or lessors are affiliated with us.
Capital Resources
Dependent on market conditions, we anticipate using a mix of cash and debt financing for our expected aircraft deliveries in 2021. To the extent we cannot secure financing on terms we deem attractive, we may be required to pay in cash, further modify our aircraft acquisition plans, or incur higher than anticipated financing costs. Although we believe debt and/or lease financing should be available to us if needed, we cannot give assurances we will be able to secure financing on terms attractive to us, if at all.
Working Capital
We had working capital of $671 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to a deficit of $877 million as of December 31, 2019. Our working capital improved by $1.5 billion due to several factors, including cash proceeds from long-term debt and equity financing activities, coupled with lower level of operational payables resulting from various cost saving initiatives amid the COVID-19 pandemic.
Working capital deficits can be customary in the airline industry since air traffic liability is classified as a current liability.
In 2012, we entered into a revolving line of credit with Morgan Stanley for up to approximately $200 million. This line of credit is secured by a portion of our investment securities held by Morgan Stanley and the borrowing amount may vary accordingly. This line of credit bears interest at a floating rate based upon the London Interbank Offered Rate, or LIBOR, plus a margin. We did not borrow under this facility in 2019 or 2018 and the line was undrawn as of December 31, 2020.
In August 2019, we amended and restated our revolving Credit and Guaranty Agreement with Citibank N.A. as the administrative agent. The amendment increased our borrowing capacity by $125 million to $550 million and extended the term of the facility through August 2023. Borrowings under the Credit and Guaranty Agreement bear interest at a variable rate equal to LIBOR, plus a margin. The Amended and Restated Facility is secured by spare parts, aircraft, and certain other assets. The Credit and Guaranty Agreement includes customary covenants that require us to maintain certain minimum balances in unrestricted cash, cash equivalents, and unused commitments available under revolving credit facilities. In addition, the covenants restrict our ability to, among other things, dispose of certain collateral, or merge, consolidate, or sell assets. In response to the unprecedented decline in demand caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, we borrowed the full amount under the Credit and Guarantee Agreement in April 2020, all of which remained outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
CARES Act Loan Program
Under the CARES Act Loan Program as signed in April 2020 and subsequently amended in November 2020, JetBlue has the ability to borrow up to approximately $1.9 billion from the Treasury. If we accept the full amount of the loan, we will issue warrants to purchase approximately 20.5 million shares of our common stock to the Treasury. We borrowed $115 million of the $1.9 billion available to us under the Loan Program on September 29, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately $1.8 billion of the borrowing capacity under the Loan Program remained available to us. On January 15, 2021, we entered into a letter agreement with Treasury which provided an extension of the Loan Program allowing us the option to access the remaining borrowing capacity through May 28, 2021.
Payroll Support Program 2
Also on January 15, 2021, we entered into a Payroll Support Program Extension Agreement (the “PSP Extension Agreement”) with Treasury governing our participation in the federal Payroll Support Program for passenger air carriers under the United States Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (the “Payroll Support Program 2”).
Pursuant to the Payroll Support Program 2, on January 15, 2021, Treasury provided to JetBlue a payment of approximately $252 million (the “2021 Payroll Support Payment”) under the PSP Extension Agreement. The 2021 Payroll Support Payment includes a grant of approximately $206 million and an unsecured loan of $46 million. In consideration for the 2021 Payroll Support Payment, we issued to Treasury warrants to purchase 316,583 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $14.43 per share.
We expect to meet our obligations as they become due through available cash, investment securities, and internally generated funds, supplemented, as necessary, by financing activities and federal government assistance programs, which may be available to us. We expect to generate positive working capital through our operations. However, we cannot predict what the effect on our business might be from future developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the economy and consumer behavior, the extremely competitive environment in which we operate, or from events beyond our control, such as volatile fuel prices, economic conditions, weather-related disruptions, airport infrastructure challenges, the spread of
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
infectious diseases, the impact of other airline bankruptcies, restructurings or consolidations, U.S. military actions, or acts of terrorism. We believe there is sufficient liquidity available to us to meet our cash requirements for at least the next 12 months.
Debt and Finance Leases
As part of our efforts to effectively manage our balance sheet, we expect to continue to actively manage our debt balances. Our approach to debt management includes managing the mix of fixed and floating rate debt, annual maturities of debt, and the weighted average cost of debt. Additionally, our unencumbered assets allow some flexibility in managing our cost of debt and capital requirements.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
Our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 include the following (in billions):
(1)Includes actual interest and estimated interest for floating-rate debt based on December 31, 2020 rates.
(2)Amounts include non-cancelable commitments for the purchase of goods and services.
The interest rates are fixed for $3.0 billion of our debt and finance lease obligations, with the remaining $1.6 billion having floating interest rates. The floating interest rates adjust either quarterly or semi-annually based on LIBOR. The weighted average maturity of all of our debt was eight years as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants of our debt and lease agreements and approximately 81% of our owned property and equipment were pledged as security under various loan agreements.
As of December 31, 2020, we had operating lease obligations for 62 aircraft with lease terms that expire between 2022 and 2026. Our aircraft lease agreements contain termination provisions which include standard maintenance and return conditions. Our policy is to record these lease return conditions when they are probable and the costs can be estimated. We also lease airport terminal space and other airport facilities in each of our markets, as well as office space and other equipment. We have approximately $27 million of restricted assets pledged under standby letters of credit related to certain of our leases which will expire at the end of the related leases. As of December 31, 2020, the average age of our operating fleet was 11.3 years.
Our firm aircraft order book as of December 31, 2020 was as follows:
Committed expenditures for our firm aircraft and spare engines include estimated amounts for contractual price escalations and pre-delivery deposits. We expect to meet our pre-delivery deposit requirements for our aircraft by paying cash or by using short-term borrowing facilities for deposits generally required six to 24 months prior to delivery. Any pre-delivery deposits paid by the issuance of notes are fully repaid at the time of delivery of the related aircraft.
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
Our Terminal at JFK, T5, is governed by a lease agreement we entered into with the PANYNJ in 2005. We are responsible for making various payments under the lease. This includes ground rents for the terminal site which began at the time of the lease execution in 2005 and facility rents commenced in October 2008 upon our occupancy of T5. The facility rents are based on the number of passengers enplaned out of the terminal, subject to annual minimums. The PANYNJ reimbursed us for construction costs of this project in accordance with the terms of the lease, except for approximately $76 million in leasehold improvements provided by us. In 2013, we amended this lease to include additional ground space for our international arrivals facility, T5i, which we opened in November 2014. Minimum ground and facility rents at JFK totaling $536 million are included in the commitments table above as operating lease obligations.
We enter into individual employment agreements with each of our non-unionized FAA-licensed crewmembers, inspectors, and air traffic controllers. Each employment agreement is for a term of five years and automatically renews for an additional five-year term unless the crewmember is terminated for cause or the crewmember elects not to renew it. Pursuant to these agreements, these crewmembers can only be terminated for cause. In the event of a downturn in our business requiring a reduction in flying and related work hours, we are obligated to pay these crewmembers a guaranteed level of income and to continue their benefits. As we are not currently obligated to pay this guaranteed income and benefits, no amounts related to these guarantees are included in the contractual obligations table above.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have determined that we hold a variable interest in, but are not the primary beneficiary of, certain pass-through trusts. The beneficiaries of these pass-through trusts are the purchasers of equipment notes issued by us to finance the acquisition of aircraft. Each trust maintains a liquidity facility whereby a third party agrees to make payments sufficient to pay up to 18 months of interest on the applicable certificates if a payment default occurs.
We have also made certain guarantees and indemnities to other unrelated parties that are not reflected on our consolidated balance sheets, which we believe will not have a significant impact on our results of operations, financial condition or cash flows. We have no other off-balance sheet arrangements. See Notes 4, 5, and 12 to our consolidated financial statements for a more detailed discussion of our variable interests and other contingencies, including guarantees and indemnities.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP, requires management to adopt accounting policies as well as make estimates and judgments to develop amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. We maintain a thorough process to review the application of our accounting policies and to evaluate the appropriateness of the estimates that are required to prepare our financial statements. We believe our estimates and judgments are reasonable; however, actual results and the timing of recognition of such amounts could differ from those estimates. In addition, estimates routinely require adjustment based on changing circumstances and the receipt of new or better information.
Critical accounting policies and estimates are defined as those that are reflective of significant judgments and uncertainties that could potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. The policies and estimates discussed below have been reviewed with our independent registered public accounting firm and with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. For a discussion of these and other significant accounting policies, see Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements.
Passenger Revenue
Ticket sales and the fees collected for related ancillary services are initially deferred in air traffic liability. Air traffic liability represents tickets sold but not yet flown, credits which can be used for future travel, and a portion of the liability related to our TrueBlue® loyalty program. We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation identified in a passenger ticket on a relative standalone basis. Passenger revenue, including certain ancillary fees directly related to passenger tickets, is recognized when the transportation is provided. Taxes that we are required to collect from our customers, including foreign and U.S. federal transportation taxes, security taxes, and airport facility charges, are excluded from passenger revenue. Those taxes and fees are recorded as a liability upon collection and are relieved from the liability upon remittance to the applicable governmental agency.
The majority of the tickets we sell are non-refundable. Non-refundable fares may be canceled prior to the scheduled departure date for a credit for future travel. Refundable fares may be canceled at any time prior to the scheduled departure date. Failure to cancel a refundable fare prior to departure will result in the cancellation of the original ticket and an issuance of a credit for future travel. Passenger credits can generally be used for future travel up to a year from the date of issuance. In response to the impact of COVID-19 on air travel, we extended the expiration dates for travel credits issued from February 27,
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
2020 through June 30, 2020 to a 24-month period. The air traffic liability classified as non-current as of December 31, 2020 represents our current estimate of tickets and credits to be used or refunded beyond one year, while the balance classified as current represents our current estimate of tickets and credits to be used or refunded within one year. We will continue to monitor our customers' travel behavior and may adjust our estimates in the future.
Passenger breakage revenue from unused tickets and passenger credits will be recognized in proportion to flown revenue based on estimates of expected expiration when the likelihood of the customer exercising his or her remaining rights becomes remote. Breakage revenue consists of non-refundable tickets that remain unused past the departure date, have continued validity, and are expected to ultimately expire unused, as well as passenger credits that are not expected to be redeemed prior to expiration. JetBlue uses estimates based on historical experience of expired tickets and credits and considers other factors that could impact future expiration patterns of tickets and credits. Tickets which do not have continued validity past the departure date are recognized as revenue after the scheduled departure date has lapsed.
Passenger ticket costs primarily include credit card fees, commissions paid, and global distribution systems booking fees. Costs are allocated entirely to the purchased travel services and are capitalized until recognized when travel services are provided to the customer.
Loyalty Program
Customers may earn points under our customer loyalty program, TrueBlue®, based on the fare paid and fare product purchased for a flight. Customers can also earn points through business partners such as credit card companies, hotels, car rental companies, and our participating airline partners.
Points Earned From a Ticket Purchase. When a TrueBlue® member travels, we recognize a portion of the fare as revenue and defer in air traffic liabilities the portion that represents the value of the points net of spoilage, or breakage. We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative standalone basis. We determine the standalone selling price of TrueBlue® points issued using the redemption value approach. To maximize the use of observable inputs, we utilize the actual ticket value of the tickets purchased with TrueBlue® points. The liability is relieved and passenger revenue is recognized when the points are redeemed and the free travel is provided.
Points Sold to TrueBlue® Partners. Our most significant contract to sell TrueBlue® points is with our co-branded credit card partner. Co-branded credit card partnerships have the following identified performance obligations: air transportation; use of the JetBlue brand name, and access to our frequent flyer customer lists; advertising; and other airline benefits. In determining the estimated selling price, JetBlue considers multiple inputs, methods, and assumptions, including: discounted cash flows; estimated redemption value, net of fulfillment discount; points expected to be awarded and redeemed; estimated annual spending by cardholders; estimated annual royalty for use of JetBlue's frequent flyer customer lists; and estimated utilization of other airline benefits. Payments are typically due monthly based on the volume of points sold during the period, and the terms of our marketing contracts are generally from one to seven years. The overall consideration received is allocated to each performance obligation based on their standalone relative selling prices. The air transportation element is deferred and recognized as passenger revenue when the points are utilized. The other elements are recognized as other revenue when the performance obligation related to those services are satisfied, which is generally the same period as when consideration is received from the participating company.
Amounts allocated to the air transportation element which are initially deferred include a portion that are expected to be redeemed during the following twelve months (classified as a component of Air traffic liability), and a portion that are not expected to be redeemed during the following twelve months (classified as Air traffic liability - non-current). We periodically update this analysis and adjust the split between current and non-current liabilities as appropriate.
Points earned by TrueBlue® members never expire. TrueBlue® members can pool points between small groups of people, branded as Points Pooling™. Breakage is estimated using historical redemption patterns to determine a breakage rate. Breakage rates used to estimate breakage revenue are evaluated annually. Changes to breakage estimates impact revenue recognition prospectively.
Accounting for Long-Lived Assets
In accounting for long-lived assets, we make estimates about the expected useful lives, projected residual values, and the potential for impairment. In estimating useful lives and residual values of our aircraft, we have relied upon actual industry experience with the same or similar aircraft types and our anticipated utilization of the aircraft. Changing market prices of new and used aircraft, government regulations, and changes in our maintenance program or operations could result in changes to these estimates.
Our long-lived assets are evaluated for impairment when events and circumstances indicate the assets may be impaired. Indicators include operating or cash flow losses, significant decreases in market value, or changes in technology.
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
To determine if impairment exists for our aircraft used in operations, we group our aircraft by fleet-type (the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows) and then estimate their future cash flows based on projections of capacity, aircraft age, maintenance requirements, and other relevant conditions. An impairment occurs when the sum of the estimated undiscounted future cash flows are less than the aggregate carrying value of the fleet. The impairment loss recognized is the amount by which the fleet's carrying value exceeds its estimated fair value. We estimate aircraft fair value using third party valuations which consider the effects of the current market environment, age of the assets, and marketability.
Given the substantial reduction in our active aircraft and diminished projections of future cash flows in the near term as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we evaluated our fleet during 2020 and recorded impairment charges of flight equipment and other property and equipment related to our Embraer E190 fleet. As we obtain greater clarity about the duration and extent of reduced demand and potentially execute further capacity adjustments, we will continue to evaluate our fleet compared to network requirements and may decide to adjust our fleet strategy accordingly. Future decisions regarding the temporarily parked aircraft and the timing of any return to service will be dependent on the evolution of the demand environment.
In 2018, we recorded an impairment charge related to our decision to exit the Embraer E190 fleet.
Refer to Note 18 to our consolidated financial statements for further details of our impairment charges.
Lease Accounting
We operate airport facilities, office buildings, and aircraft under operating leases with minimum lease payments. We recognize the costs associated with these agreements as rent expense on a straight-line basis over the expected lease term. Within the provisions of certain leases, there are minimum escalations in payments over the base lease term. There are also periodic adjustments of lease rates, landing fees, and other charges applicable under such agreements, as well as renewal periods. The effects of the escalations and other adjustments have been reflected in rent expense on a straight-line basis over the lease term. This includes renewal periods when it is deemed to be reasonably assured at the inception of the lease. The amortization period for leasehold improvements is the term used in calculating straight-line rent expense or their estimated economic life, whichever is shorter.
Derivative Instruments used for Aircraft Fuel
We utilize financial derivative instruments to manage the risk of changing aircraft fuel prices. We do not purchase or hold any derivative instrument for trading purposes. Fair values are determined using commodity prices provided to us by independent third parties. When possible, we designate these instruments as cash flow hedges for accounting purposes, as defined by the Derivatives and Hedging topic of the Codification which permits the deferral of the effective portions of gains or losses until contract settlement.
The Derivatives and Hedging topic is a complex accounting standard. It requires us to develop and maintain a significant amount of documentation related to:
(1) our fuel hedging program and fuel management approach,
(2) statistical analysis supporting a highly correlated relationship between the underlying commodity in the derivative financial instrument and the risk being hedged, i.e. aircraft fuel, on both a historical and prospective basis, and
(3) cash flow designation for each hedging transaction executed, to be developed concurrently with the hedging transaction.
This documentation requires us to estimate forward aircraft fuel prices since there is no reliable forward market for aircraft fuel. These prices are developed through the observation of similar commodity futures prices, such as crude oil and/or heating oil, and adjusted based on variations to those like commodities. Historically, our hedges have settled within 24 months; therefore, the deferred gains and losses have been recognized into earnings over a relatively short period of time.
(1) Refer to our ''Regulation G Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" at the end of this section for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
REGULATION G RECONCILIATION OF NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
We sometimes use non-GAAP financial measures in this report. Non-GAAP financial measures are financial measures that are derived from the consolidated financial statements, but that are not presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. We believe these non-GAAP financial measures provide a meaningful comparison of our results to others in the airline industry and our prior year results. Investors should consider these non-GAAP financial measures in addition to, and not as a substitute for, our financial performance measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Further, our non-GAAP information may be different from the non-GAAP information provided by other companies. The information below provides an explanation of each non-GAAP financial measure and shows a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures used in this filing to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
Operating Expense per Available Seat Mile, excluding fuel and related taxes, other non-airline operating expenses, and special items ("CASM Ex-Fuel")
Operating expenses per available seat mile, or CASM, is a common metric used in the airline industry. We exclude aircraft fuel and related taxes, operating expenses related to other non-airline businesses, such as our subsidiaries, JetBlue Technology Ventures and JetBlue Travel Products, and special items from operating expenses to determine CASM ex-fuel, which is a non-GAAP financial measure.
In 2020, special items include contra-expenses recognized on the utilization of payroll support grants received under the CARES Act, contra-expenses recognized on the Employee Retention Credits provided by the CARES Act, impairment charges of our Embraer E190 fleet, losses generated from certain sale-leaseback transactions, and one-time costs associated with our voluntary crewmember separation programs.
Special items for 2019 and 2018 include an impairment charge and one-time costs related to the Embraer E190 fleet transition as well as one-time costs related to the ratification and implementation of our pilots' collective bargaining agreement.
We believe that CASM ex-fuel is useful for investors because it provides investors the ability to measure financial performance excluding items beyond our control, such as fuel costs, which are subject to many economic and political factors, or not related to the generation of an available seat mile, such as operating expense related to other non-airline businesses. We believe this non-GAAP measure is more indicative of our ability to manage airline costs and is more comparable to measures reported by other major airlines.
(1) Amounts prior to 2017 do not reflect the impact of the adoption of ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) of the Codification, adopted as of January 1, 2019.
(2) Other non-airline expenses for 2016 includes operating expenses related to JetBlue Technology Ventures only.
Reconciliation of Operating Expense, Income before Taxes, Net Income and Earnings per Share, excluding special items, gain on equity method investments, and impact of tax reform
Our GAAP results in the applicable periods were impacted by charges that are deemed special items and a one-time gain on an equity method investment.
In 2020, special items include contra-expenses recognized on the utilization of payroll support grants received under the CARES Act, impairment charges of our Embraer E190 fleet, losses generated from certain sale-leaseback transactions, and one-time costs associated with our voluntary crewmember separation programs.
Special items for 2019 and 2018 include an impairment charge and one-time costs related to the Embraer E190 fleet transition as well as one-time costs related to the ratification and implementation of our pilots' collective bargaining agreement. In 2019, we also recognized a one-time gain on an equity method investment. Our GAAP results in 2018 also included the impact from the 2017 reform under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
We believe the impact of these items distort our overall trends and that our metrics are more comparable with the presentation of our results excluding the impact of these items. The table below provides a reconciliation of our GAAP reported amounts to the non-GAAP amounts excluding the impacts of these items.
Daily Cash Burn
We present cash burn because we believe this metric is helpful to investors to evaluate our ability to maintain liquidity and evaluate cash flows from our core operating performance. Our cash burn is calculated as net cash used in operating activities, net cash used in investing activities, and net cash provided by financing activities adjusted for: cash payments associated with our voluntary separation programs, net purchases of investment securities, and net proceeds from our common stock offering completed in December 2020.
Adjusted Debt to Capitalization Ratio
Adjusted debt to capitalization ratio is a non-GAAP financial measure which we believe is relevant in assessing the Company's overall debt profile. Adjusted debt includes aircraft operating lease liabilities, in addition to total debt and finance lease obligations. Adjusted capitalization represents total equity plus adjusted debt. Investors should consider this non-GAAP financial measure in addition to, and not as a substitute for, our financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Free Cash Flow
The table below reconciles cash provided by operations determined in accordance with GAAP to Free Cash Flow, a non-GAAP financial measure. We believe that Free Cash Flow is a relevant metric in measuring our financial strength and is useful in assessing our ability to fund future capital commitments and other obligations. Investors should consider this non-GAAP financial measure in addition to, and not as a substitute for, our financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
(1) Amounts prior to 2017 do not reflect the impact of the adoption of ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) of the Codification, adopted as of January 1, 2019.