ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Overview
We are a leading global technology solutions provider to high-value segments of the food and beverage industry with focus on proteins, liquid foods and automated guided vehicle systems. We design, produce, and service sophisticated products and systems for multi-national and regional customers through our FoodTech segment. We also sell critical equipment and services to domestic and international air transportation customers through our AeroTech segment.
Our Elevate plan was designed to capitalize on the leadership position of our businesses and favorable macroeconomic trends. The Elevate plan is based on a four-pronged approach to deliver continued growth and margin expansion.
•Accelerate New Product & Service Development. We are accelerating the development of innovative products and services to provide customers with solutions that enhance yield and productivity and reduce lifetime cost of ownership.
•Grow Recurring Revenue. We are capitalizing on our extensive installed base to expand recurring revenue from aftermarket parts and services, equipment leases, consumables and our Airport Services offerings.
•Execute Impact Initiatives. We are enhancing organic growth through initiatives that enable us to sell the entire FoodTech portfolio globally, including enhancing our international sales and support infrastructure, localizing targeted products for emerging markets, and strategic cross selling of products. In AeroTech, we plan to continue to develop advanced military product offering and customer support capability to service global military customers. Additionally, our impact initiatives are designed to support the reduction in operating costs including strategic sourcing, relentless continuous improvement (lean) efforts, and the optimization of organizational structure.
•Maintain a Disciplined Acquisition Program. We are also continuing our strategic acquisition program focused on companies that add complementary products, which enable us to offer more comprehensive solutions to customers, and meet our strict economic criteria for returns and synergies.
We developed the JBT Operating System in 2018, introducing a new level of process rigor across the Company beginning in 2019. The system is designed to standardize and streamline reporting and problem resolution processes for increased visibility, efficiency, effectiveness and productivity in all business units.
Our approach to Environmental, Social and Corporate Governance (ESG) builds on our culture and long tradition of concern for our employees’ health, safety, and well-being; partnering with our customers to find ways to make better use of the earth’s precious resources; and giving back to the communities where we live and work. Our FoodTech equipment and technologies continue to deliver quality performance while striving to minimize food waste, extend food product life, and maximize efficiency in order to create shared value for our food and beverage customers. Our AeroTech equipment business offers a variety of power options, including electrically powered ground support equipment, that help customers meet their environmental objectives.We recognize the responsibility we have to make a positive impact on our shareholders, the environment and our communities in a manner that is consistent with our fiduciary duties. We have engaged in structured education for enhancing inclusive leadership skills in our organization designed to ensure more diversity in our leadership and hiring practices. We have completed a comprehensive evaluation to determine which ESG topics are most pressing for our business resulting in a materiality matrix informing our development of an ESG strategy, balanced to ensure we invest responsibly in initiatives that can address the risks and opportunities presented by ESG.
We evaluate our operating results considering key performance indicators including segment operating profit, segment operating profit margin, segment EBITDA (adjusted when appropriate) and segment EBITDA margins.
During the third quarter of 2020, we initiated a management succession plan after Tom Giacomini, the Company's former President and Chief Executive Officer, resigned his employment with the Company. The Company named Brian Deck as interim President and Chief Executive Officer and Matt Meister as interim Chief Financial Officer effective September 22, 2020, and each as official successors to those roles effective December 11, 2020 and December 14, 2020, respectively. The Company also named Alan Feldman as interim Chairman of its Board of Directors effective June 20, 2020 and as official successor to this role effective on September 22, 2020.
Business Conditions and Outlook
During 2020, despite significant decline in our revenues, our operating margins declined only marginally, due to expense control, the strength of our aftermarket business and the contribution from recent acquisitions. Additionally, we have continued to enhance our internal operating efficiency with the ongoing benefits of our restructuring program and management through the JBT Operating System.
In terms of top-line growth, the environment in 2020 was characterized by business uncertainty which impacted our ability to convert commercial activity into order commitments at FoodTech. Passenger air travel came to a halt in the early months of 2020 and has not experienced a meaningful recovery to date. This has significantly impacted AeroTech revenue which we expect may not fully recover until 2024. Moreover, recurring revenue (aftermarket parts and services and lease revenues), which represented more than 44% of total JBT revenue, has provided stability and reliable profitability demonstrating a resilient model built to sustain such unusual market forces.
While the demand environment at FoodTech has improved since the early days of the pandemic, the economic environment has changed indefinitely and JBT is evolving to continue supporting our food and air transportation customers during a difficult period . We have also captured sustainable structural improvements from our restructuring program. In addition, the real-time production information provided by the JBT Operating System enables us to proactively align costs with current market conditions.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted and will continue to result in significant economic disruption and has adversely affected our business. The following uncertainties exist and may continue to have a negative impact on our overall financial results:
•our ability to obtain raw material from domestic and international suppliers required to manufacture our products and execute our services;
•our ability to secure inbound and outbound logistics to and from our facilities, with additional delays linked to international border crossings and the associated approvals and documentation;
•our ability to access customer locations in order to execute installations, new product deliveries, maintenance and repair services;
•our ability to efficiently operate our facilities and meet customer obligations due to modified employee work patterns resulting from social distancing guidelines, absence due to illness and cautionary quarantines and/or government ordered closures;
•limitations on the ability of our customers to conduct their business, and resulting impacts to our customers' purchasing patterns, from food and travel disruption, social distancing guidelines, absence due to illness and cautionary quarantines or government ordered closures; and
•limitations on the ability of our customers to meet their financial obligations to JBT.
Specifically, when compared to the prior year, and as a result of the global shelter in place and social distancing requirements that have continued throughout 2020, the food industry has experienced a notable rise in retail demand. This increase in demand is offset by a decline in demand for food service due to the reduced restaurant, travel and school activity. While our FoodTech customers are present in both the retail and food services channels, this shift in demand creates volatility and uncertainty in our customer's purchasing patterns. Our inbound FoodTech orders in the fourth quarter and year-to-date were 1% - 2% lower in both periods than those of 2019, but progressively increased as the year unfolded as we continued to see improved access to customer plants and positive recovery for food processors, specifically for those in the quick service restaurant drive through businesses and those servicing the sustained "eat-at-home" trend. Our customers appear to be investing more to support these trends, addressing immediate capacity needs and creating strong interest in FoodTech's broad product offerings. Although the pandemic has negatively impacted our full year inbound numbers and results of operations in FoodTech compared to the prior year, we also believe it may present an opportunity to accelerate initiatives that were previously underway to bring automation solutions to the protein market. In addition, the liquid foods end products such as juice, canned foods and ready meals remain in high retail demand during the pandemic.
For AeroTech, a large portion of the business depends on the passenger airline industry. Passenger air travel had virtually halted world-wide as of the end of the first quarter, slowly began to resume as areas re-opened throughout the year and saw a small increase
in the fourth quarter during the holiday period. However global passenger traffic continues to be well below pre-pandemic levels. This has directly impacted our mobile equipment and airport services business throughout 2020, and we expect this impact of the pandemic to continue well into 2023. Airport infrastructure spending, which is subject to long lead time contracts, remained relatively stable through the fourth quarter, and, although our projections have more uncertainty than in pre-pandemic periods, we expect demand and inbound orders for these products to continue into 2021. In addition, the cost controls including restructuring, and diversity of revenue streams within the business, have allowed for AeroTech to remain solidly profitable despite these impacts and uncertainties.
Within the AeroTech segment we are also experiencing reduced aftermarket demand due to lower equipment utilization by customers. We have begun to see improvement in certain areas of the world as countries and regions reopen, but these improvements may not continue if a broader resurgence in COVID-19 cases causes restrictions to be reinstated. Recurring revenue for the FoodTech segment for the quarter and year ended December 31, 2020 increased compared to the same period last year as most food processing companies sustained critical operations, despite the disruption of the pandemic, requiring maintenance and parts.
All of the uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic are impacting companies worldwide, which is driving our customers across both segments to continue to reduce or suspend their capital expenditures. These actions have had an adverse impact on our inbound orders throughout 2020.
Furthermore, an outbreak of COVID-19 in a single plant location may lead to a temporary shut-down, which would negatively impact our results. However, there is no significant concentration across our manufacturing facilities such that a short-term single plant closure would be expected to have a material impact to our consolidated results.
Although we cannot reasonably estimate the duration and severity of these events or the impact this will have on the global economy or our business, we believe we will emerge from these events well-positioned for long-term growth. For a discussion of the risks and uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, see “The COVID-19 pandemic could have a material adverse impact on our business operations, results of operations, cash flows and financial position” in Item 1A. Risk Factors of Form 10-K.
Our Strategy to Mitigate Impacts of COVID-19
In light of these uncertainties, our focus during 2020 was to continue to preserve liquidity while maintaining our ability to execute as a critical supplier to the essential food and air transportation industries, and invest in the key growth strategies evident for a recovery from this pandemic. We have implemented incremental controls to further support our disciplined approach to working capital management. We are also availing ourselves of benefits under the CARES Act including both deferred tax payments and tax credits related to the COVID-19 pandemic. We have reduced spending more broadly across the company including reductions in bonus and other employee compensation, reduced hiring, implemented furloughs and layoffs, reduced work hours, significantly reduced discretionary spending and travel, and limited capital spending to critical needs. Human capital related cost reductions such as reductions in bonus and other employee compensation have been implemented company-wide, with a focus on reducing discretionary spending for the company as a whole. Furloughs and lay-offs are driven by individual business unit needs, and are based largely on current and anticipated customer demand within that business. We have developed contingency plans to further reduce costs and use of capital if the situation deteriorates. In addition, we are selectively resuming investments to ensure continued investment in product development, human capital, and customer support where market conditions are more favorable.
We have taken significant actions to keep our employees safe throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. In March, we formed the COVID-19 Crisis Response Team, a team of senior leaders across JBT that developed and deployed policies, programs and protocols to ensure the consistent and effective management of risk to JBT and our employees throughout the crisis. This included, but is not limited to, global travel guidelines, PPE and social distancing requirements, required location protocols, testing and return-to-work policies. As of the date of this filing, most of our factories, suppliers and warehouses remain operational. We have taken a number of steps under the guidance of our Crisis Response Team to protect the health and safety of our workers in our facilities, including daily symptoms screening for clearance to work, social distancing requirements in our workplaces, face covering requirements where social distancing is not possible, facilitation of work from home arrangements for our employees who can perform work functions remotely, and global travel restrictions consistent with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and local government guidelines. Our Crisis Response Team issues frequent guidance to our managers and employees to reinforce the protocols and policies designed to keep our employees safe, and maintain our business operations.
Furthermore, we have largely maintained our supply chain to date through our geographically diversified supplier base, and are providing enhanced remote support options and extended hours to our customers to support them through the disruption caused by the pandemic. Despite reduced capital expenditures and cost cutting measures, we have protected our investment in product development. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and our other stakeholders.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The results for the periods ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 include several items that affect the comparability of our results. These non-GAAP financial measures exclude certain amounts that are included in a measure calculated under U.S. GAAP, or include certain amounts that are excluded from a measure calculated under U.S. GAAP. By excluding or including these items, we believe we provide greater transparency into our operating results and trends, and a more meaningful comparison of our ongoing operating results, consistent with how management evaluates performance. Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures in financial and operational evaluation, planning and forecasting. The adjustments generally fall within the following categories: restructuring costs, M&A related costs, pension-related costs, constant currency adjustments and other major items affecting comparability of our ongoing operating results.
Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, we adjusted certain of our non-GAAP financial measures for management succession costs. On September 24, 2020, we announced that our former CEO resigned following a leave of absence. Management succession costs in the year include severance paid to our former CEO, net of the reversal of stock based compensation expense for forfeited equity awards, and costs related to filling executive positions in connection with this transition. We did not incur management succession costs in any prior periods presented in this report. We are excluding management succession costs from certain non-GAAP financial measures because they are not part of our regular compensation program, and we believe that excluding the effects of costs associated with the recruiting and implementing transition of our chief executive positions allows more meaningful period-to-period comparisons of our ongoing operating results.
The non-GAAP financial measures presented in this report may differ from similarly-titled measures used by other companies. The non-GAAP financial measures are not intended to be used as a substitute for, nor should they be considered in isolation of, financial measures prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Additional details for each Non-GAAP financial measure follow:
•Free cash flow: We define free cash flow as cash provided by continuing operating activities, less capital expenditures, plus proceeds from sale of fixed assets and pension contributions. For free cash flow purposes we consider contributions to pension plans to be more comparable to payment of debt, and therefore exclude these contributions from the calculation of free cash flow. We use free cash flow internally as a key indicator of our liquidity and ability to service debt, invest in business combinations, and return money to shareholders. We believe this information is useful to investors because it provides an understanding of the cash available to fund these initiatives.
•Adjusted income from continuing operations and Adjusted diluted earnings per share from continuing operations: We adjust earnings for restructuring and merger and acquisition related costs, which include integration costs and the amortization of inventory step-up from business combinations, earnout adjustments to fair value, transaction costs for both potential and completed M&A transactions (“M&A related costs”), and management succession costs.
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA: We define EBITDA as earnings before income taxes, interest expense and depreciation and amortization. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA before restructuring, pension expense other than service cost, M&A related costs, and Management succession costs. While the Company's acquired intangible assets and fixed assets contribute to generation of our revenue, management believes that due to the Company's focus on growth through acquisitions EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA facilitate an evaluation of business performance by excluding the impact of amortization and depreciation, and, in the case of Adjusted EBITDA, without the fluctuations in the amount of certain costs that do not reflect our underlying operating results. We use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA internally to make operating decisions and believe this information is helpful to investors because it allows more meaningful period-to-period comparisons of our ongoing operating results.
•Segment Adjusted Operating Profit and Segment Adjusted EBITDA: We report segment operating profit, which is the measure of segment profit or loss required to be disclosed in accordance with GAAP. We adjust segment operating profit for restructuring, and M&A related costs. We calculate segment Adjusted EBITDA by subtracting depreciation and amortization from segment adjusted operating profit. We believe segment adjusted operating profit allows more meaningful period-to period comparisons of our ongoing operating results, without the fluctuations in the amount of certain costs that do not reflect our underlying operating results. We calculate segment Adjusted EBITDA by subtracting depreciation and amortization from segment adjusted operating profit. While Company's acquired intangible assets and fixed assets contribute to generation of Company's revenue, management believes that due to the Company's focus on growth through acquisitions segment Adjusted EBITDA facilitates an evaluation of business segment performance by excluding the impact of amortization due to the step up in value of intangible assets and depreciation of fixed assets.
•Constant currency measures: We evaluate our results of operations on both an as reported and a constant currency basis. The constant currency presentation excludes the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. We calculate constant currency percentages by converting our financial results in local currency for a period using the average exchange rate for the prior period to which we are comparing.
The tables included below reconcile each non-GAAP financial measure to the most comparable GAAP financial measure.
The table below provides a reconciliation of cash provided by continuing operating activities to free cash flow:
The table below provides a reconciliation of income from continuing operations as reported to adjusted income from continuing operations and adjusted diluted earnings per share from continuing operations:
(1) Impact on tax provision was calculated using the enacted rate for the relevant jurisdiction for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. In 2020 and 2019, we have also included certain discrete adjustments related to management succession costs and restructuring related costs, respectively.
The table below provides a reconciliation of net income to EBITDA to Adjusted EBITDA:
The tables below provide a reconciliation of segment operating profit to segment adjusted operating profit and segment Adjusted EBITDA:
We evaluate our results of operations on both as reported and a constant currency basis. The constant currency presentation is a non-GAAP financial measure, which excludes the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. We believe providing constant currency information provides valuable supplemental information regarding our results of operations, consistent with how we evaluate our performance. We calculate constant currency percentages by converting our financial results in local currency for a period using the average exchange rate for the prior period to which we are comparing. This calculation may differ from similarly-titled measures used by other companies.
The non-GAAP financial measures disclosed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are not intended to nor should they be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial measures prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Results of Continuing Operations
A discussion of our results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019 is set forth below. For a discussion of our results of operations, including our segment results of operations, for 2019 compared to 2018, refer to the discussion under the sub-caption "2019 Compared With 2018" in Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, which discussion is incorporated by reference herein.
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
2020 Compared With 2019
Total revenue in 2020 decreased $217.9 million compared to 2019. This is a 11% decrease, with a 14% decline in organic revenue and a marginal unfavorable currency translation, partially offset by a 3% increase from acquisitions. The decline in organic revenue was caused by a significant disruption in orders as customers delayed capital expenditures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating income margin was 9.4% in 2020 compared to 9.7% in 2019, a decrease of 30 bps, and was as a result of the following items:
•Gross profit margin increased 20 bps to 30.9% compared to 30.7% in 2019. This increase was the result of favorable mix with contribution from acquisitions as well as higher recurring revenue for JBT FoodTech.
•Selling, general and administrative expense decreased in dollars due to lower acquisition-related costs, cost reduction actions taken in reaction to the COVID-19 pandemic, and lower stock based compensation expense due to a decline in the Company's performance in 2020 and forfeitures related to management succession. This decrease in expense was partially offset by $7.7 million of management succession costs, excluding $2.9 million benefit from forfeiture of stock based compensation, that were not incurred in the prior year. As a percentage of revenue, these expenses have increased 40 bps to 20.8% compared to 20.4% for 2019.
•Restructuring expense decreased $1.4 million. As a percent of revenue, restructuring expenses are unchanged at 0.7% for the years ended 2020 and 2019.
•Currency translation reduced operating income by $5.2 million.
Pension expense, other than service cost increased by $1.2 million driven by a decrease in expected return on pension assets and the amortization of higher actuarial losses.
Interest expense decreased $4.9 million driven by a benefit of $4.1 million from lower interest rates, and of $0.8 million resulting from lower average borrowings compared to 2019.
Income tax expense for 2020 reflected an effective income tax rate of 25.1% compared to 22.6% in 2019. The higher effective tax rate in 2020 resulted primarily from a discrete tax expense from vesting of stock based compensation awards of $0.7 million in 2020
compared to a $2.2 million discrete tax benefit in 2019. Additionally, the 2020 effective tax rate includes a $1.5 million tax expense related to the remeasurement of UK deferred taxes to reflect the UK income tax rate increase effective April 1, 2020.
Restructuring
In the first quarter of 2018, the Company implemented a restructuring plan ("2018 restructuring plan") to address its global processes to flatten the organization, improve efficiency and better leverage general and administrative resources primarily within the JBT FoodTech segment. We recognized cumulative restructuring charges of $62.2 million, net of cumulative releases of the related liability of $11.9 million. We completed this plan in the third quarter of 2020.
The following table details the cumulative amount of annualized and incremental savings for the 2018 restructuring plan:
For the 2018 restructuring plan, we originally expected to generate total annualized savings of approximately $55 million by the end of 2020. In light of the current environment, the remainder of the expected savings is expected to be achieved as the Company returns to a normal level of business operations.
In the first quarter of 2020, the Company implemented an immaterial restructuring plan primarily within the JBT AeroTech segment. Through December 31, 2020, we recognized restructuring charges of $2.4 million related to severance, net of a cumulative release of the related liability of $0.2 million. We completed this plan during the third quarter 2020.
In the third quarter of 2020, the Company implemented a restructuring plan ("2020 restructuring plan") for manufacturing capacity rationalization affecting both the JBT FoodTech and JBT AeroTech segments. We recognized restructuring charges of $9.9 million, net of a cumulative release of the related liability of $0.3 million, through December 31, 2020, and expect to recognize the remaining costs by end of the year 2021.
Cumulative cost savings for the 2020 restructuring plan during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.7 million, with savings of $0.5 million in cost of sales and $0.2 million in selling, general and administrative expense. For the 2020 restructuring plan, incremental cost savings we expect to realize during the years 2021 and 2022 are as follows:
For additional financial information about restructuring, refer to Note 19. Restructuring in the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
OPERATING RESULTS OF BUSINESS SEGMENTS
(1)Refer to Note 18. Business Segments in the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2)Segment operating profit is defined as total segment revenue less segment operating expense. Corporate expense, restructuring expense, interest income and expense and income taxes are not allocated to the segments. Corporate expense generally includes corporate staff-related expense, stock-based compensation, LIFO adjustments, certain foreign currency-related gains and losses, and the impact of unusual or strategic events not representative of segment operations.
JBT FoodTech
2020 Compared With 2019
FoodTech revenue declined 7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Acquisitions contributed 4% revenue growth while organic revenue declined 11% from 2019. Unfavorable foreign currency translation was not significant for the year ended December 31, 2020. Organic revenue declines reflected significant disruption in orders and revenues due to global slowdowns in business delaying capital expenditures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Organic recurring revenues increased 3.2% in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, as most food processing companies sustained critical operations, despite the disruption from the COVID-19 pandemic, requiring maintenance and parts.
FoodTech operating profit declined $14.1 million, or 8%, year over year for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Operating profit margin was 13.8% in 2020 compared to 13.9% in the prior year. Operating profit margin declined in 2020 compared to 2019 due to the significant revenue decline experienced in 2020. Gross profit margins increased 100 bps in 2020 compared to margins in 2019 primarily due to a higher recurring revenue mix, which increased from 44% of revenues in 2019 to 49% of revenues
in 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $12.2 million lower in 2020 compared to 2019, 21.3% as a percent of sales in 2020 compared to 20.5% in 2019. The decline was primarily reflective of cost actions taken in reaction to the COVID-19 pandemic, including reduced travel and lower compensation. Savings were partially offset by higher costs from full year inclusion of 2019 acquisition-related expenses. Currency translation reduced comparative earnings during 2020 by $5.3 million.
JBT AeroTech
2020 Compared With 2019
AeroTech revenue decreased $122.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019. This is a 20% decrease with a 19% decline contributed by our mobile equipment business and a 4% decline contributed by our service business, partially offset by 3% growth contributed by our fixed equipment business. Mobile equipment revenue decline was due to lower equipment and aftermarket sales driven by significantly lower customer demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Service revenue decline was driven by lower revenues from maintenance contracts at domestic airports mostly as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Fixed equipment revenue growth was primarily due to higher passenger boarding bridge activity and related products to domestic airports partly offset by lower aftermarket sales as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenues from acquisitions and currency translation had an immaterial impact.
AeroTech operating profit decreased $26.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019. JBT AeroTech's operating profit margin was 10.7% compared to 12.8% in the prior year, reflecting a decrease of 210 bps. Gross profit margins declined by 220 bps due to an inventory impairment resulting from restructuring, lower mix of aftermarket sales and lost leverage of fixed manufacturing costs as a result of lower revenues which were all partly offset by productivity and material cost improvements. Selling, general and administrative expenses in 2020 were $11.9 million lower than 2019 as a result of cost reduction efforts and were 10 bps lower as a percent of sales compared to 2019. Currency translation did not have a material impact on our operating profit comparative results.
Corporate Expense
2020 Compared With 2019
Corporate expense decreased by $13.6 million compared to 2019, driven primarily by a decrease in M&A related costs, lower incentive compensation, and foreign currency transactions gain, partially offset by management succession costs in 2020. Corporate expense as a percent of revenues decreased to 2.8% in 2020 compared to 3.2% in 2019.
Inbound Orders and Order Backlog
Inbound orders represent the estimated sales value of confirmed customer orders received during the years ended December 31,
Order backlog is calculated as the estimated sales value of unfilled, confirmed customer orders as of December 31,
Order backlog in our JBT FoodTech segment at December 31, 2020 increased by $25.2 million compared to December 31, 2019. We expect to convert almost all of JBT FoodTech backlog at December 31, 2020 into revenue during 2021.
Order backlog in our JBT AeroTech segment at December 31, 2020 decreased by $17.7 million compared to December 31, 2019. We expect to convert 81% of the JBT AeroTech backlog at December 31, 2020 into revenue during 2021.
Seasonality
We experience seasonality in our operating results. Historically, our revenues and operating income have been lower in the first quarter and highest in the fourth quarter, primarily as a result of our customers' purchasing trends.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows provided by operating activities and borrowings from our revolving credit facility. Our liquidity as of December 31, 2020, or cash plus borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facilities was $449.6 million. The cash flows generated by our operations and revolving credit facility are expected to be sufficient to satisfy our working capital needs, new product development, restructuring expense, capital expenditures, dividend payments, pension contributions, payments due under the CARES Act for payroll tax deferral and other financing requirements. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, and actions taken in response to the pandemic as described above under "Impact of COVID-19 on our Business", we have taken near-term actions to maintain our liquidity and reduce debt by reducing capital expenditures, operating expenses and managing trade receivables. Additionally, we are pursuing opportunities to increase liquidity by availing ourselves of benefits under the CARES Act including both deferred tax payments and tax credits related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had total operating cash flow of $252.0 million and $231.7 million in free cash flow, which includes $10.3 million in benefits from deferred payroll tax payments under the CARES Act. In addition, our capital expenditures were $34.3 million for 2020 compared to $37.9 million in the prior year. We believe JBT's strong balance sheet, operating cash flows, and access to capital at December 31, 2020 positions us to navigate through the challenging economic conditions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $47.5 million of cash and cash equivalents, $41.7 million of which was held by our foreign subsidiaries. Although these funds are considered permanently invested in our foreign subsidiaries, we are not presently aware of any restriction on the repatriation of these funds. We maintain significant operations outside of the U.S., and many of our uses of cash for working capital, capital expenditures and business acquisitions arise in these foreign jurisdictions. If these funds were needed to fund our operations or satisfy obligations in the U.S., they could be repatriated and their repatriation into the U.S. could cause us to incur additional U.S. income taxes and foreign withholding taxes.
As noted above, funds held outside of the U.S. are considered permanently invested in our non-U.S. subsidiaries. At times, these foreign subsidiaries have cash balances that exceed their immediate working capital or other cash needs. In these circumstances, the foreign subsidiaries may loan funds to the U.S. parent company on a temporary basis; the U.S. parent company has in the past and may in the future use the proceeds of these temporary intercompany loans to reduce outstanding borrowings under our committed credit facilities. By using available non-U.S. cash to repay our debt on a short-term basis, we can optimize our leverage ratio, which has the effect of lowering our interest costs.
Under Internal Revenue Service (IRS) guidance, no incremental tax liability is incurred on the proceeds of these loans as long as each individual loan has a term of 30 days or less and all such loans from each subsidiary are outstanding for a total of less than 60 days during the year. During 2020, any such loan was outstanding for less than 30 days, and all such loans were outstanding for less than 60 days in the aggregate. We used the proceeds of these intercompany loans to reduce outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit facility. We may choose to access such funds again in the future to the extent they are available and can be transferred without significant cost, and use them on a temporary basis to repay outstanding borrowings or for other corporate purposes, but intend to do so only as allowed under this IRS guidance. The amount outstanding subject to this IRS guidance at December 31, 2020 was approximately $49.1 million.
On August 10, 2018, the Board authorized a share repurchase program of up to $30 million of our common stock, effective January 1, 2019 through December 31, 2021. Shares may be purchased from time to time in open market transactions, subject to market conditions. Repurchased shares become treasury shares, which are accounted for using the cost method and are generally intended to be used for future awards under the Incentive Compensation Plan. As of the date of this report, we have not repurchased any shares pursuant to the repurchase authority.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The following is a summary of our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
(a)Our available long-term debt is dependent upon our compliance with covenants described under the heading “Financing Arrangements” in Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Any violations of covenants or other events of default, which are not waived or cured, could have a material impact on our ability to maintain our committed financial arrangements or accelerate our obligation to repay the amount due. We were in compliance with all debt covenants as of December 31, 2020.
(b)Interest payments were determined using the weighted average rates for all debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
(c)See Note 2. Acquisitions for further details on our recent acquisitions. Amounts remaining due to sellers relate to the acquisitions of Proseal and MARS.
(d)In the normal course of business, we enter into agreements with our suppliers to purchase raw materials or services. These agreements include a requirement that our supplier provide products or services to our specifications and require us to make a firm purchase commitment to our supplier. As substantially all of these commitments are associated with purchases made to fulfill our customers’ orders, the costs associated with these agreements will ultimately be reflected in cost of sales on our Consolidated Statements of Income.
(e)This amount reflects planned contributions in 2021 to our pension plans. Required contributions for future years depend on factors that cannot be determined at this time.
(f)This amount reflects the transition tax on the previously untaxed and unrepatriated current and accumulated post-1986 foreign earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries as required by the Tax Act.
The following is a summary of other off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2020:
To provide required security regarding our performance on certain contracts, we provide letters of credit, surety bonds and bank guarantees, for which we are contingently liable. In order to obtain these financial instruments, we pay fees to various financial institutions in amounts competitively determined in the marketplace. Our ability to generate revenue from certain contracts is dependent upon our ability to obtain these off-balance sheet financial instruments.
Our off-balance sheet financial instruments may be renewed, revised or released based on changes in the underlying commitment. Historically, our commercial commitments have not been drawn upon to a material extent; consequently, management believes it is not likely that there will be claims against these commitments that would result in a negative impact on our key financial ratios or our ability to obtain financing.
Cash Flows
Cash flows for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
2020 Compared with 2019
Cash provided by continuing operating activities in 2020 was $252.0 million, representing a $141.4 million increase compared to 2019. This increase was driven primarily by higher customer collections of outstanding trade receivables and of advance payments, lower investment in inventory and lower payments related to restructuring activities. These were partially offset by higher payments for accounts payable and higher pension contributions.
Cash required by investing activities during 2020 was $37.3 million, representing a $364.4 million decrease compared to 2019, primarily due to decreased acquisition spending year over year.
Cash required by financing activities of $207.4 million in 2020 was primarily due to paying down our borrowings under our revolving credit facility. Cash provided by financing activities of $287.5 million in 2019 was primarily due to higher borrowings to fund higher acquisition spending in 2019.
Financing Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 we had $523.9 million drawn on and $467.7 million of availability under the revolving credit facility. Our ability to use this availability is limited by the restrictive covenants described below.
Our credit agreement includes restrictive covenants that, if not met, could lead to a renegotiation of our credit lines, a requirement to repay our borrowings and/or a significant increase in our cost of financing. Restrictive covenants include a minimum interest coverage ratio, a maximum leverage ratio, as well as certain events of default. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants in our credit agreement. We expect to remain in compliance with all covenants in the foreseeable future. However, there can be no assurance that continued or increased volatility in global economic conditions will not impair our ability to meet our covenants, or that we will continue to be able to access the capital and credit markets on terms acceptable to us or at all.
For additional information about our credit agreement, refer to Note 6. Debt of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
As of December 31, 2020, we had one interest rate swap executed in January 2016 with a notional amount of $50 million which expired in January 2021, four interest rate swaps executed in March 2020 with a combined notional amount of $200 million expiring in April 2025, and one interest rate swap executed in May 2020 with a notional amount of $50 million expiring in May 2025. We have designated these swaps as cash flow hedges and all changes in fair value of the swaps are recognized in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). As a result, as of December 31, 2020, a portion of our variable rate debt was effectively fixed rate debt subject to an average fixed rate of 0.92%, while approximately $223.9 million, or 43%, remained subject to floating, or market, rates. Since December 31, 2020, agreements for $50 million notional amount have expired, and as a result, approximately $273.9 million, or 52%, of our outstanding debt as of December 31, 2020 is now subject to floating interest rates. To the extent interest rates increase in future periods, our earnings could be negatively impacted by higher interest expense.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. As such, we are required to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions about matters that are inherently uncertain. On an ongoing basis, our management re-evaluates these estimates, judgments and assumptions for reasonableness because of the critical impact that these factors have on the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the dates of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods presented. Management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors, and the Audit Committee has reviewed this disclosure. We believe that the following are the critical accounting estimates used in preparing our financial statements.
Intangible Asset Valuation
Accounting for business combinations requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions at the acquisition date specifically for the valuation of intangible assets. In the year of such acquisitions, critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired include, but are not limited to, growth rates for future expected cash flows, discount rates, customer attrition rates and royalty rates. The discount rates used to discount expected future cash flows to present value are typically derived from a weighted-average cost of capital analysis and adjusted to reflect inherent risks. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that could affect either the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize a significant portion of our revenue over time, for contracts that provide highly customized equipment and refurbishments of customer-owned equipment for which we have a contractual, enforceable right to collect payment upon customer cancellation for performance completed to date. We utilize the input method of “cost-to-cost” to recognize revenue over time which requires that we measure progress based on costs incurred to date relative to total estimated cost at completion. These cost estimates are based on assumptions and estimates to project the outcome of future events including labor productivity and availability, the complexity of the work to be performed, the cost of materials, and the performance of subcontractors.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
The measurement of pension plans’ costs requires the use of assumptions for discount rates, investment returns, employee turnover rates, retirement rates, mortality rates and other factors. The actuarial assumptions used in our pension reporting are reviewed annually and compared with external benchmarks to ensure that they appropriately account for our future pension and post-retirement benefit obligations. While we believe that the assumptions used are appropriate, differences between assumed and actual experience may affect our operating results.
Our accrued pension liability reflects the funded status of our worldwide plans, or the projected benefit obligation net of plan assets. Our discount rate assumption is determined by developing a yield curve based on high quality corporate bonds with maturities matching the plan’s expected benefit payment streams. The plans’ expected cash flows are then discounted by the resulting year-by-year spot rates. The projected benefit obligation is sensitive to changes in our estimate of the discount rate. The discount rate used in calculating the projected benefit obligation for the U.S. pension plan, which represents 85% of all pension plan obligations, was 2.57% in 2020, 3.28% in 2019 and 3.73% 2018. A decrease of 50 basis points in the discount rate used in our calculation would increase our projected benefit obligation by $20.1 million.
Our pension expense is sensitive to changes in our estimate of the expected rate of return on plan assets. The expected return on assets used in calculating the pension expense for the U.S. pension plan, which represents 96% of all pension plan assets, was 5.0% for 2020, 5.75% for 2019 and 6.50% for 2018. For 2021, the rate is expected to be 5.75%. A change of 50 basis points in the expected return on assets assumption would impact pension expense by $1.3 million (pre-tax).
See Note 8. Pension and Post-Retirement and Other Benefit Plans of the notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for additional discussion of our assumptions and the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information with respect to recent accounting pronouncements and the impact of these pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.