Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The purpose of this section is to discuss and analyze our consolidated financial condition, liquidity and capital resources and results of operations for the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 and 2019. For a discussion of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for the eleven months ended November 30, 2018, see "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on January 29, 2020, and Exhibit 99.1, Part II, Item 7 of our Form 8-K, which was filed with the SEC on June 3, 2020.
This analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related footnote disclosures contained in this report and the following "Cautionary Statement for Forward-Looking Information."
Cautionary Statement for Forward-Looking Information
Statements included in this report may contain forward-looking statements. Such statements may relate, but are not limited, to projections of revenues, income or loss, development expenditures, plans for growth and future operations, competition and regulation, as well as assumptions relating to the foregoing. Such forward-looking statements are made pursuant to the safe-harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
Forward-looking statements are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which cannot be predicted or quantified. When used in this report, the words "will," "could," "estimates," "expects," "anticipates," "believes," "plans," "intends" and variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Future events and actual results could differ materially from those set forth in, contemplated by or underlying the forward-looking statements.
Factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from any results projected, forecasted, estimated or budgeted or may materially and adversely affect our actual results include, but are not limited to, those set forth in Item 1A. Risk Factors and elsewhere in this report and in our other public filings with the SEC.
Undue reliance should not be placed on these forward-looking statements, which are applicable only as of the date hereof. Except as may be required by law, we undertake no obligation to revise or update these forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances that arise after the date of this report or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.
Results of Operations
We are engaged in investment banking and capital markets, asset management and direct investing. Jefferies Group, our largest subsidiary, is now the largest independent full-service global investment banking firm headquartered in the U.S. During the first quarter of 2020, we changed our internal structure with regard to our operating segments. Previously, our segments consisted of (1) Investment Banking, Capital Markets and Asset Management, which included all of the financial results of Jefferies Group; (2) Merchant Banking; and (3) Corporate. In the first quarter of 2020, we appointed co-Presidents of Asset Management and created a separate fourth operating segment that consists of the asset management activity previously included in our Investment Banking, Capital Markets and Asset Management segment, together with asset management activity previously
included in our Merchant Banking segment. Our segments consist of: (1) Investment Banking and Capital Markets; (2) Asset Management; (3) Merchant Banking; and (4) Corporate.
In the fourth quarter of 2018, we changed our fiscal year end from a calendar year basis to a fiscal year ending on November 30. Our 2018 fiscal year consists of the eleven month transition period beginning January 1, 2018 through November 30, 2018. Jefferies Group has a November 30 year end. Prior to the fourth quarter of 2018, because our fiscal year end was December 31, we reflected Jefferies Group in our consolidated financial statements utilizing a one month lag. In connection with our change in fiscal year end to November 30, we eliminated the one month lag utilized to reflect Jefferies Group results beginning with the fourth quarter of 2018. Therefore, our results for the eleven months ended November 30, 2018, include twelve month results for Jefferies Group and eleven months for the remainder of our results.
The following tables present a summary of our financial results.
A summary of results of operations for the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 is as follows (in thousands):
(1) Includes Floor brokerage and clearing fees.
(2) Interest expense within Merchant Banking of $31.4 million for the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 primarily includes $26.7 million for Foursight Capital and $4.7 million for Vitesse Energy Finance.
A summary of results of operations for the twelve months ended November 30, 2019 is as follows (in thousands):
(1) Includes Floor brokerage and clearing fees.
(2) Interest expense within Merchant Banking of $34.1 million for the twelve months ended November 30, 2019 primarily includes $29.0 million for Foursight Capital and $4.8 million for Vitesse Energy Finance.
A summary of results of operations for the eleven months ended November 30, 2018 is as follows (in thousands):
(1) Includes Floor brokerage and clearing fees.
(2) Interest expense within Merchant Banking of $26.2 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2018 primarily includes $20.6 million for Foursight Capital and $3.3 million for Vitesse Energy Finance.
The composition of our financial results has varied over time and we expect will continue to evolve. Our strategy is designed to transform Jefferies into a pure financial services firm and, as such, we are focused on the development of our Investment Banking and Capital Markets, and Asset Management segments, while we continue to realize the value of or otherwise transform our investments in Merchant Banking. The following factors and events should be considered in evaluating our financial results as they impact comparisons:
During March 2020, the global COVID-19 pandemic and initial actions taken in response wreaked havoc on the global economy and all financial markets, and adversely affected our businesses. Subsequently, with various government actions and more clarity from the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank on future interest rate policy, the equity markets have experienced a strong rebound and a supportive trading environment for investors has emerged along with renewed activity in the equity and debt new issue capital markets. Jefferies Group has experienced strong market volumes and increased client activity across its capital markets business with considerably improved performance, and mergers and acquisition activity was significant in the latter part of the year. We continue to monitor the impact of the pandemic on the operations and value of our investments. Our leadership is continuously monitoring circumstances around COVID-19, as well as economic and capital market conditions, and providing frequent communications to both our clients and our employees.
Our 2020 financial results from continuing operations were impacted by:
•Record pre-tax income of $1,177.5 million from Jefferies Group reflecting record total net revenues of $5,197.5 million, including:
◦Record Investment Banking net revenues of $2,398.2 million, including record advisory net revenues of $1,053.5 million, record equity underwriting net revenues of $902.0 million and debt underwriting net revenues of $546.0 million;
◦Record combined Capital Markets net revenues of $2,469.7 million, including record equities net revenues of $1,128.9 million and record fixed income net revenues of $1,340.8 million; and
◦Record Asset Management revenues (before allocated net interest) of $256.8 million.
•Pre-tax loss of $24.6 million related to our Merchant Banking businesses reflecting:
◦Record performance from Idaho Timber and a positive contribution from Vitesse Energy Finance;
◦A gain of $61.5 million from effective short-term hedges against mark-to-market and fair value decreases in some of our other investments within Merchant Banking;
◦A $44.2 million non-cash charge to write down the value of our investment in WeWork in the first half of 2020;
◦Non-cash charges of $73.9 million related to write-downs of real estate investments at HomeFed; and
◦Non-cash charge of $13.2 million to write down Vitesse Energy Finance's oil and gas assets in the Denver-Julesburg Basin ("DJ Basin") and $34.6 million to write down the value of our investment in JETX Energy to reflect the decline in oil prices.
Our 2019 financial results from continuing operations were impacted by:
•A nonrecurring tax benefit of $544.6 million related to the closing of our available for sale portfolio, which triggered the realization of lodged tax benefits from earlier years;
•The special dividend of our interest in Spectrum Brands of $451.1 million, removing the investment from our Merchant Banking portfolio going forward;
•A $205.0 million pre-tax gain on the sale of our remaining 31% interest in National Beef;
•A $72.1 million pre-tax gain on the revaluation of our 70% interest in HomeFed to fair value in connection with the acquisition of the remaining common stock of HomeFed; and
•A reduction during 2019 to the estimated fair value of WeWork of $182.3 million.
Our 2018 financial results from continuing operations were impacted by:
•A $418.8 million mark-to-market decrease in the value of our investment in Spectrum Brands/HRG Group, Inc. ("HRG");
•A $221.7 million pre-tax gain on the sale of our Garcadia interests;
•A $70.9 million increase in the estimated fair value of WeWork;
•A $62.1 million impairment loss related to our investment in FXCM; and
•A $47.9 million impairment loss related to our investment in Golden Queen Mining Company, LLC ("Golden Queen").
Investment Banking and Capital Markets, and Asset Management
Our Investment Banking and Capital Markets segment and Asset Management segment primarily consist of our investment in Jefferies Group. Jefferies Group was acquired on March 1, 2013. Jefferies Group financial data is presented in each year based on the twelve months ended November 30.
Investment Banking and Capital Markets
A summary of results of operations for our Investment Banking and Capital Markets segment is as follows (in thousands):
Our Investment Banking and Capital Markets segment comprises many business units, with many interactions and much integration among them. Business activities include the sales, trading, origination and advisory effort for various equity, fixed income, commodities, foreign exchange and advisory services. Our Investment Banking and Capital Markets segment business, by its nature, does not produce predictable or necessarily recurring revenues or earnings. Our results in any given period can be materially affected by conditions in global financial markets, economic conditions generally, and our own activities and positions.
Revenues by Source
Net revenues presented for our Investment Banking and Capital Markets segment include allocations of interest income and interest expense as we assess the profitability of these businesses inclusive of the net interest revenue or expense associated with the respective activities, including the net interest cost of allocated long-term debt, which is a function of the mix of each business's associated assets and liabilities and the related funding costs.
The following provides a summary of net revenues by source (in thousands):
(1)Includes net interest revenues of $12.3 million, $74.0 million and $8.5 million for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(2)Allocated net interest is not separately disaggregated in presenting our Investment Banking and Capital Markets reportable segment within Net Revenues by Source. This presentation is aligned to our Investment Banking and Capital Markets internal performance measurement.
Investment Banking Revenues
Investment banking is comprised of revenues from:
• advisory services with respect to mergers and acquisitions and restructurings and recapitalizations;
• underwriting services, which include underwriting and placement services related to corporate debt, municipal bonds, mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities and equity and equity-linked securities and loan syndication;
• our 50% share of net earnings from Jefferies Group's corporate lending joint venture, Jefferies Finance; and
• securities and loans received or acquired in connection with our investment banking activities.
The following table sets forth our investment banking activities (dollars in billions):
Investment banking revenues were a record $2,398.2 million for 2020, 57.6% higher than 2019. This reflects record performance in mergers and acquisitions, record results in equity underwriting and solid performance in debt underwriting, while the results for 2019 were impacted by the significant industry-wide decline in equity and leverage finance activity across the U.S. and Europe during the year.
Our 2020 advisory revenues were a record $1,053.5 million, up $286.1 million, or 37.3% higher than 2019, reflecting a meaningful acceleration of activity in the second half of 2020. Our underwriting revenues for 2020 were $1,448.0 million, an increase of $678.7 million, or 88.2%, from 2019, due to record results in equity underwriting and solid performance in debt underwriting, as clients took advantage of both a strong rebound in equity valuations, and in loan and bond prices to raise capital after the initial market disruption from COVID-19 subsided. From equity and debt underwriting activities, we generated $902.0 million and $546.0 million in revenues, respectively, for 2020, compared with $362.0 million and $407.3 million in revenues, respectively, for 2019.
Other investment banking revenues were a loss of $103.3 million for 2020, compared with a loss of $14.6 million for 2019. The results for 2020 include a net loss of $37.5 million from our share of the net earnings of the Jefferies Finance joint venture, reflecting unrealized losses related to the write down of commitments and loans held-for-sale, as well as reserves recorded on the loan portfolio during the current year period, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on the markets and the economy. This compares with net revenues of $22.3 million during 2019, inclusive of $12.5 million in costs from refinancing its debt. The results in both years also include the amortization of costs and allocated interest expense related to our investment in the Jefferies Finance business. In addition, Other investment banking results for 2020 include unrealized write-downs of private equity investments received or acquired in connection with our investment banking activities.
Equities Net Revenues
Equities are comprised of net revenues from:
•services provided to our clients from which we earn commissions or spread revenue by executing, settling and clearing transactions for clients;
•advisory services offered to clients;
•financing, securities lending and other prime brokerage services offered to clients; and
•wealth management services.
In May 2020, Greenwich Associates named Jefferies Group as the top firm in helping clients navigate the markets as COVID-19 significantly impacted equity markets in mid-March, causing volatility and increased trading volumes. These results were based on a survey they had conducted of more than 75 buy-side institutions evaluating brokers' performances in providing clients with liquidity, hedging solutions, market color and insights.
Total equities net revenues were a record $1,128.9 million for 2020, an increase of 45.9%, over the $774.0 million for 2019. Our strong performance was a result of the continued expansion of our business both from a product and geographic perspective, increased market volumes and the continued momentum of our client franchise. We increased our market share globally, as we were well-positioned to respond to our clients' dynamic needs during the year.
Our overall results included record net revenues across each region, including the Americas, Europe, and Asia Pacific. Each of our regional businesses is continuing to benefit from our overall global expansion and network. We believe we provided consistent and exceptional advisory and execution capabilities to our clients globally throughout this unprecedented period.
On a product basis, our overall results included record net revenues in our global cash equities businesses and across most of our global electronic trading businesses, as well as our domestic and international convertibles businesses. Our electronic trading and convertibles franchises continued to maintain several market-leading positions, while our cash equities franchise continued to improve its market share and competitive positioning. In November 2020, Greenwich Associates ranked our international convertibles business as #1 in Europe and Asia, excluding Japan, with significant market share and continued momentum.
The record results in our global cash equities businesses were driven by increased client activity, market volumes and improved trading. While global market trading volumes and higher volatility drove an increase in commissions, our results in Asia Pacific were also driven by our expansion and investment in the region in 2019 and 2020 across advisory and execution capabilities. The record results in our global convertibles business was driven by strong primary and secondary trading activity and higher volatility, and also the expansion of the business in London we undertook in late 2018. Our global electronic trading business achieved record results, which were driven by increased global market volumes, volatility, and the continued strength of the global platform. Our exchange traded funds business had higher results driven by increased trading revenues and the better market environment.
Fixed Income Net Revenues
Fixed income is comprised of net revenues from:
•executing transactions for clients and making markets in securitized products, investment grade, high-yield, emerging markets, municipal and sovereign securities and bank loans, as well as foreign exchange execution on behalf of clients;
•interest rate derivatives and credit derivatives; and
•financing services offered to clients.
Fixed income net revenues totaled a record $1,340.8 million for 2020, an increase of 96.8% compared with net revenues of $681.4 million for 2019, a result of strong client activity both in primary and secondary markets across products and regions, as well as periods of elevated market volatility. Our overall results included record net revenues regionally in each of the Americas, Europe and Asia, as the business successfully managed through the markets' high volumes and levels of uncertainty during the year.
Our global rates businesses generated record net revenues for 2020, driven by higher volatility and wider bid-offer spreads, particularly during the second quarter. Our results for 2020 also benefited from low interest rates and a favorable market environment, compared to 2019 when economic challenges and uncertainties, such as Brexit, limited client activity and trading opportunities.
Record results in our leveraged credit, European and Asian credit and investment grade corporates businesses resulted from robust revenues across regions and products due to increased client activity and higher levels of volatility during 2020. Similarly, record revenues from our global emerging markets business benefited from more favorable market conditions driving strong investor demand, as well as an increase in new issuance.
Revenues in our U.S. securitized markets group were higher due to an increase in demand for new issuance in the securitization markets and as the relative higher yields on securitized products drove investor demand in the second half of 2020.
The record results were partially offset by lower revenues in our municipal securities business, which was impacted by a significant sell-off in the second quarter of 2020 before stabilizing and recovering over the second half of 2020.
Other
Other is comprised of revenues from:
• Berkadia and other investments (other than Jefferies Finance, which is included in Other investment banking);
• principal investments in private equity and hedge funds managed by third-parties or related parties and that are not part of our asset management platform; and
• investments held as part of employee benefit plans, including deferred compensation plans (for which we incur an equal and offsetting amount of compensation expenses).
Net revenues from our other business category totaled $121.3 million for 2020, an increase of $62.8 million compared with $58.5 million for 2019.
Results for 2020 include net revenues of $68.9 million due to our share of the net income of Berkadia compared with net revenues $88.2 million in 2019. The lower net revenues for 2020 are due to the impairment of mortgage servicing rights as a result of lower interest rates and a decline in loan originations due to the impact of COVID-19 in the second quarter of 2020, with increased volumes and improved valuations returning in the latter part of the year.
The results for 2020 also include gains of $61.5 million from hedges that were bought and sold in the first quarter as we took a negative view of the market due to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Compensation and Benefits
Compensation and benefits expense consists of salaries, benefits, commissions, annual cash compensation awards and share-based awards to employees. Cash awards are recorded during the year of the award unless there are future service period requirements. Those with future service requirements are amortized into compensation expense over the required service period. Share-based awards to employees and senior executive awards are also amortized over their respective vesting periods.
Compensation and benefits expense increased to $2,735.1 million in 2020 from $1,641.8 million in 2019. The following table provides a summary of compensation and benefits expense (dollars in thousands):
A significant portion of compensation expense remains variable. Compensation and benefits expense increased in line with the significant increase in net revenues. During the fourth quarter of 2020, Jefferies Group amended the service requirement provisions of certain cash-based awards that had been granted during previous years. Compensation expense of $179.6 million was recorded to reflect the acceleration of amortization that resulted from these amendments.
Non-Compensation Expenses
Non-compensation expenses include floor brokerage and clearing fees, underwriting costs, technology and communications expense, occupancy and equipment rental expense, business development, professional services, bad debt provision, impairment charges, depreciation and amortization expense and other costs. All of these expenses, other than floor brokerage and clearing fees and depreciation and amortization expense, are included in Selling, general and other expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Non-compensation expenses were $1,134.2 million for 2020, an increase of $87.1 million, or 8.3%, compared with $1,047.1 million for 2019. Non-compensation expenses as a percentage of Net revenues were 22.7% and 34.5% for 2020 and 2019, respectively, demonstrating the operating leverage inherent in our business.
The increase in non-compensation expenses was primarily due to higher Floor brokerage and clearing fees due to record net revenues in equities and fixed income resulting from an increase in trading volumes. The increase was also due to higher underwriting costs, primarily due to record investment banking net revenues resulting from an increase in the number of transactions and higher technology and communication expenses, primarily related to costs associated with the development of various trading systems, increased market data and higher connectivity usage due to the expansion of certain businesses in Asia. Non-compensation expense also increased due to higher other expenses, which included our charitable donations of $8.6 million, in memory of Peg Broadbent, Jefferies Group's longstanding, esteemed CFO who tragically died from complications of COVID-19 in March. Additionally, other expenses also included $34.0 million attributed to our donation made to various charities in support of the Australian wildfire relief effort, costs associated with the early retirement of Jefferies Group's 6.875% senior notes in November 2020 and costs related to provisions for receivable losses. The increase in non-compensation expenses was partially offset by significantly lower business development expenses as business travel and hosted events were curtailed due to COVID-19.
Asset Management
Our asset management business is a diversified alternative asset management platform offering institutional clients an innovative range of investment strategies through us and our affiliated asset managers. We provide certain of our affiliated asset managers access to fully integrated global operational infrastructure and support. This may include strategy and product development, daily operations and finance-related activities, compliance, legal and human resources support, as well as all aspects of business development.
Collectively, we and our affiliated asset managers have net asset values or net asset value equivalent assets under management of approximately $26.8 billion as of November 30, 2020 and $20.7 billion as of November 30, 2019. Net asset values or net asset value equivalent assets under management are comprised of the fair value of the net assets of a fund, the net capital invested in a separately managed account, par value of collateralized loan obligations or notional account value. These include the following:
•$12.6 billion (2020) and $7.2 billion (2019) - This includes the assets under management raised by affiliated asset managers with whom we have an ongoing profit or revenue sharing arrangement. In some instances, due to the timing of payments and crystallization of profits or revenue, the majority of revenue related to these relationships will be realized at their calendar year-end (during our first fiscal quarter).
•$10.8 billion (2020) and $9.5 billion (2019) - Asset management activities within Jefferies Finance, our 50/50 joint venture with Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company, which represent the aggregate par value of collateralized loan obligations managed by Jefferies Finance, including those consolidated by Jefferies Finance. Because management evaluates segment performance based on the inclusion of our share of the net earnings of our Jefferies Finance joint venture in our Investment Banking and Capital Markets segment, those activities are excluded from our Asset Management segment results.
•$2.6 billion (2020) and $2.8 billion (2019) - Net asset values of investments made by us in funds or separately managed accounts. At times, we will incubate strategies using our own capital during the institutional build-out phase before opening investments to outside capital. This net asset value includes our seed capital of $1.5 billion (2020) and $1.3 billion (2019) in addition to amounts financed of $1.1 billion (2020) and $1.5 billion (2019), invested in funds and separately managed accounts that are managed by us and our affiliated asset managers.
•$0.8 billion (2020) and $1.2 billion (2019) - This includes third-party investments actively managed by wholly-owned divisions.
A summary of results of operations for our Asset Management segment is as follows (in thousands):
Revenues
Asset management net revenues include the following:
• Total asset management fees: management and performance fees from funds and accounts managed by us;
• Revenue from arrangements with strategic affiliates: revenues from affiliated asset managers in which we hold interests that entitle us to portions of their revenues and/or profits, as well as earnings on our ownership interests in our affiliated asset managers; and
• Investment return: this includes investment income from capital invested in and managed by us and our affiliated asset managers.
The key components of asset management revenues are the level of assets under management and the performance return, for the most part on an absolute basis and, in certain cases, relative to a benchmark or hurdle, of us and our affiliated asset managers. These components can be affected by financial markets, profits and losses in the applicable investment portfolios and client capital activity. Further, asset management fees vary with the nature of investment management services. The terms under which clients may terminate our investment management authority, and the requisite notice period for such termination, varies depending on the nature of the investment vehicle and the liquidity of the portfolio assets. Performance fees are generally recognized once a year, typically in December, when they become fixed and determinable and are not probable of being significantly reversed. As a result, the benefit of performance fees attributable to performance during the latter eleven months of each of our fiscal years is actually realized and recorded only in the first quarter of our next fiscal year.
The following summarizes the results of our Asset Management businesses revenues by asset class (in thousands):
(1)The amounts include our share of fees received by affiliated asset management companies with which we have revenue and profit share arrangements, as well as earnings on our ownership interest in affiliated asset managers.
(2)Net revenues attributed to the Investment return in our Asset Management segment have been disaggregated to separately present Investment return and Allocated net interest (see footnote 4 below). This disaggregation is intended to increase transparency and to make clearer actual Investment return. We believe that aggregating Investment return and Allocated net interest would obscure the Investment return by including an amount that is unique to our credit spreads, debt maturity profile, capital structure, liquidity risks and allocation methods.
(3)Includes net interest expense of $24.5 million, $8.9 million and $8.4 million for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(4)Allocated net interest represents the allocation of long-term debt interest expense to our Asset Management reportable segment, net of interest income on Cash and cash equivalents and other sources of liquidity. For discussion of sources of liquidity, refer to the "Liquidity and Capital Resources" section herein.
Asset management net revenues for 2020 were a record $235.3 million, compared with $84.9 million for 2019, primarily as a result of higher investment returns. Since 2019, we made capital investments in several new separately managed accounts and funds. Total asset management revenues for 2020 are also reflective of a 6.2% increase in total asset management fees and revenues, primarily attributed to higher revenues from our share of fees received by affiliated asset management companies with which we have revenue and profit share arrangements, partially offset by a decline in asset management fees.
Expenses
The increase in expenses in 2020 as compared with 2019 primarily reflects the expansion of the Asset Management business, additional costs from the wind down of one of our asset management businesses and the dedication of resources previously included in Corporate.
Assets under Management
The tables below include only third-party assets under management by us, excluding those of our affiliated asset managers.
Assets under management by predominant asset class were as follows (in millions):
(1) Assets under management include third-party net assets actively managed by us, including hedge funds and certain managed accounts. We may consolidate certain funds and for such consolidated funds, assets under management include the pro-rata portion of third- party net assets in consolidated funds based on the percentage ownership of third-party investors in the consolidated fund. The above amounts do not include assets under management at non-consolidated strategic affiliates or investments.
(2) During 2020, certain of the assets under management in this asset class were liquidated and the funds were returned to the third-party investors due to the wind down of our quantPORT asset management platform.
Changes in assets under management during the year were as follows (in millions):
The change in assets under management in our wholly-owned managers during 2020 is primarily due to the liquidation and redemptions from certain funds related to the wind down of our quantPORT asset management platform and market depreciation, partially offset by increased investments by third-parties in certain funds and managed accounts. The change in assets under management during 2019 is primarily due to redemptions from certain funds and separately managed accounts and dissolution of a fund, partially offset by new subscriptions and investments from third-parties and market appreciation.
Our definition of assets under management is not based on any definition contained in any of our investment management agreements and differs from the manner in which "Regulatory Assets Under Management" is reported to the SEC on Form ADV.
Asset Management Investments
Our asset management business makes seed and additional strategic investments directly in alternative asset management separately managed accounts and co-mingled funds where we act as the asset manager or in affiliated asset managers where we have strategic relationships and participate in the earnings or profits of the affiliated manager. Our asset management investments generated an investment return of $257.2 million and $100.4 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The following table reflects amounts invested by asset manager (in thousands):
(1) Due to the level or nature of an investment in a fund, we may consolidate that fund, and accordingly, the assets and liabilities of the fund are included in the representative line items in the consolidated financial statements. At November 30, 2020 and 2019, $0.1 million and $22.6 million, respectively, represents net investments in funds that have been consolidated in our financial statements.
(2) Where we have investments in a separately managed account, the assets and liabilities of such account are presented in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition within each respective line item.
(3) The increase in 2020 was primarily due to an investment in a new fund.
Merchant Banking
The composition of our Merchant Banking portfolio has been impacted by a number of transactions during recent years. The following chart reflects the significant components of our portfolio each year:
A summary of results for Merchant Banking is as follows (in thousands):
In the fourth quarter of 2018, we transferred our 50% membership interest in Berkadia into Jefferies Group. Income from continuing operations before income taxes related to the net assets transferred was $78.7 million for the eleven months ended November 30, 2018.
The increase in Net revenues in 2020 as compared to 2019 is primarily due to an increase in revenues at Idaho Timber and an increase in realized and unrealized gains on financial instruments, partially offset by the 2019 pre-tax gains on the sale of our remaining 31% interest in National Beef and on the revaluation of our 70% interest in HomeFed to fair value in connection with the acquisition of the remaining common stock of HomeFed. The increase in Compensation and benefits expense in 2020 as
compared to 2019 is primarily due to an increase at Idaho Timber and the full year acquisition impact of HomeFed. The increase in Cost of sales in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflects the increased sales at Idaho Timber. The increase in Selling, general and other expenses in in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflects increased non-cash charges in 2020 to JETX Energy's and Vitesse Energy Finance's oil and gas assets and write-downs to some of our real estate investments at HomeFed, partially offset by lease abandonment charges at JETX Energy in 2019.
A summary of results for Merchant Banking by significant business and investment is as follows (in thousands):
Oil and Gas
Oil and gas results for 2020 were lower than 2019 primarily due to curtailed production, lower oil prices and impairment charges recorded during the first half of the year. Oil and gas net revenues totaled $142.0 million during 2020 and $150.2 million during 2019, and primarily consist of three components:
•Production revenues (include the impact of realized gains and losses related to oil hedges) were $156.8 million in 2020 and $176.9 million in 2019. The decrease in production revenues related both to lower oil prices on current volume and decisions made to pause production on a portion of operating wells due to expectation of higher future prices. Production revenues included realized gains on oil hedges of $52.7 million in 2020 and $1.5 million in 2019.
•Net unrealized losses related to oil hedge derivatives were $7.0 million in 2020 and $6.5 million in 2019. As discussed further in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements, Vitesse Energy Finance uses swaps and call and put options to reduce exposure to future oil price fluctuations. For 2020, approximately 108% of oil production was hedged at a
weighted average price of approximately $60/barrel. For 2021, approximately 50% of expected oil production is hedged at a weighted average price of approximately $54/barrel.
•Mark-to-market losses related to a financial instrument owned held at fair value were $7.8 million during 2020 and $20.2 million during 2019.
Total expenses for Oil and gas were $178.7 million during 2020 as compared to $170.7 million in 2019. Although some of Vitesse Energy Finance's operating expenses were lower due to reduced production, this was offset by non-cash charges in 2020 to JETX Energy's oil and gas assets of $34.6 million and to Vitesse Energy Finance's oil and gas assets in the DJ Basin of $13.2 million. 2019 also included lease abandonment charges of $15.1 million and non-cash charges to JETX Energy's oil and gas assets of $10.9 million at JETX Energy.
Idaho Timber
High demand for wood for home improvement and construction led to favorable pricing and record results for Idaho Timber in 2020. Net revenues increased during 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to an increase in average selling price of 29%.
The increase in total expenses for Idaho Timber during 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflects increased cost of sales and increased compensation expense.
Real Estate
The increase in real estate revenues and real estate expenses during 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily relates to the July 1, 2019 acquisition of the remaining 30% of HomeFed we did not previously own. From July 1, 2019, the results of HomeFed are reflected on a consolidated basis.
Income (loss) related to real estate associated companies for 2020, includes a non-cash charge of $55.6 million to fully write off the value of HomeFed's RedSky JZ Fulton Investors ("RedSky JZ Fulton Mall") joint venture investment due to the softening of the Brooklyn real estate market and a non-cash charge of $6.9 million to fully write off HomeFed's interest in the Brooklyn Renaissance Plaza hotel related to the significant impact of COVID-19.
FXCM
Net revenues from our FXCM term loan include gains (losses) of $0.3 million and $(8.1) million during 2020 and 2019, respectively.
National Beef and Spectrum Brands
Income from associated companies in 2019, reflects our share of National Beef's results prior to our sale in November 2019.
Spectrum Brands net revenues reflect changes in the value of our investment. We classified Spectrum Brands as a financial instrument owned, at fair value for which the fair value option was elected and we reflected mark-to-market adjustments in Principal transactions revenues. We distributed all of our Spectrum Brands shares through a special pro rata dividend effective on October 11, 2019. We recorded a $451.1 million dividend payable as of the September 16, 2019 declaration date, which was equal to the fair value of Spectrum Brands shares at that time.
Other
Other revenues for 2019 include a $205.0 million pre-tax gain on the sale of our remaining 31% interest in National Beef and a $72.1 million pre-tax gain on the revaluation of our 70% interest in HomeFed to fair value in connection with the acquisition of the remaining common stock of HomeFed.
Other revenues also reflect realized and unrealized gains (losses) on financial instruments owned, which are held at fair value, of $54.7 million and $(279.3) million during 2020 and 2019, respectively. The gains (losses) on financial instruments owned include unrealized losses on WeWork of $43.0 million and $182.3 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively. The gains (losses) on financial instruments owned for 2020, also include a gain of $61.5 million from effective short-term hedges against mark-to-market and fair value decreases in our portfolio investments.
Corporate
A summary of results of operations for Corporate is as follows (in thousands):
Net revenues primarily include realized and unrealized securities gains and interest income for investments held at the holding company. Total expenses include share-based compensation expense of $13.7 million and $22.9 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Parent Company Interest
Parent company interest totaled $53.4 million and $53.0 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. In connection with the acquisition of HomeFed in 2019, we began capitalizing interest. Capitalized interest was allocated among all of HomeFed's projects that are currently under development. Parent company interest capitalized during 2020 and 2019 was $5.7 million and $6.0 million, respectively.
Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes was $298.7 million for 2020, representing an effective tax rate of 28.0%.
For 2019, our benefit for income taxes from continuing operations was $484.0 million. As discussed in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, during the second quarter of 2019, we completed the sale of our available for sale portfolio. In connection therewith, we recognized a tax benefit of $544.6 million during 2019. Unrealized gains and losses on available for sale securities, and their associated tax impacts, are recorded directly to equity as part of the Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) balance. Following the portfolio approach, when unrealized gains and losses and their associated tax impacts are recorded at a then current tax rate, and then realized later at a different tax rate, the difference between the tax impact initially recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and the tax impact removed from Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) upon realization remains in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) until the disposal of the portfolio and is referred to as a "lodged tax effect." Large changes in the fair value of our available for sale securities, primarily during 2008 through 2010, combined with fluctuations in our tax rate during those periods, generated a lodged tax benefit of $544.6 million. As a result of steps to improve our Corporate investment management efforts, we sold the remaining portion of our available for sale portfolio in the second quarter of 2019, which resulted in the realization of the $544.6 million tax benefit. While this realization did not impact total equity, it resulted in a tax benefit reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Operations of $544.6 million and, as a result, Retained earnings increased and Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) decreased by corresponding amounts.
For further information on income taxes, see Note 19 to our consolidated financial statements.
Discontinued Operations
On June 5, 2018, we sold 48% of National Beef to Marfrig for $907.7 million in cash, reducing our then ownership in National Beef to 31%. We accounted for our remaining interest under the equity method of accounting. The 2018 sale of National Beef met the GAAP criteria to be classified as a discontinued operation as the sale represented a strategic shift in our operations and financial results. As such, we classified the results of National Beef prior to June 5, 2018 as a discontinued operation and it is reported in Income from discontinued operations, net of income tax provision in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. In addition, we recognized a pre-tax gain as a result of the 2018 transaction of $873.5 million ($643.9 million after-tax) for the eleven months ended November 30, 2018, which has been recognized as Gain on disposal of discontinued operations, net of income tax provision in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
A summary of the results of discontinued operations for National Beef for the period from January 1, 2018 through June 4, 2018 as included in discontinued operations for the eleven months ended November 30, 2018 is as follows (in thousands):
National Beef's profitability is dependent, in large part, on the spread between its cost for live cattle, the primary raw material for its business, and the value received from selling boxed beef and other products, coupled with its overall volume. National Beef operates in a large and liquid commodity market and it does not have much influence over the price it pays for cattle or the selling price it receives for the products it produces. National Beef's profitability typically fluctuates seasonally, with relatively higher margins in the spring and summer months and during times of ample cattle availability. Throughout 2018, demand for beef and cattle supply remained strong, supporting favorable margin conditions.
For further information, see Note 26 to our consolidated financial statements.
Selected Statement of Financial Condition Data
The tables below reconcile the balance sheet for each of our segments to our consolidated balance sheet (in thousands):
(1) Jefferies Group long-term debt of $6.9 billion at November 30, 2020 is allocated to Investment Banking and Capital Markets, and Asset Management segments based on an internal management view only and may not be reflective of what long-term debt would be on a stand-alone segment basis.
(2) Long-term debt within Merchant Banking of $463.6 million at November 30, 2020, primarily includes $236.8 million for real estate businesses, $97.9 million for Vitesse Energy Finance and $129.0 million for Foursight Capital. At November 30, 2020, Vitesse Energy Finance had $98.5 million drawn out of the maximum $120.0 million borrowing base on its credit facility and Foursight Capital had $129.3 million drawn out of the maximum $175.0 million credit commitment on its credit facilities. See Note 12 in our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
(1) Jefferies Group long-term debt of $7.0 billion at November 30, 2019 is allocated to Investment Banking and Capital Markets, and Asset Management segments based on an internal management view only and may not be reflective of what long-term debt would be on a stand-alone segment basis.
(2) Long-term debt within Merchant Banking of $342.3 million at November 30, 2019, primarily includes $140.7 million for real estate businesses, $103.1 million for Vitesse Energy Finance and $98.3 million for Foursight Capital. At November 30, 2019, Vitesse Energy Finance had $104.0 million drawn out of the maximum $170.0 million borrowing base on its credit facility and Foursight Capital had $98.7 million drawn out of the maximum $175.0 million credit commitment on its credit facilities. See Note 12 in our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
The table below presents our capital by significant business and investment (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Parent Company Liquidity
Our strategy focuses on strengthening and expanding our core businesses of Investment Banking and Capital Markets and Asset Management, while continuing to simplify our structure and return capital to our shareholders. We are simplifying our structure through a managed transformation of Merchant Banking, which to date has included divestitures, special distributions to shareholders of assets, as well as transfers of financial assets out of our Merchant Banking portfolio and into Jefferies Group. We anticipate additional transactions as our transformation is completed. Some of these transactions have generated significant excess liquidity; some of these transactions have also reduced the future receipt of periodic distributions from subsidiaries to the parent company.
Parent company liquidity, which includes cash and investments that are easily convertible into cash within a relatively short period of time total $1,884.7 million at November 30, 2020, and are primarily comprised of cash, prime and government money market funds and other publicly traded securities. These are classified in our Consolidated Statement of Financial Condition as cash and cash equivalents and financial instruments owned, at fair value. At November 30, 2020, $1,551.7 million of this amount is invested in U.S. government money funds that invest at least 99.5% of its total assets in cash, securities issued by the U.S. government and U.S. government-sponsored entities and repurchase agreements that are fully collateralized by cash or government securities.
During the twelve months ended November 30, 2020, our parent company received cash distributions of $733.5 million from our subsidiary businesses, including $581.7 million from Jefferies Group. We also received $303.4 million from divestitures and repayments of advances.
Our recurring cash requirements, including the payment of interest on our parent company debt, dividends and corporate cash overhead expenses, aggregate approximately $309.7 million on an annual basis. Dividends paid during the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 of $160.9 million include quarterly dividends of $0.15 per share. On January 4, 2021, our Board of Directors increased our quarterly dividend by 33% to $0.20 per share. The payment of dividends is subject to the discretion of our Board of Directors and depends upon general business conditions, legal and contractual restrictions on the payment of dividends and other factors that our Board of Directors may deem to be relevant.
For many years, we benefited from federal net operating loss carryovers ("NOLs") which substantially offset our federal cash tax requirements. As a result of full utilization of our federal NOLs and other tax attributes, we expect to incur federal cash tax liabilities in 2021.
Our primary long-term parent company cash requirement is our $1.0 billion principal outstanding as of November 30, 2020 under our long-term debt, of which $750.0 million is due in 2023 and $250.0 million in 2043. As we generate excess liquidity, we evaluate the best use of the proceeds, which may include reductions to existing debt, share repurchases, special dividends, investments in our businesses, or any of a number of other options available to us.
Shares Outstanding
At November 30, 2019, we had approximately $203.6 million available for future share repurchases, based on the closing price of Jefferies common shares on November 30, 2019. In January 2020, the Board of Directors approved an additional $250.0 million share repurchase authorization. In March 2020, having completed the repurchase of shares under the previous authorization, the Board of Directors approved an additional share repurchase authorization of $100 million. In June 2020, the Board of Directors increased the share repurchase authorization by $176.7 million to $250.0 million. In September 2020, the Board of Directors increased the share repurchase authorization by $128.0 million to $250.0 million. During the twelve months ended November 30, 2020, we purchased a total of 42,134,910 of our common shares for $812.7 million, or an average price per share of $19.29. At November 30, 2020, we have approximately $57.2 million available for future repurchases. In January 2021, the Board of Directors increased the share repurchase authorization to $250.0 million, including the $57.2 million.
At November 30, 2020, we had outstanding 249,750,542 common shares and 23,868,000 share-based awards that do not require the holder to pay any exercise price (potentially an aggregate of 273,618,542 outstanding common shares if all awards become outstanding common shares). The 23,868,000 share-based awards include the target number of shares under the senior executive award plan, which is more fully discussed in Note 15.
Concentration and Liquidity Targets
From time to time in the past, we have accessed public and private credit markets and raised capital in underwritten bond financings. The funds raised have been used by us for general corporate purposes, including for our existing businesses and new investment opportunities. In addition, the ratings of Jefferies are a factor considered by rating agencies that rate the debt of our subsidiary companies, including Jefferies Group, whose access to external financing is important to its day to day operations. Ratings issued by bond rating agencies, subject to change at any time, are as follows:
(1) On April 15, 2020, Moody's Investors Service affirmed our rating of Baa3 and rating outlook of stable.
(2) On October 29, 2020, Standard and Poor's affirmed our rating of BBB and revised our rating outlook from negative to stable.
We target specific concentration and liquidity principles, although there is no legal requirement to do so.
Concentration Target: As a diversification measure, we limit cash investments such that our single largest investment does not exceed 20% of equity excluding Jefferies Group, and that our next largest investment does not exceed 10% of equity excluding Jefferies Group, in each case measured at the time the investment was made. On this basis, Linkem is our largest investment excluding Jefferies Group and Vitesse Energy Finance is our next largest investment excluding Jefferies Group. There were no investments made during the year that approached 10% of equity excluding Jefferies Group.
Liquidity Target: We hold a parent company liquidity reserve calculated as a minimum of twenty-four months of holding company expenses (excluding non-cash components), parent company interest, and dividends. Maturities of parent company debt within the upcoming year are also included in the target; however, our next maturity is during 2023 so there is no current inclusion.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
As discussed above, we have historically relied on our available liquidity to meet short-term and long-term needs, and to make acquisitions of new businesses and investments. Except as otherwise disclosed herein, our operating businesses do not generally require significant funds to support their operating activities. The mix of our operating businesses and investments can change frequently as a result of acquisitions or divestitures, the timing of which is impossible to predict but which often have a significant impact on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in any one period. Further, the timing and amounts of distributions from investments in associated companies may be outside our control. As a result, reported cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities do not generally follow any particular pattern or trend, and reported results in the most recent period should not be expected to recur in any subsequent period.
The following table provides a summary of our cash flows (in thousands):
During the twelve months ended November 30, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities primarily relates to funds provided by Jefferies Group of $1,870.9 million. Net losses related to property and equipment, and other assets includes the non-cash charge of $61.0 million to write down the value of certain of our assets during the twelve months ended November 30, 2020.
During the twelve months ended November 30, 2019, net cash used for operating activities primarily relates to funds used by Jefferies Group of $1,187.1 million. We also received distributions of $318.2 million from National Beef in 2019. Net gains related to real estate, property and equipment, and other assets for 2019 include the non-cash pre-tax gain of $72.1 million recognized in connection with the acquisition of the remaining interest of HomeFed.
During the twelve months ended November 30, 2020, net cash used for investing activities principally reflects $1,690.6 million of loans to and investments in associated companies and $813.9 million for advances on notes, loans and other receivables, partially offset by $1,556.0 million of capital distributions and loan repayments from associated companies and $686.1 million of collections on notes, loans and other receivables.
During the twelve months ended November 30, 2019, net cash provided by investing activities includes proceeds from sale of associated companies, primarily related to our sale of our investment in National Beef. Additionally, cash provided by investing activities for 2019 includes proceeds from maturities of investments of $531.1 million and proceeds from sales of investments of $913.2 million. Jefferies Group used funds of $124.4 million for investing activities in 2019.
During the twelve months ended November 30, 2020, net cash used for financing activities primarily relates to funds used to repurchase common shares for treasury of $816.9 million and funds used to pay dividends of $160.9 million. This was partially offset by funds provided by Jefferies Group of $215.5 million, including funds provided by the issuance of debt of $2,789.5 million and proceeds from other secured financings of $305.9 million, partially offset by funds used for the repayment of debt of $2,863.0 million.
During the twelve months ended November 30, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities primarily relates to funds provided by Jefferies Group of $2,167.4 million. This includes funds provided by the issuance of debt of $2,972.1 million and proceeds from other secured financings of $1,586.3 million, partially offset by funds used for the repayments of debt of $2,421.6 million. Net cash provided by financing activities for 2019 also includes funds used to repurchase common shares for treasury of $509.9 million and funds used to pay dividends of $149.6 million.
The following below provides information about our contractual obligations at November 30, 2020.
Amounts related to our U.S. pension obligations ($46.4 million) are not included in the above table as the timing of payments is uncertain; however, we do expect to make $8.0 million of contributions to these plans in 2021. For further information, see Note 17 in our consolidated financial statements. In addition, the above amounts do not include liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits as the timing of payments, if any, is uncertain. Such amounts aggregated $401.4 million at November 30, 2020; for more information, see Note 19 in our consolidated financial statements.
Our U.S. pension obligations relate to frozen defined benefit pension plans, principally the defined benefit plan of WilTel Communications Group, LLC ("WilTel"), our former telecommunications subsidiary. When we sold WilTel in 2005, its defined benefit pension plan was not transferred in connection with the sale. At November 30, 2020, we had recorded a liability of $38.0 million in our Consolidated Statement of Financial Condition for WilTel's unfunded defined benefit pension plan obligation. This amount represents the difference between the present value of amounts owed to former employees of WilTel (referred to as the projected benefit obligation) and the market value of plan assets set aside in segregated trust accounts. Since the benefits in this plan have been frozen, future changes to the unfunded benefit obligation are expected to principally result from benefit payments, changes in the market value of plan assets, differences between actuarial assumptions and actual experience and interest rates.
Calculations of pension expense and projected benefit obligations are prepared by actuaries based on assumptions provided by management. These assumptions are reviewed on an annual basis, including assumptions about discount rates, interest credit rates and expected long-term rates of return on plan assets. The timing of expected future benefit payments was used in conjunction with the Citigroup Pension Discount Curve to develop a discount rate for the WilTel plan that is representative of the high quality corporate bond market. Holding all other assumptions constant, a 0.25% change in the discount rate would affect pension expense in 2021 by $0.1 million and the benefit obligation by $6.4 million, of which $4.7 million relates to the WilTel plan.
The deferred losses in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) have not yet been recognized as components of net periodic pension cost in the Consolidated Statements of Operations ($57.3 million at November 30, 2020). These deferred amounts primarily result from differences between the actual and assumed return on plan assets and changes in actuarial assumptions, including changes in discount rates and changes in interest credit rates. They are amortized to expense if they exceed 10% of the greater of the projected benefit obligation or the market value of plan assets as of the beginning of the year. The estimated net loss that will be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) into pension expense in 2021 is $3.6 million.
The assumed long-term rates of return on plan assets are based on the investment objectives of the plans, which are more fully discussed in Note 17 in our consolidated financial statements.
Jefferies Group Liquidity
General
The Chief Financial Officer and Global Treasurer of Jefferies Group are responsible for developing and implementing liquidity, funding and capital management strategies for Jefferies Group. These policies are determined by the nature and needs of day to day business operations, business opportunities, regulatory obligations and liquidity requirements.
The actual levels of capital, total assets and financial leverage are a function of a number of factors, including asset composition, business initiatives and opportunities, regulatory requirements and cost and availability of both long-term and short-term funding. Jefferies Group has historically maintained a balance sheet consisting of a large portion of total assets in cash and liquid marketable securities, arising principally from traditional securities brokerage and trading activity. The liquid nature of these assets provides flexibility in financing and managing our business.
Jefferies Group maintains modest leverage to support its investment grade ratings. The growth of its balance sheet is supported by its equity and we have quantitative metrics in place to monitor leverage and double leverage. Jefferies Group capital plan is robust, in order to sustain its operating model through stressed conditions. We maintain adequate financial resources to support business activities in both normal and stressed market conditions, including a buffer in excess of regulatory, or other internal or external, requirements. Jefferies Group's access to funding and liquidity is stable and efficient to ensure that there is sufficient liquidity to meet its financial obligations in normal and stressed market conditions.
A business unit level balance sheet and cash capital analysis are prepared and reviewed with senior management on a weekly basis. As a part of this balance sheet review process, capital is allocated to all assets and gross balance sheet limits are adjusted, as necessary. This process ensures that the allocation of capital and costs of capital are incorporated into business decisions. The goals of this process are to protect the firm's platform, enable the businesses to remain competitive, maintain the ability to manage capital proactively and hold businesses accountable for both balance sheet and capital usage.
We actively monitor and evaluate our financial condition and the composition of assets and liabilities. The overall securities inventory is continually monitored, including the inventory turnover rate, which confirms the liquidity of overall assets. Substantially all of Jefferies Group's financial instruments are valued on a daily basis and we monitor and employ balance sheet limits for its various businesses.
At November 30, 2020, our Consolidated Statement of Financial Condition includes Jefferies Group's Level 3 financial instruments owned, at fair value that are approximately 2% of total financial instruments owned, at fair value.
Securities financing assets and liabilities include financing for financial instruments trading activity, matched book transactions and mortgage finance transactions. Matched book transactions accommodate customers, as well as obtain securities for the settlement and financing of inventory positions.
The following table presents period end balance, average balance and maximum balance at any month end within the periods presented for Securities purchased under agreements to resell and Securities sold under agreements to repurchase (in millions):
Fluctuations in the balance of repurchase agreements from period to period and intraperiod are dependent on business activity in those periods. Additionally, the fluctuations in the balances of securities purchased under agreements to resell are influenced in any given period by our clients' balances and our clients' desires to execute collateralized financing arrangements via the repurchase market or via other financing products. Average balances and period end balances will fluctuate based on market and liquidity conditions and we consider the fluctuations intraperiod to be typical for the repurchase market.
Liquidity Management
The key objectives of Jefferies Group's liquidity management framework are to support the successful execution of its business strategies while ensuring sufficient liquidity through the business cycle and during periods of financial distress. The liquidity management policies are designed to mitigate the potential risk that adequate financing may not be accessible to service financial obligations without material franchise or business impact.
The principal elements of Jefferies Group's liquidity management framework are the Contingency Funding Plan, the Cash Capital Policy and the assessment of Modeled Liquidity Outflow.
Contingency Funding Plan. Jefferies Group's Contingency Funding Plan is based on a model of a potential liquidity contraction over a one year time period. This incorporates potential cash outflows during a liquidity stress event, including, but not limited to, the following:
•Repayment of all unsecured debt maturing within one year and no incremental unsecured debt issuance;
•Maturity rolloff of outstanding letters of credit with no further issuance and replacement with cash collateral;
•Higher margin requirements than currently exist on assets on securities financing activity, including repurchase agreements;
•Liquidity outflows related to possible credit downgrade;
•Lower availability of secured funding;
•Client cash withdrawals;
•The anticipated funding of outstanding investment and loan commitments; and
•Certain accrued expenses and other liabilities and fixed costs.
Cash Capital Policy. A cash capital model is maintained that measures long-term funding sources against requirements. Sources of cash capital include equity and the noncurrent portion of long-term borrowings. Uses of cash capital include the following:
•Illiquid assets such as equipment, goodwill, net intangible assets, exchange memberships, deferred tax assets and certain investments;
•A portion of securities inventory that is not expected to be financed on a secured basis in a credit stressed environment (i.e., margin requirements); and
•Drawdowns of unfunded commitments.
To ensure that inventory does not need to be liquidated in the event of a funding crisis, we seek to maintain surplus cash capital, which is reflected in the leverage ratios Jefferies Group maintains. Jefferies Group's total long-term capital of $13.0 billion at November 30, 2020 exceeded its cash capital requirements.
Modeled Liquidity Outflow. Jefferies Group's businesses are diverse, and liquidity needs are determined by many factors, including market movements, collateral requirements and client commitments, all of which can change dramatically in a difficult funding environment. During a liquidity crisis, credit-sensitive funding, including unsecured debt and some types of secured financing agreements, may be unavailable, and the terms (e.g., interest rates, collateral provisions and tenor) or availability of other types of secured financing may change. As a result of Jefferies Group's policy to ensure it has sufficient funds to cover estimates of what may be needed in a liquidity crisis, Jefferies Group holds more cash and unencumbered securities and has greater long-term debt balances than the businesses would otherwise require. As part of this estimation process, we calculate a Modeled Liquidity Outflow that could be experienced in a liquidity crisis. Modeled Liquidity Outflow is based on a scenario that includes both a market-wide stress and firm-specific stress.
Based on the sources and uses of liquidity calculated under the Modeled Liquidity Outflow scenarios, we determine, based on a calculated surplus or deficit, additional long-term funding that may be needed versus funding through the repurchase financing market and consider any adjustments that may be necessary to Jefferies Group's inventory balances and cash holdings. At November 30, 2020, Jefferies Group had sufficient excess liquidity to meet all contingent cash outflows detailed in the Modeled Liquidity Outflow. We regularly refine our model to reflect changes in market or economic conditions and the firm's business mix.
Sources of Liquidity
Within Jefferies Group, the following are financial instruments that are cash and cash equivalents or are deemed by management to be generally readily convertible into cash, marginable or accessible for liquidity purposes within a relatively short period of time, as reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition (in thousands):
(1)Average balances are calculated based on weekly balances.
(2)At November 30, 2020 and 2019, $5,118.0 million and $4,496.7 million, respectively, was invested in U.S. government money funds that invest at least 99.5% of its total assets in cash, securities issued by the U.S. government and U.S. government-sponsored entities, and repurchase agreements that are fully collateralized by cash or government securities. The remaining $14.9 million and $87.4 million at November 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively, are invested in AAA rated prime money funds. The average balance of U.S. government money funds for the quarter ended November 30, 2020 was $4,030.2 million.
(3)Consists of high quality sovereign government securities and reverse repurchase agreements collateralized by U.S. government securities and other high quality sovereign government securities; deposits with a central bank within the EEA, Canada, Australia, Japan, Switzerland or the U.S.; and securities issued by a designated multilateral development bank and reverse repurchase agreements with underlying collateral comprised of these securities.
(4)Other includes unencumbered inventory representing an estimate of the amount of additional secured financing that could be reasonably expected to be obtained from financial instruments owned that are currently not pledged after considering reasonable financing haircuts.
In addition to the cash balances and liquidity pool presented above, the majority of financial instruments (both long and short) in our trading accounts are actively traded and readily marketable. At November 30, 2020, repurchase financing can be readily obtained for approximately 71.0% of Jefferies Group's inventory at haircuts of 10% or less, which reflects the liquidity of the inventory. In addition, as a matter of our policy, all of these assets have internal capital assessed, which is in addition to the funding haircuts provided in the securities finance markets. Additionally, certain of Jefferies Group's financial instruments owned primarily consisting of bank loans, consumer loans and investments are predominantly funded by Jefferies Group's long-term capital. Under Jefferies Group's cash capital policy, capital allocation levels are modeled that are more stringent than the haircuts used in the market for secured funding; and surplus capital is maintained at these more stringent levels. We continually assess the liquidity of Jefferies Group's inventory based on the level at which Jefferies Group could obtain financing in the marketplace for a given asset. Assets are considered to be liquid if financing can be obtained in the repurchase market or the securities lending market at collateral haircut levels of 10% or less.
The following summarizes Jefferies Group's financial instruments owned by asset class that are considered to be of a liquid nature and the amount of such assets that have not been pledged as collateral as reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition (in thousands):
(1)Consists solely of agency mortgage-backed securities issued by Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae and Ginnie Mae. These securities include pass-through securities, securities backed by adjustable rate mortgages, collateralized mortgage obligations, commercial mortgage-backed securities and interest- and principal-only securities.
(2)Unencumbered liquid balances represent assets that can be sold or used as collateral for a loan, but have not been.
In addition to being able to be readily financed at modest haircut levels, it is estimated that each of the individual securities within each asset class above could be sold into the market and converted into cash within three business days under normal market conditions, assuming that the entire portfolio of a given asset class was not simultaneously liquidated. There are no restrictions on the unencumbered liquid securities, nor have they been pledged as collateral.
Sources of Funding and Capital Resources
Jefferies Group's assets are funded by equity capital, senior debt, securities loaned, securities sold under agreements to repurchase, customer free credit balances, bank loans and other payables.
Secured Financing
Readily available secured funding is used to finance Jefferies Group's inventory of financial instruments. Jefferies Group's ability to support increases in total assets is largely a function of the ability to obtain short and intermediate-term secured funding, primarily through securities financing transactions. Repurchase or reverse repurchase agreements (collectively "repos"), respectively, are used to finance a portion of long inventory and cover some of short inventory by pledging and borrowing securities. At November 30, 2020, approximately 60.1% of Jefferies Group's cash and noncash repurchase financing activities used collateral that was considered eligible collateral by central clearing corporations. During the year ended November 30, 2020, an average of approximately 87.7% of Jefferies Group's cash and noncash repurchase financing activities used collateral that was considered eligible collateral by central clearing corporations. Central clearing corporations are situated between participating members who borrow cash and lend securities (or vice versa); accordingly, repo participants contract with the central clearing corporation and not one another individually. Therefore, counterparty credit risk is borne by the central clearing corporation which mitigates the risk through initial margin demands and variation margin calls from repo participants. The comparatively large proportion of Jefferies Group's total repo activity that is eligible for central clearing reflects the high quality and liquid composition of the inventory Jefferies Group carries in its trading books. For those asset classes not eligible for central clearing house financing, Jefferies Group seeks to execute its bi-lateral financings on an extended term basis and the tenor of Jefferies Group's repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements generally exceeds the expected holding period of the assets Jefferies Group is financing. The weighted average maturity of cash and noncash repurchase agreements for non-clearing corporation eligible funded inventory is approximately five months at November 30, 2020.
Jefferies Group's ability to finance its inventory via central clearinghouses and bi-lateral arrangements is augmented by Jefferies Group's ability to draw bank loans on an uncommitted basis under its various banking arrangements. At November 30, 2020, short-term borrowings, which must be repaid within one year or less and include bank loans and overdrafts, borrowings under revolving credit facilities, floating rate puttable notes and equity-linked notes, totaled $764.7 million. Interest under the bank
lines is generally at a spread over the federal funds rate. Letters of credit are used in the normal course of business mostly to satisfy various collateral requirements in favor of exchanges in lieu of depositing cash or securities. Average daily short-term borrowings outstanding for Jefferies Group were $656.3 million and $555.4 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Jefferies Group's short-term borrowings include facilities that contain certain covenants that, among other things, require it to maintain a specified level of tangible net worth and impose certain restrictions on the future indebtedness of certain of its subsidiaries that are borrowers. At November 30, 2020, Jefferies Group was in compliance with all covenants under these facilities. Jefferies Group's facilities included within short-term borrowings at November 30, 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
(1) Interest is generally based at spreads over the Federal Funds Rate as defined in this master loan agreement.
(2) Interest is based on an annual alternative base rate or an adjusted LIBOR, as defined in this credit facility agreement.
(3) Interest is based on a rate per annum equal to LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 2.05%.
(4) During 2020, Jefferies LLC entered into a revolving credit facility with the Bank of New York Mellon for a committed amount of $100.0 million, maturing on September 13, 2021. Interest is based on a rate per annum equal to the Federal Funds Rate plus 2%. At November 30, 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding under this agreement.
Jefferies Group's short-term borrowings at November 30, 2020 also include floating rate puttable notes of $6.8 million, equity-linked notes of $5.1 million and other bank loans of $6.8 million.
In addition, the Bank of New York Mellon has agreed to make revolving intraday credit advances ("Jefferies Group Intraday Credit Facility") for an aggregate committed amount of $150.0 million. The Jefferies Group Intraday Credit Facility is structured so that advances are generally repaid before the end of each business day. However, if an advance is not repaid by the end of any business day, the advance is converted to an overnight loan. Intraday loans accrue interest at a rate of 0.12%. Interest is charged based on the number of minutes in a day the advance is outstanding. Overnight loans are charged interest at the base rate plus 3% on a daily basis. The base rate is the higher of the federal funds rate plus 0.50% or the prime rate in effect at that time. The Intraday Credit Facility contains financial covenants, which include a minimum regulatory net capital requirement for Jefferies Group's U.S. broker-dealer, Jefferies LLC. At November 30, 2020, Jefferies Group was in compliance with all debt covenants under the Jefferies Group Intraday Credit Facility.
In addition to the above financing arrangements, Jefferies Group issues notes backed by eligible collateral under a master repurchase agreement, which provides an additional financing source for its inventory ("repurchase agreement financing program"). The notes issued under the program are presented within Other secured financings in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition. At November 30, 2020, the outstanding notes were $2.7 billion, bear interest at a spread over LIBOR and mature from December 2020 to August 2022.
Long-Term Debt
Jefferies Group's long-term debt reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Condition at November 30, 2020 is $6.9 billion. Jefferies Group's long-term debt, excluding its revolving credit facility and the secured bank loan, has a weighted average maturity of approximately 10.8 years.
During the twelve months ended November 30, 2020, Jefferies Group's 2.375% Euro Medium Term Notes matured and were repaid, and its 6.875% Senior Notes due 2021 were retired early. Additionally, during the twelve months ended November 30, 2020, Jefferies Group issued structured notes with a total principal amount of approximately $325.5 million, net of retirements, an additional $150.0 million principal amount of 5.125% Senior Notes due 2023 and $500.0 million principal amount of 2.75% Senior Notes due 2032. At November 30, 2020, all of Jefferies Group's structured notes contain various interest rate payment terms and are accounted for at fair value, with changes in fair value resulting from a change in the instrument specific credit risk presented in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and changes in fair value resulting from non-credit components recognized in Principal transactions revenue. The fair value of all of Jefferies Group's structured notes at November 30, 2020 was $1,712.2 million
Jefferies Group has a Revolving Credit Facility ("Jefferies Group Revolving Credit Facility") with a group of commercial banks for an aggregate principal amount of $190.0 million. At November 30, 2020, borrowings under the Jefferies Group Revolving Credit Facility amounted to $189.7 million. Interest is based on an annual alternative base rate or an adjusted LIBOR, as defined in the Jefferies Group Revolving Credit Facility agreement. The Jefferies Group Revolving Credit Facility contains certain covenants that, among other things, requires Jefferies Group LLC to maintain specified level of tangible net worth and liquidity amounts, and imposes certain restrictions on future indebtedness of and requires specified levels of regulated capital for certain of its subsidiaries. Throughout the year and at November 30, 2020, no instances of noncompliance with the Jefferies Group Revolving Credit Facility covenants occurred and we expect to remain in compliance given our current liquidity and anticipated funding requirements given our business plan and profitability expectations.
One of Jefferies Group's subsidiaries has a Loan and Security Agreement with a bank for a term loan with a principal amount of $50.0 million ("Jefferies Group Secured Bank Loan"). This Jefferies Group Secured Bank Loan matures on September 27, 2021 and is collateralized by certain trading securities. Interest on the Jefferies Group Secured Bank Loan is 1.25% plus LIBOR. The agreement contains certain covenants that, among other things, restrict lien or encumbrance upon any of the pledged collateral. At November 30, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants under the Jefferies Group Loan and Security Agreement.
Jefferies Group's long-term debt ratings are as follows:
(1) On April 15, 2020, Moody's Investors Service affirmed Jefferies Group's rating of Baa3 and rating outlook of stable.
(2) On October 29, 2020, Standard and Poor's affirmed Jefferies Group's rating of BBB and revised its rating outlook from negative to stable.
Jefferies Group's access to external financing to finance its day to day operations, as well as the cost of that financing, is dependent upon various factors, including its debt ratings. Jefferies Group's current debt ratings are dependent upon many factors, including industry dynamics, operating and economic environment, operating results, operating margins, earnings trend and volatility, balance sheet composition, liquidity and liquidity management, capital structure, overall risk management, business diversification and market share and competitive position in the markets in which it operates. Deterioration in any of these factors could impact Jefferies Group's credit ratings. While certain aspects of a credit rating downgrade are quantifiable pursuant to contractual provisions, the impact on business and trading results in future periods is inherently uncertain and depends on a number of factors, including the magnitude of the downgrade, the behavior of individual clients and future mitigating action taken by us.
In connection with certain over-the-counter derivative contract arrangements and certain other trading arrangements, we may be required to provide additional collateral to counterparties, exchanges and clearing organizations in the event of a credit rating downgrade. At November 30, 2020, the amount of additional collateral that could be called by counterparties, exchanges and clearing organizations under the terms of such agreements in the event of a downgrade of Jefferies Group's long-term credit rating below investment grade was $102.9 million. For certain foreign clearing organizations, credit rating is only one of several factors employed in determining collateral that could be called. The above represents management's best estimate for additional collateral to be called in the event of a credit rating downgrade. The impact of additional collateral requirements is considered in Jefferies Group's Contingency Funding Plan and calculation of Modeled Liquidity Outflow, as described above.
Ratings issued by credit rating agencies are subject to change at any time.
Net Capital
Jefferies Group operates a broker-dealer, Jefferies LLC, registered with the SEC and member firms of FINRA. Jefferies LLC is subject to the SEC Uniform Net Capital Rule ("Rule 15c3-1"), which requires the maintenance of minimum net capital and has elected to calculate minimum capital requirements using the alternative method permitted by Rule 15c3-1 in calculating net capital. Jefferies LLC, as a dually-registered U.S. broker-dealer and FCM, is also subject to Rule 1.17 of the CFTC, which sets forth minimum financial requirements. The minimum net capital requirement in determining excess net capital for a dually-registered U.S. broker-dealer and FCM is equal to the greater of the requirement under Rule 15c3-1 or CFTC Rule 1.17. Jefferies LLC's net capital and excess net capital at November 30, 2020 were $2,161.3 million and $2,060.5 million, respectively. FINRA is the designated examining authority for Jefferies LLC and the NFA is the designated self-regulatory organization for Jefferies LLC as an FCM.
Certain other U.S. and non-U.S. subsidiaries of Jefferies Group are subject to capital adequacy requirements as prescribed by the regulatory authorities in their respective jurisdictions, including Jefferies International Limited which is subject to the regulatory supervision and requirements of the Financial Conduct Authority in the U.K. The Dodd-Frank Act was signed into law on July 21, 2010. The Dodd-Frank Act contains provisions that require the registration of all swap dealers, major swap participants, security-based swap dealers, and/or major security-based swap participants. The CFTC has finalized rules establishing capital requirements and financial reporting requirements for CFTC registered swap dealers not subject to regulation by a banking regulator. We expect that these provisions will result in modifications to the regulatory capital requirements of some of Jefferies Group's entities, and will result in some of Jefferies Group's other entities becoming subject to regulatory capital requirements for the first time, including Jefferies Financial Services, Inc., which registered as a swap dealer with the CFTC during January 2013 and Jefferies Financial Products LLC, which registered during August 2014. Jefferies Group may also be required in the future to register one or more additional subsidiaries as security-based swap dealers with the SEC. Compliance with these rules is required by October 6, 2021.
The regulatory capital requirements referred to above may restrict Jefferies Group's ability to withdraw capital from its regulated subsidiaries.
Some of our other consolidated subsidiaries also have credit agreements which may restrict the payment of cash dividends, or the ability to make loans or advances to the parent company.
Other Developments
The U.K. left the EU on January 31, 2020 and the current transition period ended on December 31, 2020. On January 1, 2021, Jefferies Group's U.K. broker dealer, Jefferies International Limited, is no longer able to provide services to European clients under the passport regime. Jefferies Group has taken steps to ensure its ability to provide services to its European clients without interruption by establishing a wholly-owned subsidiary in Germany ("Jefferies GmbH"), which is authorized and regulated in Germany by the Federal Financial Services Authority ("BaFin"). European clients have been migrated to Jefferies GmbH to conduct business across all of Jefferies Group's European investment banking, fixed income and equity platforms. During 2020, Jefferies Group's European branches in Amsterdam, Madrid, Milan, Paris and Stockholm were migrated and Jefferies Group increased its local employees, equity capital and established clearing relationships.
Central banks and regulators around the world have convened working groups to find, and implement the transition to, suitable replacements for IBORs. Jefferies Group has an active transition program that focuses on an orderly transition from IBORs to alternative reference rates, including internal operational readiness and risk management. Jefferies Group is identifying, assessing and monitoring risk associated with the expected discontinuation of IBORs, which includes taking steps to update operational processes and models and evaluation legacy contracts for any changes that may be required.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At November 30, 2020, our commitments and guarantees, substantially all of which related to Jefferies Group, are as follows:
(1) Certain of our derivative contracts meet the definition of a guarantee and are therefore included in the above table. For additional information on commitments, see Note 22 in our consolidated financial statements.
We have agreed to reimburse Berkshire Hathaway for up to one-half of any losses incurred under a $1.5 billion surety policy securing outstanding commercial paper issued by an affiliate of Berkadia. As of November 30, 2020, the aggregate amount of commercial paper outstanding was $1.47 billion. This commitment is not included in the table above as the timing of payments, if any, is uncertain.
In the normal course of business, we engage in other off-balance sheet arrangements, including derivative contracts. Neither derivatives' notional amounts nor underlying instrument values are reflected as assets or liabilities in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition. Rather, the fair values of derivative contracts are reported in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition as Financial instruments owned, at fair value or Financial instruments sold, not yet purchased, at fair value as applicable. Derivative contracts are reflected net of cash paid or received pursuant to credit support agreements and are reported on a net by counterparty basis when a legal right of offset exists under an enforceable master netting agreement. For additional information about our accounting policies and our derivative activities see Notes 2, 4 and 5 in our consolidated financial statements.
We are routinely involved with variable interest entities ("VIEs") in the normal course of business. At November 30, 2020, we did not have any commitments to purchase assets from our VIEs. For additional information regarding VIEs, see Notes 7 and 8 in our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could significantly differ from those estimates. We believe that the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting estimates, which are those that are important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments - Financial instruments owned, at fair value and Financial instruments sold, not yet purchased, at fair value are recorded at fair value, either as required by accounting pronouncements or through the fair value option election. Gains and losses on Financial instruments owned, at fair value and Financial instruments sold, not yet purchased, at fair value are recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in Principal transactions. Fair value is the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date (the exit price).
In determining fair value, we maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs by requiring that observable inputs be used when available. Observable inputs are inputs that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability based on market data obtained from independent sources. Unobservable inputs reflect our assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability developed based on the best information available in the circumstances. We apply a hierarchy to categorize our fair value measurements broken down into three levels based on the transparency of inputs as follows:
Level 1: Quoted prices are available in active markets for identical assets or liabilities as of the reported date. Valuation adjustments and block discounts are not applied to Level 1 instruments.
Level 2: Pricing inputs other than quoted prices in active markets, which are either directly or indirectly observable at the reported date. The nature of these financial instruments includes cash instruments for which quoted prices are available but traded less frequently, derivative instruments for which fair values have been derived using model inputs that are directly observable in the market, or can be derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data, and instruments that are fair valued using other financial instruments, the parameters of which can be directly observed.
Level 3: Instruments that have little to no pricing observability as of the reported date. These financial instruments are measured using management's best estimate of fair value, where the inputs into the determination of fair value require significant management judgment or estimation.
Fair value is a market based measure; therefore, when market observable inputs are not available, our judgment is applied to reflect those judgments that a market participant would use in valuing the same asset or liability. The availability of observable inputs can vary for different products. We use prices and inputs that are current as of the measurement date even in periods of market disruption or illiquidity. The valuation of financial instruments classified in Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy involves the greatest amount of management judgment.
Jefferies Group's Independent Price Verification Group, independent of its trading function, plays an important role in determining that financial instruments are appropriately valued and that fair value measurements are reliable. This is particularly important where prices or valuations that require inputs are less observable. In the event that observable inputs are not available, the control processes are designed to assure that the valuation approach utilized is appropriate and consistently applied and that the assumptions are reasonable. Where a pricing model is used to determine fair value, these control processes include reviews of the pricing model's theoretical soundness and appropriateness by risk management personnel with relevant expertise who are independent from the trading desks. In addition, recently executed comparable transactions and other observable market data are considered for purposes of validating assumptions underlying the model.
For further information on the fair value definition, Level 1, Level 2, Level 3 and related valuation techniques, see Notes 2 and 4 in our consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes - We record a valuation allowance to reduce our net deferred tax asset to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. We are required to consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, and to weigh the evidence when determining whether a valuation allowance is required and the amount of such valuation allowance. Generally, greater weight is required to be placed on objectively verifiable evidence when making this assessment, in particular on recent historical operating results.
We also record reserves for unrecognized tax benefits based on our assessment of the probability of successfully sustaining tax filing positions. Management exercises significant judgment when assessing the probability of successfully sustaining tax filing positions, and in determining whether a contingent tax liability should be recorded and if so, estimating the amount. If our tax filing positions are successfully challenged, payments could be required that are in excess of reserved amounts or we may be required to reduce the carrying amount of our net deferred tax asset, either of which could be significant to our Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition or results of operations.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets - We evaluate our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate, in management's judgment, that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. When testing for impairment, we group our long-lived assets with other assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities (or asset group). The determination of whether an asset group is recoverable is based on management's estimate of undiscounted future cash flows directly attributable to the asset group as compared to its carrying value. If the carrying amount of the asset group is greater than the undiscounted cash flows, an impairment loss would be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds its estimated fair value.
Due to a decline in oil and gas prices during the second quarter of 2020, Vitesse Energy Finance performed impairment analyses on its proven oil and gas properties in the DJ Basin of Wyoming and Colorado and the Bakken Shale oil field in North Dakota. Vitesse Energy Finance first determined the estimated undiscounted cash flows based on the reserves and costs utilized in its reserve report and then updated those cash flows based on strip pricing as of May 31, 2020. The expected undiscounted future net cash flows were then compared to the end of quarter net carrying value of the oil and gas properties. No impairment of the Bakken Shale oil field assets was necessary as the undiscounted future net cash flows significantly exceeded the carrying value of these assets. As undiscounted future net cash flows were lower than the carrying value of the DJ Basin properties, Vitesse Energy Finance then determined the estimated fair value of the proven properties. To measure the estimated fair value of its proven properties, Vitesse Energy Finance used unobservable Level 3 inputs, including a 10.0% discount rate and estimated future cash flows from its reserve report. The estimated fair value of Vitesse Energy Finance's proven oil and gas properties in the DJ Basin totaled $26.8 million, which was $13.2 million lower than the carrying value as of the end of the second quarter of 2020. As a result, an impairment charge of $13.2 million was recorded in Selling, general and other expenses during 2020.
Due to a decline in oil and gas prices during the first quarter of 2020, JETX Energy performed an impairment analysis for its oil and gas properties in the East Eagle Ford. JETX Energy first determined the estimated undiscounted cash flows based on the reserves and costs utilized in its reserve report and then updated those cash flows based on strip pricing as of February 29, 2020. The expected undiscounted future net cash flows were then compared to the end of quarter net carrying value of the proven properties. As the undiscounted future net cash flows were lower than the carrying value, JETX Energy then determined the estimated fair value of the proven properties. To measure the estimated fair value of its proven properties, JETX Energy used unobservable Level 3 inputs, including a 10.0% discount rate and estimated future cash flows from its reserve report. The estimated fair value of JETX Energy's proven oil and gas properties in the East Eagle Ford totaled $9.6 million, which was $33.0 million lower than the carrying value as of the end of first quarter of 2020. As a result, an impairment charge of $33.0 million was recorded in Selling, general and other expenses during 2020.
Impairment of Equity Method Investments - We evaluate equity method investments for impairment when operating losses or other factors may indicate a decrease in value which is other than temporary. We consider a variety of factors including economic conditions nationally and in their geographic areas of operation, adverse changes in the industry in which they operate, declines in business prospects, deterioration in earnings, increasing costs of operations and other relevant factors specific to the investee. Whenever we believe conditions or events indicate that one of these investments might be significantly impaired, we obtain from such investee updated cash flow projections. We use this information and, together with discussions with the investee's management and comparable public company analysis, evaluate if the book value of its investment exceeds its fair value, and if so and the situation is deemed other than temporary, record an impairment charge.
As described further in Note 9, in the third quarter of 2018 we engaged an independent valuation firm to assist management in estimating the fair value of our equity investment in Golden Queen. Our estimate of fair value was based on a discounted cash flow analysis and is categorized within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. The discounted cash flow valuation model used inputs including management's projections of future Golden Queen cash flows and a discount rate of 12%. The estimated fair value of our equity investment in Golden Queen was $62.3 million, which was $47.9 million lower than our prior carrying value at the end of the second quarter 2018. As a result, an impairment charge of $47.9 million was recorded in Income (loss) related to associated companies in the third quarter of 2018.
During the fourth quarter of 2018, we recorded an impairment charge of $62.1 million related to the equity component of our investment in FXCM, which was based on updated expectations that had been impacted by the then revised regulations of the European Securities Market Authority and dampened operating results. Based on the updated projections, we evaluated in the fourth quarter of 2018 whether our equity method investment was fully recoverable. We engaged an independent valuation firm to assist management in estimating the fair value of FXCM. Our estimate of fair value was based on a discounted cash flow analysis. The result of our analysis indicated that the estimated fair value of our equity interest in FXCM was lower than our carrying value by $62.1 million. We concluded that based on the decline in projections and the adverse effects of the European regulations, that the decline in fair value of our equity interest was other than temporary. As a result, we impaired our equity investment in FXCM in the fourth quarter of 2018 by $62.1 million.
HomeFed has a 49% membership interest in the RedSky JZ Fulton Mall joint venture, which owns a property in Brooklyn, New York. The property consists of 14 separate tax lots, divided into two development sites which may be redeveloped with buildings consisting of up to 540,000 square feet of floor area development rights. During the first quarter of 2020, difficulties were encountered with attempts to refinance debt within the investment. We viewed this, combined with a softening of the Brooklyn, New York real estate market during the quarter, as a triggering event and evaluated HomeFed's equity method investment in RedSky JZ Fulton Mall to determine if there was an impairment. In connection with this evaluation, we obtained an appraisal which reflected a reduction in the value of the investment in comparison to an earlier appraisal obtained shortly before the beginning of the quarter. The appraisal was based off of Level 3 inputs consisting of prices of comparable properties and the appraisal indicated that the value of the property was worth less than the debt outstanding. HomeFed recorded an impairment charge of $55.6 million within Income (loss) related to associated companies during 2020, which represented all of its carrying value in the joint venture.
Goodwill - We allocate the acquisition cost of consolidated businesses to the specific tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based upon their fair values. Significant judgments and estimates are often made by management to determine these values, and may include the use of appraisals, consideration of market quotes for similar transactions, use of discounted cash flow techniques or consideration of other information we believe to be relevant. Any excess acquisition cost over the fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill, which is not amortized to expense. Substantially all of our goodwill was recognized in connection with the Jefferies Group acquisition.
At least annually, and more frequently if warranted, we assess whether goodwill has been impaired at the reporting unit level. In testing for goodwill impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances lead to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events and circumstances, we conclude that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then performing the two-step impairment test is not necessary. If we conclude otherwise, we are required to perform the two-step quantitative impairment test. In the first step, the fair value of each reporting unit is compared with its carrying value, including goodwill and allocated intangible assets. If the fair value is in excess of the carrying value, the goodwill for the reporting unit is considered not to be impaired. If the fair value is less than the carrying value then a second step is performed in order to measure the amount of the impairment loss, if any, which is based on comparing the implied fair value of the reporting unit's goodwill to the carrying value. We adopted Accounting Standards Update No. 2017-04 on December 1, 2020, which simplifies goodwill impairment testing by eliminating the second step of the impairment test noted above. If the total carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds the fair value, an impairment charge would be recorded to goodwill for the difference between the carrying value and the fair value.
The fair values are based on valuation techniques that we believe market participants would use, although the valuation process requires significant judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The methodologies we utilize in estimating fair value include price-to-earnings and price-to-book multiples of comparable public companies and/or projected cash flows. In addition, as the fair values determined under a market approach represent a noncontrolling interest, we applied a control premium to arrive at the estimated fair value of our reporting units on a controlling basis. The estimates and assumptions used in determining fair value could have a significant effect on whether or not an impairment charge is recorded and the magnitude of such a charge. Adverse market or economic events could result in impairment charges in future periods.
An independent valuation specialist was engaged to assist with the valuation process relating to the Investment Banking and Capital Markets, and Asset Management segments for our annual goodwill impairment test as of August 1, 2020. The results of our annual goodwill impairment test for both the Investment Banking and Capital Markets segment and the Asset Management segment did not indicate any goodwill impairment.
Intangible Assets - Intangible assets deemed to have finite lives are generally amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, where the useful life is the period over which the asset is expected to contribute directly, or indirectly, to our future cash flows. Intangible assets are reviewed for impairment on an interim basis when certain events or circumstances
exist. If future undiscounted cash flows are estimated to be less than the carrying amounts of the asset groups used to generate those cash flows in subsequent reporting periods, particularly for those with large investments in amortizable intangible assets, impairment charges would have to be recorded.
An intangible asset with an indefinite useful life is not amortized but assessed for impairment annually, or more frequently, when certain events or circumstances exist indicating an assessment for impairment is necessary. Impairment exists when the carrying amount exceeds its fair value. Fair value is determined using valuation techniques consistent with what a market participant would use. All of our indefinite-lived intangible assets were recognized in connection with the 2013 Jefferies Group acquisition, which consists of exchange and clearing organization membership interests and registrations. Our annual impairment testing date was August 1, 2020. At August 1, 2020, we elected to perform a quantitative assessment of membership interests and registrations that have available quoted sales prices as well as certain other membership interests and registrations that have declined in utilization. Qualitative assessments were performed on the remainder of our indefinite-life intangible assets. In applying our quantitative assessment at August 1, 2020, we recognized immaterial impairment losses on certain exchange membership interests and registrations. With regard to our qualitative assessment of the remaining indefinite-life intangible assets, based on our assessment of market conditions, the utilization of the assets and the replacement costs associated with the assets, we concluded that it is not more likely than not that the intangible assets are impaired.
Contingencies - In the normal course of business, we have been named, from time to time, as a defendant in legal and regulatory proceedings. We are also involved, from time to time, in other exams, investigations and similar reviews (both formal and informal) by governmental and self-regulatory agencies regarding our businesses, certain of which may result in judgments, settlements, fines, penalties or other injunctions.
We recognize a liability for a contingency when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. If the reasonable estimate of a probable loss is a range, we accrue the most likely amount of such loss, and if such amount is not determinable, then we accrue the minimum in the range as the loss accrual. The determination of the outcome and loss estimates requires significant judgment on the part of management, can be highly subjective and is subject to significant change with the passage of time as more information becomes available. Estimating the ultimate impact of litigation matters is inherently uncertain, in particular because the ultimate outcome will rest on events and decisions of others that may not be within our power to control. We do not believe that any of our current litigation will have a significant adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or liquidity; however, if amounts paid at the resolution of litigation are in excess of recorded reserve amounts, the excess could be significant in relation to results of operations for that period. For further information, see Note 22 in our consolidated financial statements.