Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Cautious Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations include a number of forward-looking statements that reflect management’s current views with respect to future events and financial performance. You can identify these statements by forward-looking words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate” and “continue,” or similar words. Those statements include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of us and members of management team as well as the assumptions on which such statements are based. Prospective investors are cautioned that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risk and uncertainties, and that actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by such forward-looking statements.
Readers are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in this report and in our other reports filed with the SEC. Important factors currently known to management could cause actual results to differ materially from those in forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements to reflect changed assumptions, the occurrence of unanticipated events or changes in the future operating results over time. We believe that our assumptions are based upon reasonable data derived from and known about our business and operations. No assurances are made that actual results of operations or the results of our future activities will not differ materially from our assumptions. Factors that could cause differences include, but are not limited to, expected market demand for our products, fluctuations in pricing of our products, and competition.
The following discussion provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our past financial condition and plan of operations. The discussion below should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
The Company was incorporated in the State of Nevada on September 21, 1989 under the name of Fulton Ventures, Inc. Since incorporated, the Company has engaged in a variety of businesses, but has been inactive since late 2014 through the Merger that closed on September 14, 2018. Since the Merger, the Company has been operated under the control of current management and continued to operate the business of Jacksam Corporation, described herein, as our sole business. Our sole business has been the design, manufacturing and sale of vaporizer cartridge filling machines, capping machines, pre-roll filling machines, and cartridges to customers in the medical and recreational cannabis, hemp, and CBD industries.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (US GAAP). In doing so, we make estimates and assumptions that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, gains and losses, as well as related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Accordingly, actual results could differ materially from our estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial condition or results of operations will be affected. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. We refer to accounting estimates of this type as critical accounting policies and estimates, which we discuss further below.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amount and do not bear interest. The Company extends unsecured credit to its customers in the ordinary course of business but mitigates the associated risks by performing credit checks and actively pursuing past due accounts. The Company recognizes an allowance for losses on accounts receivable in an amount equal to the estimated probable losses net of recoveries. The allowance is based on an analysis of historical bad debt experience, current receivables aging, and expected future bad debts, as well as an assessment of specific identifiable customer accounts considered at risk or uncollectible. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had recorded an allowance for doubtful accounts of $74,000.
Inventory
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost, determined on the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method or net realizable value. Cost principally consists of the purchase price (adjusted for lower of cost or market), customs, duties, and freight. The Company periodically reviews historical sales activity to determine potentially obsolete items and evaluates the impact of any anticipated changes in future demand.
The December 31, 2020 and 2019 inventory consisted entirely of finished goods. The Company will maintain an allowance based on specific inventory items that have shown no activity over a 24-month period. The Company tracks inventory as it is disposed, scrapped or sold at below cost to determine whether additional items on hand should be reduced in value through an allowance method. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, the Company has determined that no allowance is required.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property and equipment is measured at cost, less accumulated depreciation, and is reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Depreciation of property and equipment is provided utilizing the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives, ranging from 5 to 7 years of the respective assets. Expenditures for maintenance and repairs are charged to expense as incurred. Upon sale or retirement of property and equipment, the related cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any gain or loss is reflected in the statements of operations.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company measures assets and liabilities at fair value based on an expected exit price as defined by the authoritative guidance on fair value measurements, which represents the amount that would be received on the sale of an asset or paid to transfer a liability, as the case may be, in an orderly transaction between market participants. As such, fair value may be based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability. The authoritative guidance on fair value measurements establishes a consistent framework for measuring fair value on either a recurring or nonrecurring basis whereby inputs, used in valuation techniques, are assigned a hierarchical level.
The following are the hierarchical levels of inputs to measure fair value:
Level 1 - Observable inputs that reflect quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Inputs reflect quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in markets that are not active;
Quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; Inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the assets or liabilities; or inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data by correlation or other means.
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs reflecting the Company’s assumptions incorporated in valuation techniques used to determine fair value. These assumptions are required to be consistent with market participant assumptions that are reasonably available.
The carrying amounts of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities, such as cash, prepaid expenses, other current assets, accounts payable & accrued expenses, certain notes payable and an approximate of their fair values because of the short maturity of these instruments.
Binomial Calculation model
The Company uses a binomial calculator model to determine fair market value of warrants and options issued.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Basic net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Potential common stock equivalents are determined using the treasury stock method. For diluted net loss per share purposes, the Company excludes stock options and other stock-based awards, including shares issued as a result of option exercises that are subject to repurchase by the Company, whose effect would be anti-dilutive from the calculation. During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, common stock equivalents were excluded from the calculation of diluted net loss per common share, as their effect was anti-dilutive due to the net loss incurred. Therefore, basic and diluted net loss per share was the same in all periods presented.
The Company had 11,871,324 and 13,153,968 potentially dilutive securities that have been excluded from the computation of diluted weighted-average shares outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, as they would be anti-dilutive. Additionally, 1,443,414 shares of common stock issued during the year ended December 31, 2020 under a share lending arrangement are excluded from the calculation of weighted-average shares outstanding.
Issuance Costs Related to Equity and Debt
The Company allocates issuance costs between the individual freestanding instruments identified on the same basis as proceeds were allocated. Issuance costs associated with the issuance of stock or equity contracts (i.e., equity-classified warrants and convertible preferred stock) are recorded as a charge against the gross proceeds of the offering. Any issuance costs associated with the issuance of liability-classified warrants are expensed as incurred. Issuance costs associated with the issuance of debt (i.e., convertible debt) is recorded as a direct reduction of the carrying amount of the debt liability but limited to the notional value of the debt. The Company accounts for debt as liabilities measured at amortized cost and amortizes the resulting debt discount to interest expense using the effective interest method over the expected term of the notes pursuant to ASC 835, Interest (“ASC 835”). To the extent that the reduction from issuance costs of the carrying amount of the debt liability would reduce the carrying amount below zero, such excess is recorded as interest expense.
Embedded Conversion Features
The Company evaluates embedded conversion features within convertible debt under ASC 815 “Derivatives and Hedging” to determine whether the embedded conversion feature(s) should be bifurcated from the host instrument and accounted for as a derivative at fair value with changes in fair value recorded in earnings. If the conversion feature does not require derivative treatment under ASC 815, the instrument is evaluated under ASC 470-20 “Debt with Conversion and Other Options.” Under the ASC 470-20, an entity must separately account for the liability and equity components of the convertible debt instruments that may be settled entirely or partially in cash upon conversion in a manner that reflects the issuer’s economic interest cost. The effect of ASC 470-20 on the accounting for our convertible debt instruments is that the equity component is required to be included in the additional paid-in capital section of stockholders’ equity on the consolidated balance sheets and the value of the equity component is treated as original issue discount for purposes of accounting for the debt component of the notes. As a result, we are required to record non-cash interest expense as a result of the amortization of the discounted carrying value of the convertible debt to their face amount over the term of the convertible debt. We report higher interest expense in our financial results because ASC 470-20 requires interest to include both the current period’s amortization of the debt discount and the instrument’s coupon interest.
For conventional convertible debt where the rate of conversion is below market value, the Company records a “beneficial conversion feature” (“BCF”) and related debt discount. When the Company records a BCF, the relative fair value of the BCF is recorded as a debt discount against the face amount of the respective debt instrument (offset to additional paid in capital) and amortized to interest expense over the life of the debt.
Revenue Recognition
The Company derives revenues from the sale of machines and other product income. Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for transferring those goods or services.
Revenue is recognized based on the following five step model:
•
Identification of the contract with a customer
•
Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•
Determination of the transaction price
•
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•
Recognition of revenue when, or as, the Company satisfies a performance obligation
Derivatives and Hedging
On July 1, 2017, the Company early adopted ASU 2017-11, “Earnings Per Share (Topic 260) Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (Topic 480) Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815),” which addresses the complexity of accounting for certain financial instruments with down round features. The Company has concluded that the retroactive provisions of ASU 2017-11 had no impact on the accounting for the Company’s previously outstanding warrant which had been issued to the warrant holder as stock compensation.
ASU 2017-11 changes the classification analysis of certain equity-linked financial instruments (or embedded features) with down round features. When determining whether certain financial instruments should be classified as liabilities or equity instruments, a down round feature no longer precludes equity classification when assessing whether the instrument is indexed to an entity’s own stock. ASU 2017-11 also clarifies existing disclosure requirements for equity- classified instruments. As a result, a freestanding equity-linked financial instrument (or embedded conversion option) no longer would be accounted for as a derivative liability at fair value as a result of the existence of a down round feature. For freestanding equity classified financial instruments, the amendments require entities that present earnings per share (EPS) in accordance with Topic 260 to recognize the effect of the down round feature when it is triggered. That effect is treated as a dividend and as a reduction of income available to common shareholders in basic EPS. Convertible instruments with embedded conversion options that have down round features are now subject to the specialized guidance for contingent beneficial conversion features (in Subtopic 470-20, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options”), including related EPS guidance (ASC 260). Part II of ASU 2017-11 recharacterize the indefinite deferral of certain provisions of ASC 480 that now are presented as pending content in the ASC, to a scope exception. Those amendments do not have an accounting effect.
Prior to the early adoption of ASU 2017-11, an equity-linked financial instrument with a down round feature that otherwise is not required to be classified as a liability under the guidance in ASC 480 is evaluated under the guidance in ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging,” to determine whether it meets the definition of a derivative. If it meets that definition, the instrument (or embedded feature) is evaluated to determine whether it is indexed to an entity’s own stock as part of the analysis of whether it qualifies for a scope exception from derivative accounting. Generally, for warrants and conversion options embedded in financial instruments that are deemed to have a debt host (assuming the underlying shares are readily convertible to cash or the contract provides for net settlement such that the embedded conversion option meets the definition of a derivative), the existence of a down round feature results in an instrument not being considered indexed to an entity’s own stock. This results in a reporting entity being required to classify the freestanding financial instrument or the bifurcated conversion option as a liability, which the entity must measure at fair value initially and at each subsequent reporting date.
ASU 2017-11 revises the guidance for instruments with down round features in ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity,” which is considered in determining whether an equity-linked financial instrument qualifies for a scope exception from derivative accounting. An entity still is required to determine whether instruments would be classified in equity under the guidance in ASC 815-40 in determining whether they qualify for that scope exception. If they do qualify, freestanding instruments with down round features are no longer classified as liabilities and embedded conversion options with down round features are no longer bifurcated.
For entities that present EPS in accordance with ASC 260, and when the down round feature is included in an equity-classified freestanding financial instrument, the value of the effect of the down round feature is treated as a dividend when it is triggered and as a numerator adjustment in the basic EPS calculation. This reflects the occurrence of an economic transfer of value to the holder of the instrument, while alleviating the complexity and income statement volatility associated with fair value measurement on an ongoing basis. Convertible instruments are unaffected by ASU 2017-11.
Part I of ASU 2017-11 are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2018. Early adoption is permitted for all entities, including adoption in an interim period. If an entity early adopts the amendments in an interim period, any adjustments should be reflected as of the beginning of the fiscal year that includes that interim period. ASU 2017-11 Part 1 should be applied retrospectively to outstanding financial instruments with a down round feature for each prior reporting period presented in accordance with the guidance on accounting changes in paragraphs ASC 250-10-45-5 through 45-10.
The Company has determined that there were no previously outstanding financial instruments that fall under the scope of ASU 2017-11. Therefore, the Company has not determined and has not recorded a cumulative-effect adjustment to the balance sheet.
ASU 2017-11 Part II does not require any transition guidance because those amendments do not have an accounting effect.
The Company considered the impact of Part 1 of ASU 2017-11 and determined the Company had no financial instruments previously carried as derivative liabilities that were deemed to be such on the basis of embedded features containing down round provisions, resulting in the strike price being reduced on the basis of the pricing of future equity offerings. As a result, upon the early adoption provisions of ASU 2017-11, the Company did not record any adjustment to its books to account for any transition accounting issues.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718, Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”), which requires that stock-based compensation be measured and recognized as an expense in the financial statements and that such expense be measured at the grant date fair value.
For awards that vest based on service conditions, the Company uses the straight-line method to allocate compensation expense to reporting periods. The grant date fair value of options granted is calculated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires the use of subjective assumptions including volatility, expected term and the fair value of the underlying common stock, among others.
The Company periodically issues performance-based awards. For these awards, vesting will occur upon the achievement of certain milestones. When achievement of the milestone is deemed probable, the Company expenses the compensation of the respective awards over the implicit service period.
Stock awards to non-employees are accounted for in accordance with ASC 505-50, Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees (“ASC 505-50”). The measurement date for non-employee awards is generally the date performance of services required from the non-employee is complete. For non-employee awards that vest based on service conditions, the Company expenses the value of the awards over the related service period, provided they expect the service condition to be met. The Company records the expense of services rendered by non- employees based on the estimated fair value of the stock option using the Black-Scholes option pricing model over the contractual term of the non-employee. The fair value of unvested non-employee awards is remeasured at each reporting period and expensed over the vesting term of the underlying stock options on a straight-line basis. The Company adopted ASU No. 2016-09 Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting during the year ended December 31, 2017.
The stock-based compensation plans provide that grantees may have the right to exercise an option prior to vesting. Shares purchased upon the exercise of unvested options will be subject to the same vesting schedule as the underlying options and are subject to repurchase at the original exercise price by the Company should the grantee discontinue providing services to the Company for any reason, prior to becoming fully vested in such shares.
Income Tax Provision
Since inception of the Company on August 29, 2013 through March 5, 2017, the Company was taxed as a pass-through entity for federal and state income tax purposes as an S Corporation. For federal and state Income tax purposes, income and losses are passed through to the shareholders. As a pass-through entity, the Company was subject to California state income tax.
On March 6, 2017, the Company inadvertently terminated its S-election by issuing common stock to an ineligible shareholder. On March 6, 2016 and thereafter, the Company is taxed as a C corporation. The Company is subject to income taxes in the United States.
The Company accounts for income taxes under Section 740-10-30 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification, which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are based on the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent management concludes it is more likely than not that the assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the Statements of Operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
ASC 740 prescribes a comprehensive model for how companies should recognize, measure, present, and disclose in their financial statements uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken on a tax return. Under ASC 740, tax positions must initially be recognized in the financial statements when it is more likely than not the position will be sustained upon examination by the tax authorities. Such tax positions must initially and subsequently be measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the tax authority assuming full knowledge of the position and relevant facts.
The Company recognizes interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within income tax expense. Accrued interest and penalties are included within the related tax liability.
Contingencies
The Company follows subtopic 450-20 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification to report accounting for contingencies. Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to the Company, but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. The Company assesses such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. In assessing loss contingencies related to legal proceedings that are pending against the Company or un-asserted claims that may result in such proceedings, the Company evaluates the perceived merits of any legal proceedings or un-asserted claims as well as the perceived merits of the amount of relief sought or expected to be sought therein.
If the assessment of a contingency indicates that it is probable that a material loss has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in the Company’s Financial Statements. If the assessment indicates that a potentially material loss contingency is not probable but is reasonably possible, or is probable but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, and an estimate of the range of possible losses, if determinable and material, would be disclosed.
Loss contingencies considered remote are generally not disclosed unless they involve guarantees, in which case the guarantees would be disclosed. However, there is no assurance that such matters will not materially and adversely affect the Company’s business, financial position, and results of operations or cash flows.
Subsequent Events
For the first three months of 2021, the Company issued 2,368,882 shares related to common stock subscribed in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Besides, the Company issued 3,703,704 shares related to the convertible notes converted in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. As of March 31, 2021, the Company had common stock to be issued of 2,333,334 shares and 2,160,494 shares related to cash subscriptions and conversion, respectively.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the FASB or other standard setting bodies that are adopted by the Company as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, the Company believes that the effect of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material effect on its consolidated financial position or results of operations upon adoption.
Components of Statements of Operations
Revenue
Product revenue consists of sales of our eShark filling machine, 710 Shark filling machine, 710 Captain capping machine, PreRoll-ER pre-roll filling machine, cartridges, accessories, warranty, service and freight charges, net of returns, discounts and allowances. Once a sales order is negotiated and received by a sales representative, we generally collect a 50% deposit from the customer. When the product is ready to be shipped, the customer will generally pay the remaining balance. We recognize the revenue when the product leaves the warehouse on the way to the customer.
For the filling and capping machines, training is coordinated with the customers in accordance with their availability but generally completed within a week or two of the shipment. Standard warranties are offered at no cost to customers to cover parts (3 years), labor and maintenance for one year for product defects.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold represents costs directly related to supplies and materials, machines, freight and delivery, commissions, printing, packaging and other costs.
We expect our cost of goods sold per unit to decrease as we continue to scale our operations, improve product designs and work with our third-party suppliers to lower costs.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of compensation, benefits, travel and other costs for our direct sales force and project managers. Sales and marketing expenses also include costs associated with our business development efforts with our distributors and partners and costs related to trade shows and other marketing programs. We expense sales and marketing costs as incurred. We expect sales and marketing expenses to increase in future periods as we expand our sales and marketing teams and increase our participation in global trade shows and other marketing programs.
General and Administrative. Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation, benefits, travel and other costs for employees with non-sales roles. In addition, general and administrative expenses include third-party consulting, legal, audit, accounting services, and allocations of overhead costs, such as rent, facilities and information technology. In the near term, we expect general and administrative expenses to decrease driven by our cost reduction initiatives. In the long term, we expect general and administrative expenses to increase as we grow our business.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest from notes due to debtholders.
Results of Operations - Twelve Month Periods
The following set forth our results of operations for the Fiscal Years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
Revenue
Total revenue during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 were $3,281,935 (comprised of $1,969,693 of machine sales and $1,132,242 of cartridges and other consumables. Compared to the year-ended December 31, 2019 which had $4,590,977 (comprised of $2,441,524 of machine sales and $2,149,453 of cartridges and other consumables ). Two major factors contributed to the decrease in revenue. First, the outbreak of Covid-19 pandemic caused inventory supply issue during the first half of 2020 and adversely impacted our ability to meet the demand of our customers. Secondly, we shifted our business strategy to focus on profitability in 2020. We phased out selling our old proprietary cartridges since July 2019.
Cost of Goods Sold
Total cost of goods sold was $1,788,817 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3,584,525 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cost of goods sold was primarily driven by the decreased sales of cartridge in 2020.
Gross margin increased from 22% during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 to 45% during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to the successful execution of our business strategy to focus on profitability.
Operating Expenses
Sales, General and Administrative Expenses. Sales, general and administrative expenses during the during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 increased to $1,881,795 (comprised of $1,093,268 in salaries and $788,527 of other expenses), compared to December 31, 2019 that produced expenses $4,524,113 (comprised of $2,467,474 in salaries and $2,056,639 of other expenses). The decrease was primarily also attributed to our focus on profitability. We reduced headcount that were related to cartridge sales and disciplined on our operating expenses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense, a non-cash item, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $1,751,710, compared to $1,315,764 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly due to increased debt amortization, which is an accounting treatment.
Derivative Loss/Gain
Derivative loss, a non-cash item, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $1,205,196, compared to derivative gain of $1,302,886 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The change was mainly due to the stock price change between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since Jacksam’s inception in 2013 as a Delaware corporation, we have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from operations. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020, we had net losses of $3,544,880 and $3,058,547, respectively. At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $11,125,331.
On December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $489,560. As of the date of this report, we have financed our operations principally through borrowing on credit facilities, debt of $1,185,900, issuance of equity of $1,303,900, issuances of Convertible Debt of $6,744,106 and receipts of customer deposits for new orders and payments from customers for our products.
On November 8, 2018, we entered into a Line of Credit Agreement with Bass Point Capital, LLC, a Massachusetts limited liability company controlled by Doug Leighton, who is also a principal in Altar Rock Capital, one of our shareholders and the holder of the Altar Rock Warrant. The Line of Credit Agreement allows us, at the discretion of the lender, to borrow up to $250,000 by making specific requests therefor which draws, if any, will be due and payable on individually determined terms. Bass Point Capital, LLC is under no obligation to honor any request we may make for an advance under the Line of Credit Agreement.
On December 31, 2019, the Company entered into an inventory financing arrangement with a single lender, whereby $150,000 was paid by the lender directly to a vendor to secure inventory for the sales to customers in January 2020. The Company will repay $164,835 of principal and interest by February 29, 2020. The interest and fees of $14,835 were recorded as debt discount and were amortized through the maturity date. The Company also paid a deferred finance cost of $5,000 which was amortized through the maturity date. The Company entered into a second agreement on February 6, 2020 with the same lander for an additional $43,000 of funding. The Company will repay $47,253 at maturity on April 6, 2020. On April 22, 2020, these two notes payable were refinanced with the lender into a single agreement whereby the Company will make an initial repayment of $74,231 and 24 monthly payments of $7,467, for total payments of $253,439. This amendment was accounted for as a modification of the debt. The note payable matures on April 22, 2022.
In April 2020, the Company received $399,000 under the Small Business Administration’s Payroll Protection Program. The loan bears interest at a fixed rate of 1%, and matures on April 17, 2022, payable monthly with payments beginning six months after issuance. In accordance with the terms of the Payroll Protection Program, a portion of this loan may be forgiven if the loan proceeds are used for payroll, mortgage, rent and utility costs, but no more than 25% of the forgiveness amount can be related to nonpayroll costs. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company applied for loan forgiveness under the provisions of Section 1106 of the CARES Act. The forgiveness application was reviewed by both the lending bank and SBA and the Company was granted loan forgiveness of $399,000. The loan forgiveness was recognized as a gain on extinguishment of debt in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
On June 2, 2020, the Company received $150,000 under the Small Business Administration’s Economic Injury Disaster Loan. The loan bears interest at a fixed rate of 3.75%, and matures on May 26, 2050, payable monthly with payments of $731 beginning twelve months after issuance. The loan gives the Small Business Administration a security interest in all assets of the Company.
The Company amortized $23,757 of debt discount and deferred finance costs to interest expense related to notes payable.
In December 2019, the Company issued convertible notes to an institutional investor with a principal amount of $560,000 (the “December 2019 Notes”) with an original issue discount of $56,000 and a maturity date of June 10, 2020. The Company paid $44,000 of deferred finance costs. The Company also issued 186,667 shares of common stock to the lender of the December 2019 Notes as deferred finance costs, valued at $81,200 based on the closing price of the stock at the date of borrowing. This lender also received 933,333 shares of common stock valued at $406,000 as a share lending arrangement, which the company recorded as contra-equity. The shares were returned to the Company when the debt was repaid in full in June 2020, by the maturity date.
On June 4, 2020, the Company issued a convertible note to an institutional investor with a principal amount of $175,000 (the “June 2020 Note 1”) bearing interest at 15% with an original issue discount of $17,500 and a maturity date of June 4, 2021. The Company paid $17,100 of deferred finance costs. The Company also issued 116,667 shares of common stock to the lender of the June 2020 Note 1 as deferred finance costs, valued at $23,333 based on the closing price of the stock at the date of borrowing. In May 2020, the Company issued 100,000 shares of common stock to an investment bank that were recorded as a deferred finance costs, valued at $15,000 based on the closing price of the stock at the date of issuances. This lender also received 583,333 shares of common stock valued at $116,667 under a share lending arrangement, which the company recorded as contra-equity. The shares may be returned to the Company if the debt is satisfied in full by the maturity date. If the debt is not repaid by the maturity date or an event of default occurs, the shares are concerned fully earned, and the fair value of the shares will be amortized in full to expense. If the note is in default, the holder has the right to convert the outstanding principal and accrued interest balance into shares of common stock at the closing bid price of the Company’s common stock immediately prior to conversion. The balance of this note was $119,078 as of December 31, 2020, and the Company has remaining monthly payments of $21,250 through June 2021.
On June 24, 2020, the Company issued convertible notes to an institutional investor with a principal amount of $129,000 (the “June 2020 Note 2”) bearing interest at 15% with an original issue discount of $12,900 and a maturity date of June 24, 2021. The Company paid $13,500 of deferred finance costs. The Company also issued 86,000 shares of common stock to the lender of the June 2020 Note 2 as deferred finance costs, valued at $17,200 based on the closing price of the stock at the date of borrowing. This lender also received 430,000 shares of common stock valued at $86,000 as a share lending arrangement, which the company recorded as contra-equity. The shares may be returned to the Company if the debt is satisfied in full by the maturity date. If the debt is not repaid by the maturity date or an event of default occurs, the shares are concerned fully earned, and the fair value of the shares will be amortized in full to expense. If the note is in default, the holder has the right to convert the outstanding principal and accrued interest balance into shares of common stock at the closing bid price of the Company’s common stock immediately prior to conversion. The balance of this note was $87,779 as of December 31, 2020, and the Company has remaining monthly principal and interest payments of $15,664 through June 2021.
On June 24, 2020, the Company entered into a convertible note agreement with an institutional investor for a principal amount of $129,000 (the “June 2020 Note 3”) bearing interest at 15% with an original issue discount of $12,900 and a maturity date of June 24, 2021. The proceeds of this loan were received in July 2020. The Company paid $13,500 of deferred finance costs. The Company issued 86,000 shares of common stock to the lender of the June 2020 Note 3 as deferred finance costs, valued at $17,200 based on the closing price of the stock at the date of borrowing. This lender also received 430,000 shares of common stock valued at $86,000 as a share lending arrangement, which the company recorded as contra-equity. The shares may be returned to the Company if the debt is satisfied in full by the maturity date. If the debt is not repaid by the maturity date or an event of default occurs, the shares are concerned fully earned, and the fair value of the shares will be amortized in full to expense. If the note is in default, the holder has the right to convert the outstanding principal and accrued interest balance into shares of common stock at the closing bid price of the Company’s common stock immediately prior to conversion. The balance of this note was $87,779 as of December 31, 2020, and the Company has remaining monthly principal and interest payments of $15,664 through June 2021.
On November 23, 2020, the Company entered into a convertible note agreement with an institutional investor for a principal amount of $305,000 (the “November 2020 Note”) bearing interest at 12% with an original issue discount of $30,500 and a maturity date of November 23, 2021. The Company paid $28,460 of deferred finance costs. The Company issued 576,379 shares of common stock to the lender of the November 2020 Note as deferred finance costs, valued at $126,803 based on the closing price of the stock at the date of borrowing. If the note is in default, the holder has the right to convert the outstanding principal and accrued interest balance into shares of common stock at a price based on the lesser of 105% of the closing bid price of the Company’s stock at issuance, or the closing bid price of the Company’s common stock immediately prior to conversion. Monthly Payments of principal and interest of $34,160 will begin in February 2021 through November 2021.
The Company amortized $1,632,520 and $1,572,817 of debt discount and deferred finance costs to interest expense related to convertible notes payable during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Accrued interest on notes payable and convertible notes payable was $4,931 and $3,222 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We anticipate that we will need additional financing to continue as an ongoing entity over the next 12 months. Over the course of the next 12 months, we plan to raise capital to support our business plan through equity financing, debt financing, or other sources, which may result in further dilution in the equity ownership of our shares. There is no assurance that we will be able to maintain operations at a level sufficient for an investor to obtain a return on their investment in our common stock, or that we will be able to raise sufficient capital required to implement our business plan on acceptable terms, if at all. Even if we are successful in raising sufficient capital to implement our business plan, we may continue to be unprofitable.
We anticipate our cash requirements to be as follows:
*Estimated expense
Operating Activities
We have historically experienced negative cash outflows as we developed and sold our eShark filling machine, 710 Shark filling machine, 710 Captain capping machine, pre-roll filling machine, and cartridges. Our net cash used in operating activities primarily results from our operating losses combined with changes in working capital components as we have grown our business and is influenced by the timing of cash payments for inventory purchases and cash receipts from our customers. Our primary source of cash flow from operating activities is cash down payments and final payments for our products. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are employee-related expenditures and amounts due to vendors for purchased components. Our cash flows from operating activities will continue to be affected principally by our working capital requirements, the extent to which we build up our inventory balance, and increased spending on personnel and other operating activities as our business grows.
Several of our products are produced in China, specifically our 710 Shark filling machines and cartridges. We do not have firm purchase or minimum quantity commitments with any of our Chinese suppliers. Certain of our Chinese suppliers require a deposit in the range of 25% to 30% of the total cost of an order before beginning production. All of our Chinese suppliers require that the entirety of the purchase price of an order be sent prior to shipment to us. However, since we generally require that our customers make a deposit of not less than half of any order of the products, including the products produced in China, as a condition of accepting an order from our customers, we typically have on hand sufficient funds to cover the entirety of the amounts owed to our Chinese suppliers in advance. The timing of cash payment obligations is thus coordinated to not to create a cash flow or liquidity problem for us.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash used in operating activities was $1,105,696 and $2,296,288, respectively.
Investing Activities
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash used in investing activities were both zero.
Financing Activities
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $1,141,633, primarily from $634,940 of proceeds from new convertible debt, $591,900 of proceeds from stock issuance, and $846,400 of proceeds from exercise of common stock warrants. The Company also made payments of $104,942 on notes payable, $43,300 on debt issuance costs, and $783,365 on convertible notes.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $1,675,806, primarily from $2,295,666 of proceeds from new convertible debt. The Company also made payments of $70,912 on notes payable, $181,848 on debt issuance costs, and $370,000 on convertible notes.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by applicable SEC regulations.
Going Concern
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to successfully execute the business plan and attain profitable operations. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that may be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
In the coming year, the Company’s foreseeable cash requirements will relate to continual development of the operations of its business, maintaining its good standing and making the requisite filings with the SEC, and the payment of expenses associated with operations and business developments. The Company may experience a cash shortfall and be required to raise additional capital.
Historically, it has mostly relied upon convertible notes payable and cash flows from operations to finance its operations and growth. Management may raise additional capital by retaining net earnings or through future private offerings of the Company’s stock or through loans from private investors, although there can be no assurance that it will be able to obtain such financing. The Company’s failure to do so could have a material and adverse effect upon it and its shareholders.
Seasonality
In the past, our operating results and operating cash flows historically have not been subject to seasonal variations. At this time, we do not anticipate having any seasonal fluctuations in sales.