ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
Overview
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the accompanying notes to the financial statements included in this Form 10K Annual filing.
The MD&A is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Background
We are not currently engaged in any business operations. We are, however, in the process of attempting to identify, locate, and if warranted, acquire new commercial opportunities.
Previous business operations of the Company generated limited revenues and the Company currently has no business operations. No revenue has been generated in the last two years ended September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2021, it is unlikely the Company will have any future revenues unless it is able to effect an acquisition or merger with an operating company, of which there can be no assurance. The Company’s plan of operation for the remainder of the fiscal year shall be to continue its efforts to locate suitable acquisition candidates. Our principal business objective for the next 12 months and beyond such time will be to achieve long-term growth potential through a combination with a business rather than immediate, short-term earnings. The Company will not restrict our potential candidate target companies to any specific business, industry or geographical location and, thus, may acquire any type of business.
The Company does not currently engage in any business activities that provide cash flow. The costs of investigating and analyzing business combinations for the next 12 months and beyond such time will be paid with funds to be loaned to or invested in us by our stockholders, management or other investors.
During the next 12 months we anticipate incurring costs related to:
(i) filing of Exchange Act reports, and
(ii)
investigating, analyzing and consummating an acquisition.
We believe we will be able to meet these costs through use of funds to be loaned by or invested in us by our stockholders, management or other investors. There are no assurances that such funds will be advanced or that the Company will be able to secure any additional funding as needed.
Results of Operations
Working Capital
September 30,
September 30
Current Assets
$ -
$ -
Current Liabilities
34,293
18,985
Working Capital (Deficit)
$ (34,293)
$ (18,985)
Cash Flows
September 30,
September 30,
Cash Flows from (used in) Operating Activities
$ (17,733)
$ (4,160)
Cash Flows from (used in) Financing Activities
17,733
4,160
Net Increase (decrease) in Cash During Year
$ -
$ -
Year Ended September 30, 2021 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2020
Operating Revenues
We have generated revenues of $0 and $0 for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020.
Operating Expenses and Net Loss
Operating expenses for the year ended September 30, 2021, were $17,308 compared with $8,737 for the year ended September 30, 2020. The increase in operating expenses were attributable to an increase in professional fees from $4,877 for the year ended September 30, 2020 to $15,157 for the year ended September 30, 2021. There was a decrease in general and administrative expenses from $3,860 for the year ended September 30, 2020 to $2,151 for the year ended September 30, 2021.
During the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company recorded a net loss of $17,308, compared with net loss of $8,737 for the year ended September 30, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of September 30, 2021 the Company's cash balance was $0 compared to cash balance of $0 as of September 30, 2020. As of September 30, 2020, the Company's total assets were $0 compared to total assets of $0 as of September 30, 2020.
As of September 30, 2021, the Company had total liabilities of $34,293 compared with total liabilities of $18,985 as of September 30, 2020. The increase in total liabilities is attributed to an increase in notes payable - related parties from $4,160 on September 30, 2020 to $19,893 on September 30, 2021 and an increase in accounts payable - related parties from $2,000 on September 30, 2020 to $5,250 on September 30, 2021. There was a decrease in account payable from $10,522 on September 30, 2020 to $6,847 on September 30, 2021.
As of September 30, 2021, the Company has a working capital deficit of $34,293 compared with working capital deficit of $18,985 at September 30, 2020 with the increase in the working capital deficit attributed an increase in notes payable - related parties from $4,160 on September 30, 2020 to $19,893 on September 30, 2021 and an increase in accounts payable - related parties from $2,000 on September 30, 2020 to $5,250 on September 30, 2021. There was a decrease in account payable from $10,522 on September 30, 2020 to $6,847 on September 30, 2021.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
During the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company used $17,733 cash for operating activities compared to the use of $4,160 cash for operating activities during the year ended September 30, 2020.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During the year ended September 30, 2021 the company received $17,733 in cash from financing activities compared to receiving $4,160 in cash from financing activity for the year ended September 30, 2020.
Going Concern
The financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis which assumes the Company will be able to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business for the foreseeable future. The Company has incurred a loss since Inception (March 25, 2008) resulting in an accumulated deficit of $80,293 as of September 30, 2021 and further losses are anticipated in the development of its business. Further, the Company has current liabilities in excess of current assets and has a stockholders’ deficit at September 30, 2021. These factors raise substantial doubts about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year from the issuance of these financial statements.
Further, the effects of Covid-19 could also impact our ability to operate under the going concern and maintain sufficient liquidity to continue operations. The impact of COVID-19 on companies is evolving rapidly and its future effects are uncertain. There are material uncertainties from Covid-19 that cast significant doubt on the company’s ability to operate under the going concern. It is possible that our company will have issues relating to the current situation that will need to be considered by management in the future. There will be a wide range of factors to take into account in going concern judgments and financial projections including travel bans, restrictions, government assistance and potential sources of replacement financing, financial health of suppliers and customers and their effect on expected profitability and other key financial performance ratios including information that shows whether there will be sufficient liquidity to continue to meet obligations when they are due.
The Company filed a Registration Statement; Form-10-12g on June 16, 2021 and was effective 60 days post filing. Management believes that this plan provides an opportunity for the Company to continue as a going concern. The ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company generating profitable operations in the future and/or obtaining the necessary financing to meet its obligations and repay its liabilities arising from normal business operations when they come due. Management intends to finance operating costs over the next twelve months with existing cash on hand and loans from directors and/or private placement of common stock. The failure to achieve the necessary levels of profitability or obtaining additional funding would be detrimental to the Company.
The Company continues to rely on borrowings and financings either arranged by the Company’s President or through entities controlled by the President. In the next 12 months we expect to incur expenses equal to approximately $20,000 related to legal, accounting, audit, and other professional service fees incurred in relation to the Company’s Exchange Act filing requirements. The costs related to the acquisition of a business combination target company vary widely and are dependent on a variety of factors including, but not limited to, the amount of time it takes to complete a business combination, the location of the target company, the size and complexity of the business of the target company, whether stockholders of the Company prior to the transaction will retain equity in the Company, the scope of the due diligence investigation required, the involvement of the Company’s auditors in the transaction, possible changes in the Company’s capital structure in connection with the transaction, and whether funds may be raised contemporaneously with the transaction. Therefore, we believe such costs are unascertainable until the Company identifies a business combination target. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The Company is currently devoting its efforts to locating merger candidates. The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to develop additional sources of capital, locate and complete a merger with another company, and ultimately, achieve profitable operations.
The Company may consider a business which has recently commenced operations, is a developing company in need of additional funds for expansion into new products or markets, is seeking to develop a new product or service, or is an established business which may be experiencing financial or operating difficulties and is in need of additional capital. Our management believes that the public company status that results from a combination with the Company will provide such company greater access to the capital markets, increase its visibility in the investment community, and offer the opportunity to utilize its stock to make acquisitions. There is no assurance that we will in fact have access to additional capital or financing as a public company. In the alternative, a business combination may involve the acquisition of, or merger with, a company which does not need substantial additional capital, but which desires to establish a public trading market for its shares, while avoiding, among other things, the time delays, significant expense, and loss of voting control which may occur in a public offering.
Our officer and director has not had any preliminary contact or discussions with any representative of any other entity regarding a business combination with us. Any target business that is selected may be a financially unstable company or an entity in its early stages of development or growth, including entities without established records of sales or earnings. In that event, we will be subject to numerous risks inherent in the business and operations of financially unstable and early stage or potential emerging growth companies. In addition, we may effect a business combination with an entity in an industry characterized by a high level of risk, and, although our management will endeavor to evaluate the risks inherent in a particular target business, there can be no assurance that we will properly ascertain or assess all significant risks.
Our management anticipates that it will likely be able to effect only one business combination, due primarily to our limited financing and the dilution of interest for present and prospective stockholders, which is likely to occur as a result of our management’s plan to offer a controlling interest to a target business in order to achieve a tax-free reorganization. This lack of diversification should be considered a substantial risk in investing in us, because it will not permit us to offset potential losses from one venture against gains from another.
The Company anticipates that the selection of a business combination will be complex and extremely risky. While the Company is in a competitive market with a small number of business opportunities, through information obtained from industry professionals including attorneys, investment bankers, and other consultants with experience in the reverse merger industry, our management believes that there are opportunities for a business combination with firms seeking the perceived benefits of becoming a publicly traded corporation. Such perceived benefits of becoming a publicly traded corporation include, among other things, facilitating or improving the terms on which additional equity financing may be obtained, providing liquidity for the principals of and investors in a business, creating a means for providing incentive stock options or similar benefits to key employees, and offering greater flexibility in structuring acquisitions, joint ventures and the like through the issuance of stock. Potentially available business combinations may occur in many different industries and at various stages of development, all of which will make the task of comparative investigation and analysis of such business opportunities extremely difficult and complex.
We do not currently intend to retain any entity to act as a “finder” to identify and analyze the merits of potential target businesses.
We have not established a specific timeline nor have we created a specific plan to identify an acquisition target and consummate a business combination. We expect that our management and the Company, through its various contacts and affiliations with other entities will locate a business combination target. We expect that funds in the amount of approximately $20,000 will be required in order for the Company to satisfy its Exchange Act reporting requirements during the next 12 months, in addition to any other funds that will be required in order to complete a business combination. Such funds can only be estimated upon identifying a business combination target. Our management and stockholders have indicated an intent to advance funds on behalf of the Company as needed in order to accomplish its business plan and comply with its Exchange Act reporting requirements, however, there are no agreements in effect between the Company and our management or stockholders specifically requiring they provide any funds to the Company. Therefore, there are no assurances that the Company will be able to obtain the required financing as needed in order to consummate a business combination transaction.
Summary of Significant Accounting Polices
Basis of Presentation
The financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America and are presented in US dollars. The Company has adopted a September 30 fiscal year end.
Use of Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
The Company has no business operations and has not had to make material assumptions or estimates other than the assumption that the Company is a going concern.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid instruments purchased with a maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents to the extent the funds are not being held for investment purposes.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company’s financial instruments consist of accounts payable and loans to shareholders. The carrying amount of financial instruments approximates fair value because of the short-term nature of these items.
Stock-Based Compensation	
As of September 30, 2021 & 2020, the Company has not issued any stock-based payments to its employees Stock-based compensation is accounted for at fair value in accordance with ASC 718, when applicable. To date, the Company has not adopted a stock option plan and has not granted any stock options.
Income Taxes
The Company follows the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying values and their respective income tax basis (temporary differences). The effect on deferred income tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Future tax benefits which arise as result of accumulated losses have not be recognized in these financial statements, as their realization is not likely to occur.
Basic Income (Loss) Per Share
The Company computes loss per share in accordance with “ASC-260”, “Earnings per Share” which requires presentation of both basic and diluted earnings per share on the face of the statement of operations. Basic loss per share is computed by dividing net loss available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of outstanding common shares during the period. Diluted loss per share gives effect to all dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period. Dilutive loss per share excludes all potential common shares if their effect is anti-dilutive.
For the years ended September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020 there were no potentially dilutive debt or equity instruments issued or outstanding and any such shares would have been excluded from the computation because they would have been anti-dilutive as the Company incurred losses in this period.
Commitments and Contingencies
The Company follows ASC 440 & ASC 450, subtopic 450-20 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification to report accounting for contingencies and commitments respectively. Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to the Company, but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur.
The Company assesses such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. In assessing loss contingencies related to legal proceedings that are pending against the Company or un-asserted claims that may result in such proceedings, the Company evaluates the perceived merits of any legal proceedings or un-asserted claims as well as the perceived merits of the amount of relief sought or expected to be sought therein.
If the assessment of a contingency indicates that it is probable that a material loss has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in the Company’s financial statements. If the assessment indicates that a potentially material loss contingency is not probable but is reasonably possible, or is probable but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, and an estimate of the range of possible losses, if determinable and material, would be disclosed.
Loss contingencies considered remote are generally not disclosed unless they involve guarantees, in which case the guarantees would be disclosed. Management does not believe, based upon information available at this time, that these matters will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. However, there is no assurance that such matters will not materially and adversely affect the Company’s business, financial position, and results of operations or cash flows.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company reviewed all the recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and we do not believe any of these pronouncements will have a material impact on the Company.
ITEM 7. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
Not Applicable.
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the shareholders and the Board of Directors of Nine Alliance Science & Technology Group.
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying balance sheets of Nine Alliance Science & Technology Group. ("the Company") as of September 30, 2021, and 2020, the related statements of operations, stockholder's equity, and cash flows, for each of the two years in the period ended September 30, 2021 and the related notes (collectively referred to as the "financial statements"). In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of September 30, 2021 and 2020, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the two years in the period ended September 30, 2021, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Material Uncertainty Relating to Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 3 to the financial statements, the Company had incurred losses since inception and had an accumulated deficit of $80,293 as of September 30, 2021 and the Company had limited liquidity and anticipated more losses in the development of its business. These factors raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. Management's plans in regard to these matters are also described in Note 3 to the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. Our opinion is not modified with respect to this matter.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company's financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) ("PCAOB") and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. As part of our audits we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company's internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks.
Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matters
Critical audit matters are matters arising from the current period audit of the financial statements that were communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that: (1) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. We determined that there are no critical audit matters.
/s/Zia Masood Kiani & Co.
Zia Masood Kiani & Co.	
(Chartered Accountants)
We have served as the Company's auditor since 2021.
Islamabad, Pakistan
Date: October 31, 2021
ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA.
Nine Alliance Science & Technology Group
BALANCE SHEETS
(Audited)
Nine Alliance Science & Technology Group
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(Audited)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these audited financial statements
Nine Alliance Science & Technology Group
STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY (DEFICIT)
For the Year Ended September 30, 2021
(Audited)
Nine Alliance Science & Technology Group
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
(Audited)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these audited financial statements
NINE ALLIANCE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY GROUP
NOTES TO THE AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEARS ENDED SEPTEMBER 30, 2021 AND SEPTEMBER 30, 2020
NOTE 1 - NATURE OF OPERATIONS
Nine Alliance Science and Technology Group (the “Company”) was incorporated as Paramount Supply Inc. and established under the Corporation Laws of the State of Nevada on September 12, 2014. On September 29, 2017, the Company filed a Certificate of Amendment changing the name from “Paramount Supply Inc.” to “Nine Alliance Science and Technology Group”. The Company was formed for the purpose of marketing and distributing ladies fashion handbags. At the end of 2017 the Company became dormant and ceased all business operations.
On August 27, 2020, a motion and application was made to appoint a Custodian of the Company based on prior management abandoning its responsibilities to continue making filings at the Nevada Secretary of State’s office and for failing to hold a shareholders’ meeting in over 3 years and otherwise failing to keep current in its obligations to the Company. Upon motion and application to the District Court, Clark County Nevada, the Court granted the request for Custodian for the Company (“Custodian”). Upon granting the motion, the Court issued an Order acknowledging that the Custodian has performed all of the duties that had been required of it and the management of the Company will revert exclusively to the officers and directors appointed by the Custodian. In the Revival of the Company, Investment Reserves Series, as the Custodian of the Company, appointed Joseph Passalaqua as CEO, CFO and Secretary.
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
2.1 Basis of Presentation
The financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America and are presented in US dollars. The Company has adopted a September 30 fiscal year end.
2.2 Use of Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Due to the limited level of operations, the Company has not had to make material assumptions or estimates other than the assumption that the Company is a going concern.
2.3 Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid instruments purchased with a maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents to the extent the funds are not being held for investment purposes.
2.4 Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company’s financial instruments consist of accounts payable and loans to shareholders. The carrying amount of financial instruments approximates fair value because of the short-term nature of these items.
2.5 Stock-Based Compensation
As of September 30, 2021 & 2020, the Company has not issued any stock-based payments to its employees Stock-based compensation is accounted for at fair value in accordance with ASC 718, when applicable. To date, the Company has not adopted a stock option plan and has not granted any stock options.
NINE ALLIANCE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY GROUP
NOTES TO THE AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEARS ENDED SEPTEMBER 30, 2021 AND SEPTEMBER 30, 2020
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
.
2.6 Income Taxes
The Company follows the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying values and their respective income tax basis (temporary differences). The effect on deferred income tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Future tax benefits which arise as result of accumulated losses have not be recognized in these financial statements, as their realization is not likely to occur.
2.7 Basic Income (Loss) Per Share
The Company computes loss per share in accordance with “ASC-260”, “Earnings per Share” which requires presentation of both basic and diluted earnings per share on the face of the statement of operations.
Basic loss per share is computed by dividing net loss available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of outstanding common shares during the period. Diluted loss per share gives effect to all dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period. Dilutive loss per share excludes all potential common shares if their effect is anti-dilutive.
For the years ended September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020 there were no potentially dilutive debt or equity instruments issued or outstanding and any such shares would have been excluded from the computation because they would have been anti-dilutive as the Company incurred losses in this period.
2.8 Commitments and Contingencies
The Company follows ASC 440 & ASC 450, subtopic 450-20 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification to report accounting for contingencies and commitments respectively. Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to the Company, but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur.
The Company assesses such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. In assessing loss contingencies related to legal proceedings that are pending against the Company or un-asserted claims that may result in such proceedings, the Company evaluates the perceived merits of any legal proceedings or un-asserted claims as well as the perceived merits of the amount of relief sought or expected to be sought therein.
If the assessment of a contingency indicates that it is probable that a material loss has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in the Company’s financial statements. If the assessment indicates that a potentially material loss contingency is not probable but is reasonably possible, or is probable but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, and an estimate of the range of possible losses, if determinable and material, would be disclosed.
Loss contingencies considered remote are generally not disclosed unless they involve guarantees, in which case the guarantees would be disclosed. Management does not believe, based upon information available at this time, that these matters will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. However, there is no assurance that such matters will not materially and adversely affect the Company’s business, financial position, and results of operations or cash flows.
2.9 Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company reviewed all the recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and we do not believe any of these pronouncements will have a material impact on the Company.
NINE ALLIANCE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY GROUP
NOTES TO THE AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEARS ENDED SEPTEMBER 30, 2021 AND SEPTEMBER 30, 2020
.
NOTE 3 - GOING CONCERN
The financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis which assumes the Company will be able to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business for the foreseeable future. The Company has incurred a loss since Inception (March 25, 2008) resulting in an accumulated deficit of $80,293 as of September 30, 2021 and further losses are anticipated in the development of its business. Further, the Company has current liabilities in excess of current assets and has a stockholders’ deficit at September 30, 2021. These factors raise substantial doubts about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year from the issuance of these financial statements.
Further, the effects of Covid-19 could also impact our ability to operate under the going concern and maintain sufficient liquidity to continue operations. The impact of COVID-19 on companies is evolving rapidly and its future effects are uncertain. There are material uncertainties from Covid-19 that cast significant doubt on the company’s ability to operate under the going concern. It is possible that our company will have issues relating to the current situation that will need to be considered by management in the future. There will be a wide range of factors to take into account in going concern judgments and financial projections including travel bans, restrictions, government assistance and potential sources of replacement financing, financial health of suppliers and customers and their effect on expected profitability and other key financial performance ratios including information that shows whether there will be sufficient liquidity to continue to meet obligations when they are due.
The Company filed a Registration Statement; Form-10-12g on June 16, 2021 and was effective 60 days post filing. Management believes that this plan provides an opportunity for the Company to continue as a going concern. The ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company generating profitable operations in the future and/or obtaining the necessary financing to meet its obligations and repay its liabilities arising from normal business operations when they come due. Management intends to finance operating costs over the next twelve months with existing cash on hand and loans from directors and/or private placement of common stock. The failure to achieve the necessary levels of profitability or obtaining additional funding would be detrimental to the Company.
NOTE 4 - COMMON STOCK
On September 23, 2014, the Company issued 4,000,000 shares of common stock for a purchase price of $0.001 per share to its sole Director. The Company received aggregate gross proceeds of $4,000.
On September 2, 2015, the Company issued 1,000,000 shares of common stock for a purchase price of $0.04 to 30 independent investors pursuant to an offering on Registration Statement on Form S-1. The Company received proceeds of $40,000.
On October 31, 2020, the Company issued 70,000,000 shares of Common Stock to Friction & Heat LLC; Joseph Passalaqua as Managing Member, in exchange for debt in the amount of $2,000 paid to the Company’s Transfer Agent.
On February 25, 2021, the Company filed a Certificate of Amendment through which the par value has been changed from $0.001 to $0.0001. This change in par value has been applied retroactively in the financial statements presented for the year ended September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2019. The Company changed the par value to increase the possibility of attracting a merger candidate.
Through this amendment (effective February 25, 2021) Company also increased the authorized shares from 75,000,000 to 300,000,000, of which 290,000,000 will be Common Stock with a par value of $0.0001 and 10,000,000 will be Blank Check Preferred Stock with a par value of $0.0001. Before this amendment, Company did not have any authorized Preferred Stock.
As of the year ended September 30, 2020, the Company had 75,000,000 shares of Common Stock Authorized and 5,000,000 shares of Common Stock Issued and Outstanding.
As of the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company had 290,000,000 shares of Common Stock Authorized and 75,000,000 shares of Common Stock Issued and Outstanding.
As of the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company had 10,000,000 shares of Blank Check Preferred Stock Authorized and 0 Issued and Outstanding.
NINE ALLIANCE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY GROUP
NOTES TO THE AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEARS ENDED SEPTEMBER 30, 2021 AND SEPTEMBER 30, 2020
NOTE 5 - RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
In support of the Company’s efforts and cash requirements, it may rely on advances from related parties until such time that the Company can support its operations or attains adequate financing through sales of its equity or traditional debt financing. There is no formal written commitment for continued support by shareholders or directors. Amounts represent advances or amounts paid in satisfaction of liabilities. The advances were considered temporary in nature and were not formalized by a signed promissory note.
On July 6, 2020, Joseph Passalaqua, an officer and Related Party, advanced the Company $1,500 to cover the Company’s legal fees. This amount is non-interest bearing, payable on demand and unsecured. As of the September 30, 2021, the outstanding balance on this amount is $1,500.
On September 29, 2020, Joseph Passalaqua, an officer and Related Party, advanced the Company $2,660 to cover the Company’s renewal with the State of Nevada. This amount is non-interest bearing, payable on demand and unsecured. As of September 30, 2021, the outstanding balance on this amount is $2,660.
On October 14, 2020, Joseph Passalaqua, an officer and Related Party of the Company advanced the Company $2,000 to cover the Company’s Transfer Agent fees. The amount was non-interest bearing, payable on demand and unsecured. On October 31, 2020, the Company issued 70,000,000 shares of Common Stock to Friction & Heat LLC; Joseph Passalaqua as Managing Member, in exchange for debt in the amount of $2,000 paid to the Company’s Transfer Agent. As of September 30, 2021, this amount is paid in full.
On November 16, 2020, Joseph Passalaqua, an officer and Related Party of the Company advanced the Company $2,045 to cover the Company’s Transfer Agent fees. This amount is non-interest bearing, payable on demand and unsecured. As of September 30, 2021, the outstanding balance on this amount is $2,045.
On February 25, 2021, Joseph Passalaqua, an officer and Related Party advanced the Company $325 to cover the Company’s Amendment with Nevada. This amount is non-interest bearing, payable on demand and unsecured. As of September 30, 2021, the outstanding balance on this amount is $325.
On March 4, 2021 and May 25, 2021, Joseph Passalaqua, an officer and Related Party advanced the Company $1,950 and $500, respectively to cover the Company’s Transfer Agent fees. These amounts are non-interest bearing, payable on demand and unsecured. As of September 30, 2021, the outstanding balance on these amounts is $1,950 and $500.
On May 28, 2021 and June 10, 2021, Joseph Passalaqua, an officer and Related Party advanced the Company $4,934 and $ 2,266, respectively to cover the Company’s Auditor/CPA fees. These amounts are non-interest bearing, payable on demand and unsecured. As of September 30, 2021, the outstanding balance on these amounts is $4,934 and $2,266.
On June 21, 2021, Joseph Passalaqua, an officer and Related Party advanced the Company $100 to cover the Company’s EDGAR filing fees. This amount is non-interest bearing, payable on demand and unsecured. As of September 30, 2021, the outstanding balance on this amount is $100.
On July 23, 2021, Joseph Passalaqua, an officer and Related Party advanced the Company $480 to cover the Company’s Secretary of State of Delaware and Broadridge fees. This amount is non-interest bearing, payable on demand and unsecured. As of September 30, 2021, the outstanding balance on this amount is $480.
On August 8, 2021, Joseph Passalaqua, an officer and Related Party advanced the Company $1,133 to cover the Company’s Auditor/CPA fees. This amount is non-interest bearing, payable on demand and unsecured. As of September 30, 2021, the outstanding balance on this amount is $1,113.
On September 3, 2021, Joseph Passalaqua, an officer and Related Party advanced the Company $2,000 to cover the Company’s Legal fees. This amount is non-interest bearing, payable on demand and unsecured. As of September 30, 2021, the outstanding balance on this amount is $2,000.
NINE ALLIANCE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY GROUP
NOTES TO THE AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEARS ENDED SEPTEMBER 30, 2021 AND SEPTEMBER 30, 2020
NOTE 5 - RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS (Continued)
The total amount as of the year end September 30, 2021 due to Joseph Passalaqua, an officer and Related party, for payment of company expenses is $19,893.
During the years ended September 30, 2019 to September 30, 2021, Lyboldt-Daly, Inc; its sole officer is Joseph Passalaqua, who is also an officer and Related Party of Nine Alliance Science and Technology Group, Inc., provided the internal accounting for the Company. As of year ended September 30, 2021, $5,250 is currently due for these services.
The Company currently operates out of an office of a related party free of rent.
NOTE 6 - INCOME TAXES
As of September 30, 2020, the Company had net operating loss carry forwards of approximately $62,985 that may be available to reduce future years' taxable income in varying amounts through 2040.
As of September 30, 2021, the Company had net operating loss carry forwards of approximately $80,293 that may be available to reduce future years' taxable income in varying amounts through 2041.
Future tax benefits which arise as a result of these losses have not been recognized in these financial statements, as their realization is determined not likely to occur and accordingly, the Company has recorded a valuation allowance for the deferred tax asset relating to these tax loss carry-forwards.
The 21% tax rate provision for Federal income tax consists of the following:
The cumulative tax effect at the expected rate of 35% of significant items comprising our net deferred tax amount is as follows:
Due to the change in ownership provisions of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, net operating loss carry forwards of approximately $80,293 for Federal income tax reporting purposes are subject to annual limitations. Should a change in ownership occur net operating loss carry forwards may be limited as to use in future years. The Company’s returns are open to examination by the Internal Revenue Services for all tax years since inception.
NOTE 7 - SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
The Company evaluated all other events or transactions that occurred after September 30, 2021 through October 31, 2021. The Company determined that it does not have any other subsequent event requiring recording or disclosure in the financial statements for the year ended September 30, 2021.
ITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.
None.
ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES.
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
As of the end of the period covered by this report, the Company carried out, under the supervision and with the participation of the Company’s management, including its Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, an evaluation of the effectiveness of the design and operation of the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rule 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) in ensuring that information required to be disclosed by the Company in its reports is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the required time periods. In carrying out that evaluation, management identified a material weakness (as defined in Public Company Accounting Oversight Board Standard No. 2) in our internal control over financial reporting regarding a lack of adequate segregation of duties. Accordingly, based on their evaluation of our disclosure controls and procedures as of September 30, 2021, Joseph C. Passalaqua, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and its Chief Financial Officer have concluded that, as of that date, the Company’s controls and procedures were not effective for the purposes described above.
There was no change in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) during the year ended September 30, 2021 that has materially affected or is reasonably likely to materially affect the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Management of the Company is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. We have assessed the effectiveness of those internal controls as of September 30, 2021, using the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (“COSO”) Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) as a basis for our assessment.
Because of inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies and procedures may deteriorate. All internal control systems, no matter how well designed, have inherent limitations. Therefore, even those systems determined to be effective can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial statement preparation and presentation.
A material weakness in internal controls is a deficiency in internal control, or combination of control deficiencies, that adversely affects the Company’s ability to initiate, authorize, record, process, or report external financial data reliably in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America such that there is more than a remote likelihood that a material misstatement of the Company’s annual or interim financial statements that is more than inconsequential will not be prevented or detected. In the course of making our assessment of the effectiveness of internal controls over financial reporting, we identified a material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting. This material weakness consisted of inadequate staffing and supervision within the bookkeeping and accounting operations of our company. The relatively small number of employees who have bookkeeping and accounting functions prevents us from segregating duties within our internal control system. The inadequate segregation of duties is a weakness because it could lead to the untimely identification and resolution of accounting and disclosure matters or could lead to a failure to perform timely and effective reviews.
As we are not aware of any instance in which the company failed to identify or resolve a disclosure matter or failed to perform a timely and effective review, we determined that the addition of personnel to our bookkeeping and accounting operations is not an efficient use of our resources at this time and not in the interest of shareholders.
Because of the above condition, the Company’s internal controls over financial reporting were not effective as of September 30, 2021.
This annual report does not include an attestation report of the Company’s registered public accounting firm regarding internal control over financial reporting. Management’s report was not subject to attestation by the Company’s registered public accounting firm pursuant to the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission that permit the Company to provide only management’s report in this annual report.
ITEM 9B. OTHER INFORMATION.
None.
PART III
ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
The following table sets forth information regarding our current directors and each director nominee, as of the date of filing.
Joseph C. Passalaqua
Mr. Passalaqua, 73, has been the president of Lyboldt-Daly, Inc., a real estate management company, since February 1996. He worked in sales for Summit Automotive from 2012 to 2016. He became President, Secretary and a Director of Plantation Lifecare Developers, Inc. in February 2015 until it merged into Plantation Corp. effective July 27, 2017. He was President, Secretary, Treasurer and Director of Plantation Corp. from April 27, 2017 until May 18, 2017 when he became Executive Vice-president and Director. He resigned as Executive Vice-president and Director on September 14, 2018. Mr. Passalaqua is serving as President and Director of Petro USA, previously All State Properties Holdings, Inc. (PBAJ) since February 2017. Mr. Passalaqua is now currently serving as President and Director of Nine Alliance Science and Technology (JMKJ) since August 2020.
Our Executive Officers
We designate persons serving in the following positions as our named executive officers: our chief executive officer, chief financial officer. The following table sets forth information regarding our executive officers as of September 30, 2021 and the date of this filing.
Joseph C. Passalaqua’s biographical summary is included under “Our Board of Directors.
ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION.
The following table sets forth information regarding each element of compensation that we paid or awarded to our named executive officers from as of the years ended September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2021:
Employment Agreements
The Company does not have employment agreements with any of its officers or directors and there are no other employees.
Directors Compensation
No director received compensation for services rendered in any capacity to us during the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2021.
Indemnification of Directors and Officers
Our Articles of Incorporation, as amended and restated, and our Bylaws provide for mandatory indemnification of our officers and directors, except where such person has been adjudicated liable by reason of his negligence or willful misconduct toward the Company or such other corporation in the performance of his duties as such officer or director. Our Bylaws also authorize the purchase of director and officer liability insurance to insure them against any liability asserted against or incurred by such person in that capacity or arising from such person's status as a director, officer, employee, fiduciary, or agent, whether or not the corporation would have the power to indemnify such person under the applicable law.
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation
We have not established a compensation committee. We are not currently subject to any law, rule or regulation requiring that we establish a compensation committee.
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
No director, person nominated to become a director, executive officer, promoter or control person of our company has, during the last ten years: (i) been convicted in or is currently subject to a pending a criminal proceeding (excluding traffic violations and other minor offenses); (ii) been a party to a civil proceeding of a judicial or administrative body of competent jurisdiction and as a result of such proceeding was or is subject to a judgment, decree or final order enjoining future violations of, or prohibiting or mandating activities subject to any federal or state securities or banking or commodities laws including, without limitation, in any way limiting involvement in any business activity, or finding any violation with respect to such law, nor (iii) any bankruptcy petition been filed by or against the business of which such person was an executive officer or a general partner, whether at the time of the bankruptcy or for the two years prior thereto.
Audit Committee and Conflicts of Interest
Since we do not have an audit or compensation committee comprised of independent directors, the functions that would have been performed by such committees are performed by our directors. The Board of Directors has not established an audit committee and does not have an audit committee financial expert, nor has the Board of Directors established a nominating committee. The Board is of the opinion that such committees are not necessary since the Company is a start-up company and has only one director, and to date, such directors have been performing the functions of such committees. Thus, there is a potential conflict of interest in that our directors and officers have the authority to determine issues concerning management compensation, nominations, and audit issues that may affect management decisions.
Other than as described above, we are not aware of any other conflicts of interest with any of our executive officers or directors.
Stock Option Grants
We had no outstanding equity awards from inception through the year ended September 30, 2021. The following table sets forth certain information concerning outstanding stock awards held by our officers and our directors as of the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021:
(1) Appointed President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Secretary, Treasurer and Director September 12, 2019.
ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Principal Stockholders
The following table sets forth, as of September 30, 2021, the number of shares of Common Stock owned of record and beneficially by executive officers, directors and persons who beneficially own more than 5% of the outstanding shares of Common Stock of the Company.
Beneficial Owner
Number of Shares Beneficially Owned
Percent
Friction & Heat, LLC
Beneficial Owner-Joe Passalaqua
106 Glenwood Drive S.
Liverpool, NY 13090-3340
70,000,000
93.33 %
Tongqing Bao
Tongquing Bao is the former CEO of the company when it was known as Paramount Supply Co. No reports were filed after he assumed control of the company in 2017 and he apparently abandoned the company. His whereabouts are unknown and he has no input or communication with current management.
4,000,000
5.33 %
Named Executive Officers and Directors:
Joseph C. Passalaqua - owns Friction & Heat LLC
106 Glenwood Drive S.
Liverpool, NY 13090-3340
70,000,000
93.33 %
All executive officers and directors as a group (1 person)
70,000,000
93.33 %
ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE.
Mr. Passalaqua is considered to be a promoter, and currently is the only promoter, of Nine Alliance Science & Technology Group Inc., as that term is defined in the rules and regulations promulgated under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1933.
On October 14, 2020, Joseph Passalaqua, an officer and Related Party of the Company advanced the Company $2,000 to cover the Company’s Transfer Agent fees. The amount was non-interest bearing, payable on demand and unsecured. On October 31, 2020, the Company issued 70,000,000 shares of Common Stock to Friction & Heat LLC; Joseph Passalaqua as Managing Member, in exchange for debt in the amount of $2,000 paid to the Company’s Transfer Agent. As of September 30, 2021, this amount is paid in full.
Since 2019, Joseph Passalaqua has loaned the Company $19,893. This amount is held in Notes Payable - Related Party.
The loans do not have any terms, carry no interest and are not secured.
ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
During the year ended September 30, 2020, the total fees billed for audit-related services was $2,395 for tax services was $0 and for all other services was $0.
During the year ended September 30, 2021, the total fees billed for audit-related services was $2,500, for tax services was $0 and for all other services was $0.
PART IV
ITEM 15. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES.
The following exhibits are included with this registration statement:
__________
* Filed herewith.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
NINE ALLIANCE SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY GROUP
Date: November 3, 2021 By: /s/ Joseph C. Passalaqua
Joseph C. Passalaqua
President, Secretary, Treasurer, Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer
(Principal Executive Officer, Principal Accounting Officer and Principal Financial Officer)