Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors. We discuss factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these differences below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including those factors set forth in the section entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Industry Data” and in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage immunotherapy company dedicated to transforming the treatment of cancer by developing therapies that enable the immune system to attack tumors and provide long-lasting benefits to patients. Our strategy is to use a biomarker-driven approach from discovery through clinical development. We have developed a suite of integrated technologies that comprise our Translational Science Platform, enabling us to comprehensively interrogate the cellular and molecular composition of tumors. By focusing on specific cell types, both immune and non-immune, within tumors, we can prioritize targets and then identify related biomarkers designed to match the right therapy to the right patient. Our pipeline is focused on product candidates to address PD-(L)1-inhibitor resistant and PD-(L)1 inhibitor sensitive tumors, which represent significant opportunities requiring different biological approaches. We aim to develop product candidates that address the unmet medical need of patients in both of these populations.
Our highest priority program, JTX-8064, is being developed for patients with either PD-(L)1-inhibitor resistant or PD-(L)1 inhibitor sensitive tumors. JTX-8064 is the first tumor-associated macrophage candidate to emerge from our Translational Science Platform. JTX-8064 is an antibody that binds to Leukocyte Immunoglobulin Like Receptor B2, or LILRB2 (also known as ILT4), which is a cell surface receptor expressed on macrophages. In January 2021, we began enrollment in the INNATE trial, our Phase 1 dose-escalation clinical trial of JTX-8064 as a monotherapy and in combination with either our PD-1 inhibitor, JTX-4014, or pembrolizumab in patients with advanced solid tumors. Our goal is to advance this program rapidly, and, as a result, INNATE is a proof-of-concept trial that includes indication-specific expansion cohorts.
Vopratelimab is a clinical-stage monoclonal antibody that binds to and activates the Inducible T cell CO-Stimulator, or ICOS, a protein on the surface of certain T cells commonly found in many solid tumors. We are currently enrolling patients in the SELECT trial, which is evaluating vopratelimab in combination with JTX-4014, our anti-PD-1 antibody, compared to JTX-4014 alone in biomarker-selected, immunotherapy-naive second-line non-small cell lung cancer, or NSCLC, patients. We identify patients for SELECT using TISvopra , an 18 gene signature that includes genes relevant to both CD8 and CD4 T cell biology. TISvopra has been optimized to predict for emergence of ICOS hi CD4 T cells in the peripheral blood, which have been associated with clinical benefit in patients treated with vopratelimab alone or in combination with nivolumab. SELECT is a randomized Phase 2 clinical trial outside the United States, and we dosed the first patient in October 2020. Due to COVID-19-related delays, we now expect to report clinical data from SELECT in 2022.
JTX-4014 is a clinical-stage anti-PD-1 antibody that we are developing primarily for potential use in combination with our product candidates, as we believe that combination therapy has the potential to be a mainstay of cancer immunotherapy. We presented safety and preliminary efficacy data from a Phase 1 clinical trial of JTX-4014 monotherapy in 2019. Based on the results of that clinical trial, we are using JTX-4014 in combination with vopratelimab in SELECT, and we plan to use JTX-4014 in combination with JTX-8064 in INNATE.
Beyond our product candidates, we continue to advance and build our discovery pipeline. We are discovering and developing next-generation immunotherapies by leveraging our Translational Science Platform to systematically and comprehensively interrogate cell types within the tumor microenvironment. Our broad discovery pipeline includes multiple programs targeting myeloid cells such as macrophages, T regulatory cells and non-immune cells, such as stromal cells. We believe that the use of our Translational Science Platform to efficiently identify novel immuno-oncology targets and advance them from discovery to investigational new drug application, or IND, stage is a sustainable approach that we plan to continually apply across our broad discovery pipeline and target selection process.
In August 2020, we entered into an agreement to exclusively license JTX-1811 to Gilead Sciences, Inc., or Gilead. JTX-1811 is the most recent product candidate to emerge from our Translational Science Platform, and, is a monoclonal antibody that is designed to selectively deplete T regulatory cells in the tumor microenvironment, or TME, by targeting a receptor called CCR8, which is preferentially expressed on intra-tumoral T regulatory cells. Pursuant to our exclusive license agreement with Gilead, or the Gilead License Agreement, we granted Gilead a worldwide license to develop, manufacture and commercialize JTX-1811 and certain derivatives thereof, as well as backup antibodies defined within the agreement. Concurrently with the license agreement, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with Gilead, or the Stock Purchase Agreement, and a registration rights agreement.
Under the terms of the Gilead License Agreement and Stock Purchase Agreement, Gilead paid us a one-time, non-refundable upfront payment of $85.0 million and $35.0 million to purchase 5,539,727 shares of our common stock pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement. Under the terms of the Gilead License Agreement, we will advance JTX-1811 until the clearance of an IND application or an earlier date specified by Gilead, at which time the program will be transitioned to Gilead. We are entitled to receive payments from Gilead upon the achievement of specified clinical, regulatory and sales milestones, including potential clinical development and regulatory milestone payments up to an aggregate total of $510.0 million and potential sales milestone payments up to an aggregate total of $175.0 million. We are also eligible to receive tiered royalty payments based on a percentage of annual worldwide net sales ranging from the high-single digits to mid-teens, based on future annual net sales of licensed products, on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis.
On July 22, 2019, we entered into an exclusive license agreement with Celgene, or the Celgene License Agreement, granting Celgene a worldwide and exclusive license to develop, manufacture and commercialize JTX-8064 and certain derivatives thereof, as well as any antibody or other biologic controlled by us that is specifically directed to the LILRB2 receptor. Under the terms of the Celgene License Agreement, Celgene paid us a one-time, non-refundable upfront payment of $50.0 million.
Celgene was subsequently acquired by Bristol Myers Squibb, or BMS, in November 2019 and the Celgene License Agreement was terminated effective June 3, 2020. We now have sole worldwide rights to JTX-8064, and all of our intellectual property rights pertaining to JTX-8064 and licensed to Celgene were reacquired by us.
In July 2016, we entered into a Master Research and Collaboration Agreement, or the Celgene Collaboration Agreement, and a Series B-1 Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement with Celgene. Under the terms of these agreements, we received a $225.0 million upfront cash payment and $36.1 million from the sale of 10,448,100 shares of our Series B-1 convertible preferred stock, which shares converted into 2,831,463 shares of common stock upon the completion of our initial public offering, or IPO, in 2017. We terminated the Celgene Collaboration Agreement concurrently with entry into the Celgene License Agreement.
Since inception, our operations have focused on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, developing our Translational Science Platform and conducting research, preclinical studies and clinical trials. We do not have any products approved for sale. We are subject to a number of risks comparable to those of other similar companies, including dependence on key individuals; the need to develop commercially viable products; competition from other companies, many of which are larger and better capitalized; and the need to obtain adequate additional financing to fund the development of our products. We have funded our operations primarily through proceeds received from public offerings and private placements of our stock totaling $298.5 million and up-front payments from our Celgene and Gilead collaboration and license agreements totaling $360.0 million.
Due to our significant research and development expenditures, we have accumulated substantial losses since our inception. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $151.0 million. We expect to incur substantial additional losses in the future as we expand our research and development activities.
The spread of COVID-19 during 2020 has caused an economic downturn on a global scale. As of February 25, 2021, we have not experienced a significant financial impact directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic but have experienced some disruptions to clinical operations and to our supply chain. As the pandemic continues to unfold, the extent of its effect on our operational and financial performance will depend in large part on future developments, which cannot be predicted with confidence at this time.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $62.3 million of license revenue under the Gilead License Agreement entered into in October 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized $147.9 million of license and collaboration revenue, which was comprised of $50.0 million of license revenue under the Celgene License Agreement and $97.9 million of collaboration revenue under the Celgene Collaboration Agreement. The Celgene Collaboration Agreement was terminated effective July 22, 2019, at which time all remaining deferred revenue was recognized as we had no further performance obligations.
In the future, we may generate revenue from product sales or collaboration agreements, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements, including potential milestone payments and royalties under the Gilead License Agreement. We expect that our revenue will fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year as a result of the timing and amount of license fees, milestones, reimbursement of costs incurred and other payments, if any, and product sales, to the extent any products are successfully commercialized. If we or third parties fail to complete the development of our product candidates in a timely manner or obtain
regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenue, and our results of operations and financial position, would be materially adversely affected.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred by us for the discovery, development and manufacture of our current and future product candidates and include: external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, including contract research organizations, contract manufacturing organizations, academic and non-profit institutions and consultants; salaries and personnel-related costs, including non-cash stock-based compensation expense; license fees to acquire in-process technology and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for laboratory, facilities and other costs.
We use our employee and infrastructure resources across multiple research and development programs directed toward developing our Translational Science Platform and for identifying, testing and developing product candidates. We manage certain activities such as contract research and manufacture of our product candidates and discovery programs through our third-party vendors.
At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of our product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from sales of our product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing such product candidates, including the uncertainty of:
•addition and retention of key research and development personnel;
•establishing an appropriate safety profile with IND-enabling toxicology studies;
•the cost to acquire or make therapies to study in combination with our immunotherapies;
•successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials, including the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the timing and progress of our ongoing and planned clinical trials;
•establishing agreements with third-party contract manufacturing organizations for clinical supply for our clinical trials and commercial manufacturing, if our product candidates are approved;
•receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•commercializing products, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
•the cost to develop companion diagnostics and/or complementary diagnostics as needed for each of our development programs;
•the costs associated with the development of any additional product candidates we acquire through third-party collaborations or identify through our Translational Science Platform;
•the terms and timing of any collaboration, license or other arrangement, including the terms and timing of any milestone payments thereunder;
•obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our products, if and when approved; and
•continued acceptable safety profiles of the products following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs, timing and viability associated with the development of that product candidate. We plan to increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we advance our product candidates through clinical trials and continue the enhancement of our Translational Science Platform and the progression of our pipeline.
Due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development, we do not allocate all of our internal research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis as they primarily relate to personnel and lab consumables costs that are deployed across multiple programs under development. Our research and development expenses also include external costs, which we do track on a program-by-program basis following the program’s nomination as a development candidate. We began incurring such external costs for vopratelimab in 2015, JTX-4014 in 2016, JTX-8064 in 2017 and JTX-1811 in 2019.
Included below are external research and development and external clinical and regulatory costs for vopratelimab, JTX-4014, JTX-1811, JTX-8064, and our pre-development candidates:
Research and development activities account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. As we continue to implement our business strategy, we expect our research and development expenses to increase over the next several years. We expect that these expenses will increase as we:
•continue our clinical development of JTX-8064, including our Phase 1 INNATE clinical trial of JTX-8064 as a monotherapy and in combination with either JTX-4014 or pembrolizumab;
•continue our clinical development of vopratelimab, including our Phase 2 SELECT clinical trial of vopratelimab and JTX-4014;
•complete preclinical, IND-enabling and other development activities for JTX-1811 and transition the program to Gilead in accordance with the terms of the Gilead License Agreement;
•continue to identify and develop potential predictive biomarkers and companion diagnostics and/or complementary diagnostics for our product candidates; and
•continue to develop and enhance our Translational Science Platform and advance our pipeline of immunotherapy programs and our early research activities into IND-enabling activities.
Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally incur higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of salaries and personnel-related costs, including non-cash stock-based compensation expense, for our personnel in executive, business development, legal, finance and accounting, human resources and other administrative functions, consulting fees, facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, fees paid for accounting and tax services, insurance expenses and legal costs. Legal costs include general corporate legal fees, patent legal fees and related costs. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support our continued operations.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, consists primarily of interest and investment income on our cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. On an ongoing basis, our management evaluates our estimates which include, but are not limited to, estimates related to revenue recognized under the Gilead License Agreement and Celgene Collaboration Agreement (including estimates of internal and external costs expected to be incurred to satisfy performance obligations), accrued expenses, stock-based compensation expense and income taxes. In addition, in 2019, we made estimates to determine the discount rate utilized in the initial application of Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 842, Leases, or ASC 842. We base our estimates on historical experience and other market specific or other relevant assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606. Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. In applying ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the promises and performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligations. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration to which we are entitled in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract, determine those that are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied. We do not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is that the period between payment by the customer and the transfer of promised goods or services to the customer will be one year or less.
The terms of our license agreements include upfront and license fees, milestones and other contingent payments for the achievement of defined certain clinical, regulatory and sales-based milestone events, as well as royalties on sales of commercialized products. Arrangements that include upfront payments may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until obligations under such arrangements are fulfilled. The event-based milestone payments represent variable consideration, and we use the “most likely amount” method to estimate this variable consideration. Given the high degree of uncertainty around the occurrence of these events, we determined the milestone and other contingent amounts to be fully constrained until the uncertainty associated with these payments is resolved. Revenue will be recognized from sales-based royalty payments when or as the sales occur. We will re-evaluate the transaction price in each reporting period as uncertain events are resolved and other changes in circumstances occur. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included within Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on the application of ASC 606 to the Celgene Collaboration Agreement, the Celgene License Agreement and the Gilead License Agreement.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses as of each balance sheet date. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with internal personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with our service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. The financial terms of agreements with these service providers are subject to negotiation, vary from contract-to-contract and may result in uneven payment flows. In circumstances where amounts have been paid in excess of costs incurred, we record a prepaid expense.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based payments in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. This guidance requires all stock-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, restricted stock awards and restricted stock units, to be recognized as expense in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss) based on their grant date fair values. For stock options granted to employees and to members of our board of directors for their services on the board of directors, we estimate the grant date fair value of each stock option using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. For restricted stock awards and restricted stock units granted to employees, we estimate the grant date fair value of each award using intrinsic value, which is based on the value of the underlying common stock less any purchase price. For stock-based payments subject to service-based vesting conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense equal to the grant date fair value of stock-based payment on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period.
The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of certain subjective assumptions, including (i) the calculation of expected term of the stock-based payment, (ii) the risk-free interest rate, (iii) the expected stock price volatility and (iv) the expected dividend yield. We use the simplified method as prescribed by SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107 to calculate the
expected term for stock options granted to employees as we do not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term. We determine the risk-free interest rate based on a treasury instrument whose term is consistent with the expected term of the stock options. Because there had been no public market for our common stock prior to our IPO, there is a lack of historical and implied volatility data. Accordingly, we base our estimates of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of publicly-traded companies with similar characteristics to us, including stage of product development and therapeutic focus within the life sciences industry. Historical volatility is calculated over a period of time commensurate with the expected term of the stock-based payment. We use an assumed dividend yield of zero as we have never paid dividends on our common stock, nor do we expect to pay dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future.
We account for forfeitures of all stock-based payments when such forfeitures occur.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded in accordance with ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance against deferred tax assets is recorded if, based on the weight of the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We account for uncertain tax positions using a more-likely-than-not threshold for recognizing and resolving uncertain tax positions. The evaluation of uncertain tax positions is based on factors, including, but not limited to, changes in the law, the measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns, the effective settlement of matters subject to audit, new audit activity and changes in facts or circumstances related to a tax position.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included within Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our business.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
License and Collaboration Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $62.3 million of license revenue under the Gilead License Agreement entered into in October 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized $147.9 million of license and collaboration revenue, which was comprised of $50.0 million of license revenue under the Celgene License Agreement and $97.9 million of collaboration revenue under the Celgene Collaboration Agreement. The Celgene Collaboration Agreement was terminated effective July 22, 2019, at which time all remaining deferred revenue was recognized as we had no further performance obligations.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Research and development expenses increased by $11.6 million from $67.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $78.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to:
•$7.9 million of increased external clinical and regulatory costs primarily attributable to our SELECT clinical trial which commenced in 2020;
•$3.2 million of increased external research and development costs primarily attributable to IND-enabling expenses related to JTX-1811, partially offset by reduced expenses related to JTX-8064 incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020;
•$2.9 million of increased employee compensation costs primarily attributable to increased headcount, merit and bonus expense;
•partially offset by $0.9 million of decreased other research costs primarily attributable to reduced travel expenses resulting from COVID-19 travel limitations; and
•$0.8 million of decreased lab consumables costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
General and administrative expenses increased by $0.8 million from $27.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $28.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to $1.5 million of increased employee compensation costs related to increased merit and bonus expense for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income, net
Other income, net, decreased by $2.8 million from $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in other income, net is attributable to reduced interest rates due to current market conditions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have funded our operations primarily through proceeds received from public offerings and private placements of our stock totaling $298.5 million and up-front payments from our Celgene and Gilead collaboration and license agreements totaling $360.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $213.2 million.
On December 17, 2019, we entered into a Sales Agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, pursuant to which we offered and sold shares of our common stock with an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million under the ATM Offering. The Sales Agreement provides that Cowen will be entitled to a sales commission equal to 3.0% of the gross sales price per share of all shares sold under the ATM Offering. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold an aggregate of 2,522,121 shares under the ATM Offering at an average price of $7.47 per share for net proceeds of $18.0 million after deducting sales commissions and offering expenses, of which $14.5 million was received during the year ended December 31, 2020.
In January 2021, we sold an aggregate of 3,156,200 shares at an average price of $9.87 per share for net proceeds of $30.2 million. Consequently, we have completed the sale of all available amounts under the ATM Offering, of which three investors account for $43.1 million of all funds raised (see Note 16 to our consolidated financial statements included within Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Funding Requirements
Our plan of operation is to continue implementing our business strategy, the research and development of our current product candidates, our preclinical development activities, the expansion of our research pipeline and the enhancement of our internal research and development capabilities. Due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development and given the early stage of our programs and product candidates, we cannot reasonably estimate the costs we will incur and the timelines that will be required to complete development, obtain marketing approval, and commercialize our products, if and when approved. For the same reasons, we are also unable to predict when, if ever, we will generate revenue from product sales or whether, or when, if ever, we may achieve profitability. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success, and development costs can differ materially from expectations. In addition, we cannot forecast which products, if and when approved, may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
Due to our significant research and development expenditures, we have generated substantial operating losses since inception. We have incurred an accumulated deficit of $151.0 million through December 31, 2020. We expect to incur substantial additional losses in the future as we expand our research and development activities and continue to advance our programs. Based on our research and development plans, we expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments of $213.2 million will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through the second quarter of 2023. However, we have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect, and we could exhaust our capital resources sooner than we expect. The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend largely on:
•the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities, including the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the timing and progress of our ongoing and planned clinical trials;
•the cost to access, acquire or develop therapies to study in combination with our immunotherapies;
•successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
•the cost to develop companion diagnostics and/or complementary diagnostics as needed for each of our development programs;
•our ability to establish agreements with third-party manufacturers for clinical supply for our clinical trials and, if any of our product candidates are approved, commercial manufacturing;
•the costs associated with the development of any additional product candidates we acquire through acquisition or third-party collaborations or identify through our Translational Science Platform;
•our ability to maintain our current research and development programs and enhancement of our Translational Science Platform;
•addition and retention of key research and development personnel;
•our efforts to enhance operational, financial and information management systems, and hire additional personnel, including personnel to support development of our product candidates;
•the legal patent costs involved in prosecuting patent applications and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property claims;
•the costs and ongoing investments to in-license or acquire additional technologies, including the in-license of intellectual property related to our potential product candidates;
•the progress and success of our exclusive license of JTX-1811 to Gilead; and
•the terms and timing of any other collaboration, license or other arrangement, including the terms and timing of any option and milestone payments thereunder.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. Furthermore, our operating plans may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans.
In addition to the variables described above, if and when any of our product candidates successfully complete development, we expect to incur substantial additional costs associated with regulatory filings, marketing approval, post-marketing requirements, maintaining our intellectual property rights, and regulatory protection, in addition to other costs. We cannot reasonably estimate these costs at this time.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity or debt financings, collaborations, licensing arrangements and strategic alliances. We currently do not have a credit facility or committed sources of capital. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the future sale of equity or debt, the ownership interests of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our existing common stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt securities, these securities could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. We may require additional capital beyond our currently anticipated amounts. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, or at all. If we raise additional funds through collaboration arrangements in the future, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or product candidates, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce, or terminate development or future commercialization efforts, or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $27.8 million, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $30.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash used in operating activities decreased by $2.3 million primarily due to $62.3 million in revenue recognized under the Gilead License Agreement in 2020, partially offset by $50.0 million in revenue recognized under the Celgene License Agreement during 2019 and increased operating expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $51.3 million, compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $31.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash provided by investing activities increased by $19.9 million as cash was reinvested into cash equivalents, as opposed to other short-term and long-term investments, due to current market conditions during the year ended December 31, 2020. Proceeds received from maturities and sales of investments were either re-invested or used to fund operations.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $70.7 million, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash provided by financing activities increased by $66.7 million due to Gilead’s equity investment of $55.7 million, at fair value at the closing, and the receipt of $14.5 million of net proceeds from our ATM Offering during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have, during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable SEC rules.