ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read with the Business in Item 1 of Part I and the Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes in Item 8 of Part II of this Report.
The following discussion is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. In the course of operating our business, we routinely make decisions as to the timing of the payment of invoices, the collection of receivables, the manufacturing and shipment of products, the fulfillment of orders, the purchase of supplies, and the building of inventory and spare parts, among other matters. In making these decisions, we consider various factors including contractual obligations, customer satisfaction, competition, internal and external financial targets and expectations, and financial planning objectives. Each of these decisions has some impact on the financial results for any given period. For further information about our critical accounting policies and estimates, see “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” section included in this “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
To aid in understanding our operating results for the periods covered by this Report, we have provided an executive overview, which includes a summary of our business and market environment along with a financial results and key performance metrics overview. These sections should be read in conjunction with the more detailed discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations in this Item 7, our “Risk Factors” section included in Item 1A of Part I, and our Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of Part II of this Report.
Executive Overview
Financial Results and Key Performance Metrics Overview
The following table provides an overview of our financial results and key financial metrics (in millions, except per share amounts, percentages, and days sales outstanding, or DSO):
________________________________
(*) DSO is for the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2020, and 2019.
•Net Revenues: Net revenues were flat during 2020 compared to 2019. We experienced growth in our Enterprise and Cloud verticals, which was offset by a decline in our Service Provider vertical. The growth in our Enterprise vertical was primarily driven by Switching, and the growth in our Cloud vertical was primarily driven by Routing. We believe the decline in our Service Provider vertical was partially due to the COVID-19 related supply constraints. Service net revenues increased primarily due to strong renewals of support contracts.
•Gross Margin: Gross margin as a percentage of net revenues decreased primarily due to increased logistics and other supply chain-related costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, customer and product mix, and intangible amortization associated with the acquisition of Mist, partially offset by the impact associated with higher service revenues.
•Operating Margin: Operating income as a percentage of net revenues decreased primarily due to the drivers described in the gross margin discussion above, higher restructuring charges, and higher personnel-related costs. The decrease in operating margin was partially offset by lower travel costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Operating Cash Flows: Net cash provided by operations increased primarily due to higher invoicing activity and working capital differences related to customer collections, partially offset by higher payments to indirect suppliers and for employee compensation.
•Capital Return: We continue to return capital to our stockholders. During the fourth quarter of 2019, we entered into an accelerated share repurchase program (the "ASR"), to repurchase an aggregate of $200.0 million in shares. Under
the ASR, we made an up-front payment of $200.0 million and received and retired 6.4 million shares of our common stock during the fourth quarter of 2019. During the first quarter of 2020, the ASR was completed, and we received and retired an additional 1.8 million shares for a total repurchase of 8.2 million shares of our common stock. During 2020, we repurchased a total of 16.1 million shares of our common stock in the open market at an average price of $23.36 per share for an aggregate purchase price of $375.0 million. During 2020, we paid quarterly dividends of $0.20 per share, for an aggregate amount of $264.1 million.
•DSO: DSO is calculated as the ratio of ending accounts receivable, net of allowances, divided by average daily net revenues for the preceding 90 days. DSO increased, primarily due to higher accounts receivable resulting from higher overall invoicing volume.
•Deferred Revenue: Total deferred revenue increased, primarily due to the timing of maintenance service renewals.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
The COVID-19 pandemic and the containment measures taken by governments and businesses are expected to continue to have a substantial negative impact on businesses around the world and on global, regional, and national economies. As a result, the pandemic has, and may continue to, negatively affect our operations, including as a result of external factors beyond our control such as restrictions on the physical movement of our employees, contract manufacturers, partners, and customers to limit the spread of COVID-19 and the availability and acceptance of a COVID-19 vaccine. Since March 2020, the majority of our global workforce has been working remotely due to shelter-in-place requirements and travel restrictions. We continue to follow the guidance of local and national governments, including monitoring the health of our employees who have returned to our offices and limiting the gathering size of employee groups in indoor spaces.
We continue to support healthy customer demand for our products by working with our suppliers and distributors to address supply chain disruptions as well as travel restrictions that have impacted our operations. We have a global supply chain footprint with our primary manufacturing partners located in China, Taiwan, Malaysia, Mexico, and the United States. Our component suppliers are more geographically distributed with vendors from many countries throughout the world. During 2020, the supply constraints we experienced were due to both constrained manufacturing capacity as well as component parts shortages as our component vendors were also facing manufacturing challenges. These challenges resulted in extended lead-times to our customers, increased logistics costs, and impacted the volume of products we were able to deliver, which negatively impacted our ability to recognize revenue and decreased our gross margins.
Challenges to our supply chain due to the impact of the pandemic remain dynamic, including ongoing shortages of component parts, and increased logistics costs due to air travel and transport restrictions that limited the availability of flights on which we were able to ship products in the fourth quarter. However, we saw improvements in our manufacturing capacity during the second half of 2020. We also believe that we have a robust and fairly flexible supply chain. Our supply chain team has been working to meet our customer needs by executing on a strong risk mitigation plan, including multi-sourcing, pre-ordering components, transforming our logistics network, prioritizing critical customers, working with local government agencies to understand challenges, and partnering on solutions that limit disruptions to our operations while ensuring the safety of our employees, partners and suppliers.
The pandemic has not had a substantial net impact to our consolidated operating results or our liquidity position in 2020. We continue to generate operating cash flows to meet our short-term liquidity needs, and we expect to continue to maintain access to the capital markets enabled by our strong credit ratings. In 2020, we did not observe any material impairments of our assets or a significant change in the fair value of assets due to the pandemic.
We enter the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 with healthy backlog in our Cloud and Service Provider verticals. We intend to continue to work with government authorities and implement safety measures to ensure that we are able to continue manufacturing and distributing our products during the pandemic. We may continue to experience constrained supply and increased logistics costs and could experience curtailed customer demand, any of which could adversely impact our business, results of operations, and overall financial performance in future periods.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to sales returns, pricing credits, warranty costs, allowance for doubtful accounts, impairment of long-term assets, especially goodwill and intangible assets, contract manufacturer liabilities, assumptions used in the valuation of share-based compensation, and litigation. We base our estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. For further information about our significant accounting policies, see Note 1, Description of Business, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report, which describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The accounting policies described below are significantly affected by critical accounting estimates. Such accounting policies require significant judgments, assumptions, and estimates used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements and actual results could differ materially from the amounts reported based on these policies. To the extent there are material differences between our estimates and the actual results, our future consolidated results of operations may be affected.
•Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets: We make significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments when valuing goodwill and other intangible assets in connection with the initial purchase price allocation of an acquired entity, as well as when evaluating impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets on an ongoing basis. The purchase price of an acquired entity is allocated between intangible assets and the net tangible assets of the acquired business with the residual of the purchase price recorded as goodwill. The determination of the value of the intangible assets acquired involves certain judgments and estimates. Critical estimates include, but are not limited to, historical and projected customer retention rates, anticipated growth in revenue from the acquired customer and product base, and the expected use of the acquired assets. These factors are also considered in determining the useful life of the acquired intangible assets. These estimates are based upon a number of factors, including historical experience, market conditions, and information obtained from the management of the acquired company. These judgments can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in future periods and the appropriate weighted average cost of capital.
Goodwill represents the future economic benefits arising from other assets acquired in a business combination that are not individually identified and separately recorded. We evaluate goodwill for impairment on an annual basis, as of November 1st, or more frequently if an event occurs or facts and circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our reporting units below their carrying amount. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is one level below the operating segment, by first performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. This initial assessment includes, among others, consideration of macroeconomic conditions and financial performance. If the qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that an impairment exists, a quantitative analysis is performed by determining the fair value of each reporting unit using a combination of the discounted cash flow and the market approaches. The discounted cash flow approach uses expected future operating results. The market approach uses comparable company information to determine revenue and earnings multiples to value our reporting units. Failure to achieve these expected results or market multiples may cause a future impairment of goodwill of our reporting units. Goodwill is considered impaired if the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value. A goodwill impairment loss is recognized for the amount that the carrying amount of a reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeds its fair value, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
We conducted our annual impairment test of goodwill during the fourth quarters of 2020 and 2019. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we determined that no impairment of the carrying value of goodwill for any reporting units exists. See Note 6, Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets, in Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report for additional information regarding our Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets.
•Inventory Valuation and Contract Manufacturer Liabilities: Inventory consists primarily of component parts to be used in the manufacturing process and finished goods in-transit, and is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. A provision is recorded when inventory is determined to be in excess of anticipated demand or obsolete, to adjust inventory to its estimated realizable value. In determining the provision, we also consider estimated recovery
rates based on the nature of the inventory. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our net inventory balances were $221.9 million and $94.2 million, respectively.
We establish a liability for non-cancelable, non-returnable purchase commitments with our contract manufacturers for quantities in excess of our demand forecasts or obsolete materials charges for components purchased by contract manufacturers based on our demand forecasts or customer orders. We also take estimated recoveries of aged inventory into consideration when determining the liability. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our contract manufacturer liabilities were $15.2 million and $28.6 million, respectively.
Significant judgment is used in establishing our forecasts of future demand, recovery rates based on the nature and age of inventory, and obsolete material exposures. We perform a detailed analysis and review of data used in establishing our demand forecasts. If the actual component usage and product demand are significantly lower than forecast, which may be caused by factors within and outside of our control, or if there were a higher incidence of inventory obsolescence because of rapidly changing technology and our customer requirements, we may be required to increase our inventory write-downs and contract manufacturer liabilities, which could have an adverse impact on our gross margins and profitability. We regularly evaluate our exposure for inventory write-downs and adequacy of our contract manufacturer liabilities. Inventory and supply chain management remains an area of focus as we balance the risk of material obsolescence and supply chain flexibility in order to reduce lead times.
•Revenue Recognition: We enter into contracts to sell our products and services, and while some of our sales agreements contain standard terms and conditions, there are agreements that contain non-standard terms and conditions and include promises to transfer multiple goods or services. As a result, significant interpretation and judgment are sometimes required to determine the appropriate accounting for these transactions, including: (1) whether performance obligations are considered distinct that should be accounted for separately versus together, how the price should be allocated among the performance obligations, and when to recognize revenue for each performance obligation; (2) developing an estimate of the stand-alone selling price, or SSP, of each distinct performance obligation; (3) combining contracts that may impact the allocation of the transaction price between product and services; and (4) estimating and accounting for variable consideration, including rights of return, rebates, price protection, expected penalties or other price concessions as a reduction of the transaction price.
Our estimates of SSP for each performance obligation require judgment that considers multiple factors, including, but not limited to, historical discounting trends for products and services, pricing practices in different geographies and through different sales channels, gross margin objectives, internal costs, competitor pricing strategies, and industry technology lifecycles. Our estimates for rights of return, rebates, and price protection are based on historical sales returns and price protection credits, specific criteria outlined in customer contracts or rebate agreements, and other factors known at the time. Our estimates for expected penalties and other price concessions are based on historical trends and expectations regarding future incurrence.
Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the timing or amount of revenue recognition.
•Income Taxes: We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions and determining our taxes. Although we believe our reserves are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different from that which is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence, including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income, and the feasibility of tax planning strategies. In the event that we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
Our provision for income taxes is subject to volatility and could be adversely affected by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries that have lower tax rates and higher than anticipated in countries that have higher tax rates; by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities; by expiration of, or lapses in the research and
development, or R&D, tax credit laws; by transfer pricing adjustments, including the effect of acquisitions on our intercompany R&D cost-sharing arrangement and legal structure; by tax effects of nondeductible compensation; by tax costs related to intercompany realignments; by changes in accounting principles; or by changes in tax laws and regulations, including possible U.S. changes to the taxation of earnings of our foreign subsidiaries, the deductibility of expenses attributable to foreign income, or the foreign tax credit rules. In addition, the OECD’s recommended changes to numerous long-standing tax principles, as adopted by countries, will increase tax uncertainty and may adversely affect our provision for income taxes. Significant judgment is required to determine the recognition and measurement attributes prescribed in the accounting guidance for uncertainty in income taxes. The accounting guidance for uncertainty in income taxes applies to all income tax positions, including the potential recovery of previously paid taxes, which if settled unfavorably could adversely affect our provision for income taxes or additional paid-in capital. In addition, we are subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns by the IRS and other tax authorities. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. There can be no assurance that the outcomes from these continuous examinations will not have an adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition.
•Loss Contingencies: We are involved in various lawsuits, claims, investigations, and proceedings, including those involving our IP, commercial, securities and employment matters, which arise in the ordinary course of business. We use significant judgment and assumptions to estimate the likelihood of loss or impairment of an asset, or the incurrence of a liability, in determining loss contingencies. An estimated loss contingency is accrued when it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. We record a charge equal to the minimum estimated liability for litigation costs or a loss contingency only when both of the following conditions are met: (i) information available prior to issuance of our consolidated financial statements indicates that it is probable that an asset had been impaired or a liability had been incurred at the date of the financial statements and (ii) the range of loss can be reasonably estimated. We regularly evaluate current information available to us to determine whether such accruals should be adjusted and whether new accruals are required.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, Description of Business, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, in Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects on financial condition and results of operations, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Results of Operations
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 can be found under Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 20, 2020, which is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at http://investor.juniper.net.
Revenues
The following table presents net revenues by product and service, customer vertical, and geographic region (in millions, except percentages):
Product net revenues decreased due to decreases in Security and Routing, offset by Switching.
Security revenue decreased primarily driven by Enterprise from lower net revenues in our SRX product family.
Routing revenue decreased primarily driven by Service Provider and to a lesser extent, Enterprise, from lower net revenues in our MX product family. The decrease was partially offset by strength in Cloud.
Switching revenue increased primarily driven by Enterprise and Service Provider, from higher net revenues in our Mist product family.
Service net revenues increased primarily due to strong renewals of support contracts.
Gross Margins
The following table presents gross margins (in millions, except percentages):
Our gross margins as a percentage of net revenues have been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, including the mix and average selling prices of our products and services, new product introductions and enhancements, manufacturing, component and logistics costs, expenses for inventory obsolescence and warranty obligations, cost of support and service personnel, customer mix as we continue to expand our footprint with certain strategic customers, the mix of distribution channels through which our products and services are sold, and import tariffs. For example, we are subject to tariffs on networking components imported from China, which are included in products that we import into and sell within the United States. In addition, our logistics and other supply chain-related costs have increased due to the COVID-19 pandemic. For more information on the potential impact of tariffs and COVID-19 on our business, see the “Risk Factors” section of Item 1A of Part I of this Report.
Product gross margin
Product gross margin as a percentage of product revenues decreased primarily due to increased logistics and other supply chain-related costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, customer and product mix, and higher amortization of intangible assets associated with the acquisition of Mist, acquired in the second quarter of 2019. We continue to undertake specific efforts to address certain factors impacting our product gross margin. These efforts include performance and quality improvements through engineering to increase value across our products; optimizing our supply chain and service business; pricing management; and increasing software and solution sales.
Service gross margin
Service gross margin as a percentage of service net revenues increased primarily due to higher revenue and lower delivery costs.
Operating Expenses
The following table presents operating expenses (in millions, except percentages):
Our operating expenses have historically been driven in large part by personnel-related costs, including salaries and wages; commissions and bonuses, which we refer to collectively as variable compensation; benefits; share-based compensation; and travel. Facility and information technology, or IT, departmental costs are allocated to each department based on usage and headcount. We had a total of 9,950 and 9,419 employees as of December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Our headcount increased by 531 employees, or 6%, primarily from hiring for the research and development, and sales organizations, and to a lesser extent, from the acquisitions in 2020.
Research and development
Research and development expense, or R&D, increased $2.7 million primarily due to higher personnel-related costs of $26.3 million driven by an increase in headcount and higher professional services spending of $12.4 million. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in share-based compensation expense of $15.2 million, lower engineering costs of $14.3 million due to decreased investments in certain R&D projects, and lower travel costs of $4.0 million due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense increased $11.1 million primarily due to higher acquisition-related costs of $10.5 million, mainly for our acquisitions during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Restructuring charges
Restructuring charges increased $32.7 million, primarily due to higher severance costs related to voluntary and involuntary workforce reductions recorded under the 2020 Restructuring Plan.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
The following table presents the loss on extinguishment of debt (in millions, except percentages):
During 2020, we incurred a loss on extinguishment of debt of $55.0 million related to the early repayment of a portion of our 2024 and 2025 Senior Notes. The loss primarily consists of a premium on the tender offer and acceleration of unamortized debt discount and fees on the redeemed debt. During 2019, we incurred a loss on extinguishment of debt of $15.3 million related to the early repayment of our 2020 and 2021 Senior Notes.
Other Expense, Net
The following table presents other expense, net (in millions, except percentages):
_______________________________
N/M - percentage is not meaningful.
Interest income primarily includes interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents, investments, and a promissory note issued to us in connection with the sale of Junos Pulse. Interest expense primarily includes interest, net of capitalized interest expense, from long-term debt and customer financing arrangements. Gain (loss) on investments, net, primarily includes losses from the sale of investments in public and privately-held companies, and any observable changes in fair value and impairment charges recorded on these investments. Other typically consists of foreign exchange gains and losses and other non-operational income and expense items.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased $42.8 million, primarily due to lower yields from our fixed income investment portfolio as a result of a lower interest rates and lower average portfolio balance, and to a lesser extent, lower interest income as a result of the collection of a promissory note receivable in connection with the previously completed sale of Junos Pulse.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased $11.6 million primarily due to lower interest rates and savings from our interest rate swap contracts.
Gain (loss) on Investments, Net
During 2020, we had gains related to certain equity investments and other isolated transactions, compared to losses from certain equity investments in 2019.
Income Tax Provision
The following table presents the income tax provision (benefit) (in millions, except percentages):
The effective tax rate for fiscal year 2020 was lower than 2019, primarily due to the net difference in discrete items unique to fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. In 2020, our effective rate included a $63.7 million benefit, including interest and penalties, related to a multi-year recognition of previously unrecognized tax benefits and a $20.1 million charge, including interest, for the cumulative impact of cost sharing for share-based compensation. In 2019, our effective rate included a $25.4 million benefit, including interest, related to the recognition of previously unrecognized tax benefits pursuant to the resolution of a tax audit and a $7.5 million benefit, including interest, for a lapse in statute of limitations.
For a complete reconciliation of our effective tax rate to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% and further explanation of our income tax provision, see Note 13, Income Taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report.
Our effective tax rate may fluctuate significantly on a quarterly basis and may be adversely affected to the extent earnings are lower than anticipated in countries that have lower statutory rates and higher than anticipated in countries that have higher statutory rates. Our effective tax rate may also fluctuate due to changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets or liabilities, or by changes in tax laws, regulations, or accounting principles, as well as certain discrete items. See Item 1A of Part I, "Risk Factors" of this Report for a description of relevant risks which may adversely affect our results.
As a result of recommendations by the OECD on Base Erosion and Profit Shifting, certain countries in EMEA and APAC have either enacted new corporate tax legislation or are considering enacting such legislation in the near future. We expect the effect of these reform measures to potentially impact long-standing tax principles, particularly in regards to transfer pricing. Consequently, we expect global tax authorities to increasingly challenge our cost sharing and other intercompany arrangements, and the related sourcing of taxable profits in global jurisdictions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following sections discuss the effects of changes in our balance sheet, our capital return strategy, including our stock repurchase program and dividends, our contractual obligations, and certain other commitments and activities on our liquidity and capital resources.
We have funded our business primarily through our operating activities and the issuance of our long-term debt. The following table presents our capital resources (in millions, except percentages):
Summary of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes cash flow activity from our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows (in millions, except percentages):
Operating Activities
Our primary source of operating cash flows is cash collections from our customers. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for personnel-related expenditures, payments for suppliers and other general operating expenses, as well as payments related to taxes, interest, and facilities.
Net cash provided by operations increased primarily due to higher invoicing activity and working capital differences related to customer collections, partially offset by higher payments to indirect suppliers and for employee compensation.
Investing Activities
Investing cash flows consist primarily of capital expenditures; purchases, sales, maturities, and redemptions of investments; and cash used for business combinations.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased in 2020, compared to 2019. In 2020, the net payment for acquisitions was $438.1 million and the net proceeds from sales, maturities, and redemptions of investments was $250.7 million. In 2019, the net payment for the acquisition of Mist was $270.9 million and the net purchase of investments was $140.4 million.
Financing Activities
Financing cash flows consist primarily of repurchases and retirement of common stock, payment of cash dividends to stockholders, issuance and repayment of long-term debt, and proceeds from the issuance of shares of common stock through employee equity incentive plans.
Net cash used in financing activities decreased in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to $416.2 million net issuance of debt in 2020 compared to $454.8 million net repayment of debt in 2019, and $175 million decrease in stock repurchases as discussed below.
Capital Return
The following table summarizes our dividends paid and stock repurchase activities (in millions, except per share amounts):
_______________________________
(*) During 2020, the $23.47 average price per share includes $375.0 million in open market purchases, and settlement of a forward contract of $40.0 million under accelerated share repurchase program (the "ASR"), which was initiated during the fourth quarter of 2019. During 2019, the $25.36 average price per share excludes the forward contract of $40.0 million under the ASR.
In January 2018, our Board of Directors, which we refer to as the Board, approved a $2.0 billion share repurchase program, which we refer to as the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program. In October 2019, the Board authorized a $1.0 billion increase to the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program for a total of $3.0 billion.
As part of the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program, in February 2018 and April 2019, we entered into two ASRs and repurchased $750.0 million and $300.0 million of our common stock, respectively. The aggregate number of shares ultimately repurchased of 29.3 million and 11.6 million shares of our common stock, respectively, was determined based on a volume weighted average repurchase price, less an agreed upon discount, of $25.62 and $25.79 per share, respectively. The shares we received were retired and accounted for as a reduction to stockholder’s equity in the Consolidated Balance Sheets, and treated as a repurchase of common stock for purposes of calculating earnings per share.
As part of the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program, on October 28, 2019, we entered into an additional ASR with a financial institution to repurchase an aggregate of $200.0 million of our outstanding common stock. We made an up-front payment of $200.0 million pursuant to the ASR and received and retired an initial 6.4 million shares of our common stock for an aggregate price of $160.0 million based on the market price of $25.15 per share of our common stock on the date of the transaction. In January, 2020, the ASR was completed, and an additional 1.8 million shares were received for a total repurchase of 8.2 million shares of our common stock at a volume weighted average repurchase price, less an agreed upon discount, of $24.44 per share. The shares received by us were retired, accounted for as a reduction to stockholder’s equity in the Consolidated Balance Sheets, and treated as a repurchase of common stock for purposes of calculating earnings per share.
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased 16.1 million shares of our common stock in the open market for an aggregate purchase price of $375.0 million at an average price of $23.36 per share, under the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program.
As of December 31, 2020, there was $1.3 billion of authorized funds remaining under the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program.
Future share repurchases under the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program will be subject to a review of the circumstances at that time and will be made from time to time in private transactions or open market purchases as permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements. Our 2018 Stock Repurchase Program may be discontinued at any time. See Note 10, Equity, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report for further discussion of our share purchase program.
In addition, any future dividends, and the establishment of record and payment dates, are subject to approval by the Board or an authorized committee thereof. See Note 17, Subsequent Events, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report for discussion of our dividend declaration subsequent to December 31, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303 (a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K. It is not our business practice to enter into off-balance sheet arrangements. However, in the normal course of business, we enter into contracts consisting of guarantees of product and service performance, standby letters of credit for certain lease facilities and insurance programs. See Guarantees below for additional information regarding our guarantees.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal commitments consist of obligations outstanding under operating leases, purchase commitments, debt, and other contractual obligations. The following table summarizes our principal contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods (in millions):
_______________________________
(1) See Note 15, Commitments and Contingencies, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report for additional information regarding our leases and other contractual commitments.
(2) See Note 9, Debt and Financing, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report for additional information regarding our debt.
(3) See Note 15, Commitments and Contingencies, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report for additional information regarding our tax liability related to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (“Tax Act”).
As of December 31, 2020, we had $61.9 million included in long-term income taxes payable in the Consolidated Balance Sheets for unrecognized tax positions. At this time, we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments related to this amount due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes. As a result, this amount is not included in the table above.
Revolving Credit Facility
We have an unsecured revolving credit facility, which enables borrowings of up to $500.0 million, with an option to increase the amount of the credit facility by up to an additional $200.0 million, subject to the lenders' approval. The credit facility will terminate in April 2024, subject to a one-year maturity extension option. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants and no amounts were outstanding under our credit facility.
Guarantees
We have financial guarantees consisting of guarantees of product and service performance and standby letters of credit for certain lease facilities, insurance programs, and customs of $29.0 million and $30.6 million, as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity and capital resources may be impacted by our operating activities as well as acquisitions, investments in strategic relationships, repurchases of additional shares of our common stock, and payment of cash dividends on our common stock.
Since the enactment of the Tax Act, we have repatriated a significant amount of cash, cash equivalents, and investments from outside of the U.S., and plan to continue to repatriate on an ongoing basis. We intend to use the repatriated cash to invest in the business, support value-enhancing merger and acquisitions, or M&A, and fund our return of capital to stockholders.
Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, short-term, and long-term investments, together with cash generated from operations and access to capital markets and the revolving credit facility will be sufficient to fund our operations; planned stock repurchases and dividends; capital expenditures; commitments and other liquidity requirements; and anticipated growth for at least the next twelve months. However, our future liquidity and capital requirements may vary materially from those now planned depending on many factors, including, but not limited to, our growth rate; the timing and amount we spend to support development efforts; the expansion of sales and marketing activities; the introduction of new and enhanced products and services; the costs to acquire or invest in businesses and technologies; an increase in manufacturing or component costs; and the risks and uncertainties detailed in the “Risk Factors” section of Item 1A of Part I of this Report.