Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this annual report on Form 10-K. The statements in this discussion regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding our future performance, liquidity and capital resources and other non-historical statements in this discussion are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, including the risks and uncertainties described in “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in this annual report on Form 10-K. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. We assume no obligation to revise or publicly release any revision to any forward-looking statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K, unless required by law.
Business Overview
St. Joe is a real estate development, asset management and operating company with real estate assets and operations in Northwest Florida. We intend to use existing assets for residential, hospitality and commercial ventures. We have significant residential and commercial land-use entitlements. We actively seek higher and better uses for our real estate assets through a range of development activities. We may partner with or explore the sale of discrete assets when we and/or others can better deploy resources. We seek to enhance the value of our owned real estate assets by developing residential, commercial and hospitality projects to meet market demand. Approximately 86% of our real estate is located in Florida’s Bay, Gulf, and Walton counties. Approximately 90% of our real estate land holdings are located within fifteen miles of the Gulf of Mexico.
We believe our present capital structure, liquidity and land provide us with years of opportunities to increase recurring revenue and long-term value for our shareholders. We intend to focus on our core business activity of real estate development, asset management and operations. We are developing a broad range of asset types that we believe will provide acceptable rates of return, grow recurring revenues and support future business. Capital commitments will be funded with cash proceeds from completed projects, existing cash, owned-land, partner capital and financing arrangements. We do not anticipate immediate benefits from investments. Timing of projects may be subject to delays caused by factors beyond our control.
Our real estate investment strategy focuses on projects that meet long-term risk-adjusted return criteria. Our practice is to only incur such expenditures when our analysis indicates that a project will generate a return equal to or greater than the threshold return over its life.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
The economic conditions in the United States have been and continue to be negatively impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, which has resulted in among other things, quarantines, “stay-at-home” orders and similar mandates for many individuals to substantially restrict daily activities and for many businesses to close or significantly reduce normal operations, and we expect these negative impacts to continue. Beginning in mid-March 2020, in response to federal, state and local orders and guidelines, we took a number of protective measures, including temporarily closing the WaterColor Inn, WaterSound Inn and The Pearl Hotel for overnight guests, closing retail outlets and beach clubs, closing or limiting restaurant activities at our food and beverage operations to pick up only (and in certain locations, local delivery), implementing cost reduction measures and “work from home” policies. Our hospitality assets gradually reopened in May 2020, but could be ordered to close again.
While the breadth and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic impact is still unknown, we could experience material declines within each of our reportable segments in one or more periods in 2021 and beyond compared to the historical norms. We will continue to monitor the potential impacts and evaluate each new project day by day and phase by phase and take prudent measures and respond as needed based on market conditions. Further discussion of the potential impacts on our business from the COVID-19 pandemic are discussed in Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Reportable Segments
We have the following three reportable segments: 1) residential, 2) hospitality and 3) commercial. Prior to the first quarter of 2020, commercial leasing and sales, as well as forestry were treated as individual reportable segments. Commencing in the first quarter of 2020, due to organizational changes, our previously titled “commercial leasing and sales” and “forestry” segments are reported as one segment and retitled to “commercial.” This change is consistent with our belief that the decision making and management of the assets in these segments are being made as one group. All prior year segment information has been reclassified to conform to the 2020 presentation. Also commencing in the first quarter of 2020, our previously titled “residential real estate” segment was retitled to “residential.” The change had no effect on the consolidated balance sheets, statements of income, statements of comprehensive income or statements of cash flows for the periods presented.
The following table sets forth the relative contribution of these reportable segments to our consolidated operating revenue:
(a) Includes revenue of $23.1 million in 2018 for a one-time receipt of RiverTown impact fees related to the 2014 RiverTown transaction. See Note 18. RiverTown Impact Fees included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K for further discussion.
(b) Other includes mitigation bank credit sales and title fee revenue. For 2018, other includes revenue of $2.2 million related to a specific sale of mitigation bank credits.
For more information regarding our reportable segments, see Note 20. Segment Information included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K.
Residential Segment
Our residential real estate segment typically plans and develops residential communities of various sizes across a wide range of price points and sells homesites to homebuilders or retail consumers. Our residential real estate segment
also evaluates opportunities to enter into JV agreements for specific communities such as Latitude Margaritaville Watersound.
Watersound Origins, Watersound Camp Creek, Breakfast Point, Titus Park, College Station, Park Place, WindMark Beach and SouthWood are large scale, multi-phase communities with current sales activity and future phases. Homesites in these communities are developed based on market demand and sold primarily to homebuilders and retail customers on a limited basis.
Other residential communities of SummerCamp Beach and RiverCamps have homesites available for sale or lands for future development. In addition, the residential communities of WaterSound Beach, WaterSound West Beach, WaterColor and Wild Heron that are substantially developed, with homesites in these communities available for sale.
The Latitude Margaritaville Watersound community is a planned 55+ active adult residential community under development in Bay County, Florida. The community is located near the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway with convenient access to the Northwest Florida Beaches International Airport. The community is being developed as an unconsolidated JV with our partner Minto Communities USA, a homebuilder and community developer, and is estimated to include approximately 3,500 residential homes, which will be developed in smaller increments of discrete neighborhoods. The sales center and 13 model homes are currently under construction. In addition, homesite infrastructure for the initial neighborhoods including models is underway, with site development of 629 homesites.
Planned residential projects of East Lake Powell, Mexico Beach, Ward Creek and other Watersound communities are in the planning and engineering stages of development.
The residential homesite pipeline by community/project are as follows:
(a) The number of homesites are preliminary and are subject to change.
(b) Planned Unit Development (“PUD”).
(c) Development Agreement (“DA”).
(d) Detailed Specific Area Plan (“DSAP”).
(e) The unconsolidated Latitude Margaritaville Watersound JV (the “Latitude Margaritaville Watersound JV”), plans to build and sell homes in this community.
(f) Development of Regional Impact (“DRI”).
As of December 31, 2020, we had 1,269 residential homesites under contract with ten different local, regional, and national homebuilders, which are expected to result in revenue of approximately $115.0 million at closing of the homesites, which are expected over the next several years. As of December 31, 2019, we had 930 residential homesites under contract, which are expected to result in revenue of approximately $84.3 million ($20.3 million has been realized through December 31, 2020). The increase in homesites under contract is due to the development of additional homesites and increased homebuilder contracts for residential homesites. The number of homesites under contract are subject to change based on homesite closings and homebuilder interest in each community.
Hospitality Segment
Our hospitality segment features a private membership club (“The Clubs by JOE”), hotel operations, food and beverage operations, golf courses, beach clubs, retail outlets, gulf-front vacation rentals, management services, marinas and other entertainment assets. The hospitality segment generates revenue and incurs costs from membership sales, membership reservations, golf courses, the WaterColor Inn and WaterSound Inn, short-term vacation rentals, management of The Pearl Hotel, food and beverage operations, merchandise sales, marina operations, charter flights, other resort and entertainment activities and beach clubs, which includes operation of the WaterColor Beach Club. Hospitality revenue is generally recognized at the point in time services are provided and represent a single performance obligation with a fixed transaction price. Hospitality revenue recognized over time includes non-refundable club membership initiation fees, club membership dues, management fees and other membership fees. From time to time, we may explore the sale of certain hospitality properties, the development of new hospitality properties, as well as new entertainment and management opportunities. Some of our JV assets and other assets incur interest and financing expenses related to the loans as described in Note 11. Debt, Net included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K.
The Clubs by JOE provides club members and guests in some of our hotels access to our member facilities, which include the Camp Creek Golf Club, Shark’s Tooth Golf Club, WaterSound Beach Club and our Pilatus PC-12 NG aircraft (“N850J”). The Clubs by JOE offers different types of club memberships, each with different access rights and associated fee structures. The Clubs by JOE is focused on creating a world class membership experience combined with the luxurious aspects of a destination resort. Club operations include our golf courses, beach club and facilities that generate revenue from membership sales, membership reservations, daily play at the golf courses, merchandise sales, charter flights and food and beverage sales and incur expenses from the services provided, maintenance of the golf courses, aircraft, beach club and facilities and personnel costs. Watersound Origins includes a six-hole golf course, resort-style pool, fitness center, two tennis courts and private lake dock located in the community. Access to amenities are reserved to Watersound Origins members consisting of the community residents. The golf course is available for public play.
WaterSound Beach Club is The Clubs by JOE’s private beach club located in Watersound, Florida, which includes over one mile of Gulf of Mexico frontage, two resort-style pools, two restaurants, three bars, kid’s room and a recreation area. Shark’s Tooth Golf Club includes an 18-hole golf course, a full club house, a pro shop, as well as two food and beverage operations. In addition to the golf course, The Clubs by JOE tennis center is located in the Wild Heron community near the Shark’s Tooth golf course. Camp Creek Golf Club is an 18-hole championship golf course located in Watersound, Florida. In the fourth quarter of 2019, we commenced construction on new club amenities adjacent to the Camp Creek golf course. Amenities are planned to include a health and wellness center, restaurants, a tennis center, pickle ball courts, a resort-style pool complex with separate adult pool, a golf teaching academy, pro shop and multi-sport fields. Once complete, these amenities will be available to The Clubs by JOE members and guests at some of our hotels. The Clubs by JOE also offers members private air charter flights through our N850J aircraft.
We own and operate the award-winning WaterColor Inn, which includes the FOOW restaurant, the WaterSound Inn and two gulf-front vacation rental houses. We own and operate retail and commercial outlets near our hospitality facilities. We also operate the award-winning The Pearl Hotel and Havana Beach Bar & Grill restaurant and the WaterColor Beach Club, which includes food and beverage operations and other hospitality related activities, such as beach chair rentals. Revenue is generated from (i) the WaterColor Inn, WaterSound Inn and operation of the WaterColor Beach Club, (ii) management of The Pearl Hotel, (iii) short-term vacation rentals, (iv) food and beverage operations and (v) merchandise sales. The WaterColor Inn, WaterSound Inn and operation of the WaterColor Beach Club generate
revenue from service and/or daily rental fees and incur expenses from the cost of services and goods provided, maintenance of the facilities and personnel costs. Revenue generated from our management services include management fees. Management services expenses consist primarily of internal administrative costs. Hotel operations and short-term vacation rentals generate revenue from rental fees and incur expenses from the holding cost of assets we own and standard lodging personnel, such as front desk, reservations and marketing personnel. Our food and beverage operations generate revenue from food and beverage sales and incur expenses from the cost of services and goods provided and standard personnel costs. Our retail outlets generate revenue from merchandise sales, which are recognized at the point of sale and incur expenses from the cost of goods provided, personnel costs and facility costs.
We are in the process of constructing an Embassy Suites hotel, with our JV partner, planned for 255 guest suites in the Pier Park area of Panama City Beach, Florida; an upscale 75 room boutique hotel located adjacent to the Camp Creek Golf Club near the highly desirable Scenic Highway 30A corridor; a Hilton Garden Inn near Northwest Florida Beaches International Airport (“ECP”), which is planned to feature 143 guest rooms; a Homewood Suites by Hilton adjacent to the new Panama City Beach Sports Complex in Panama City Beach, Florida, which is planned to feature 131 one and two-bedroom guest suites; and The Lodge 30A, with our JV partner, an 85 room boutique hotel on Scenic Highway 30A in Seagrove Beach, Florida. In the third quarter of 2020 we executed a long-term land lease to develop, construct and operate a new waterfront Hotel Indigo and standalone restaurant in Panama City, Florida’s downtown waterfront district. Construction is expected to begin in the second quarter of 2021. Once complete, we will manage the day-to-day operations of all planned hotels and restaurants.
We own and operate two marinas consisting of the Bay Point Marina and Port St. Joe Marina. Our marinas generate revenue from boat slip rentals and fuel sales, and incur expenses from cost of services provided, maintenance of the marina facilities and personnel costs. At present, we are redeveloping the marinas. See Note 7. Hurricane Michael included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
We own and operate the WaterColor retail store that generates revenue from merchandise sales, which are recognized at the point of sale, and incur expenses from the cost of goods provided, personnel costs and facility costs. We own and operate the Powder Room Shooting Range and Training Center (“The Powder Room”) in Panama City Beach, Florida. The approximately 17,000 square feet facility was completed in December 2020 and includes a retail store with firearms and ammunition, as well as training and educational space and 14 shooting lanes. The Powder Room generates revenue from service fees and merchandise sales, which are recognized at the point of sale, and incurs expenses from the cost of services and goods provided, personnel costs and facility costs.
Commercial Segment
Our commercial segment includes leasing of commercial property, multi-family, a senior living community and other assets. The commercial segment also oversees the planning, development, entitlement, management and sale of our commercial and rural land holdings for a variety of uses, including a broad range of retail, office, hotel, senior living, multi-family, self-storage and industrial properties. We provide development opportunities for national, regional and local retailers and other strategic partners in Northwest Florida. We own and manage retail shopping centers and develop commercial parcels. We have large land holdings near the Pier Park retail center, adjacent to the Northwest Florida Beaches International Airport, near or within business districts in the region and along major roadways. We also lease land for hunting, rock quarrying and other uses.
The commercial segment also manages our timber holdings in Northwest Florida which includes growing and selling pulpwood, sawtimber and other products, such as fill dirt. As of December 31, 2020, we had an estimated 2.3 million tons of marketable pulpwood and 3.2 million tons of marketable sawlogs on approximately 64,000 acres. Based on our annual harvest plan, we anticipate harvesting approximately 260,000 tons of pulpwood and sawlogs during 2021.
The commercial segment generates leasing revenue and incurs leasing expenses primarily from maintenance and management of our properties, personnel costs and asset holding costs. Our commercial segment also generates revenue from the sale of developed and undeveloped land, timber holdings or land with limited development and/or entitlements and the sale of commercial operating properties. Real estate sales in our commercial segment incur costs of revenue directly associated with the land, development, construction, timber and selling costs. Our commercial segment
generates timber revenue primarily from open market sales of timber on site without the associated delivery costs. Some of our JV assets and other assets incur interest and financing expenses related to the loans as described in Note 11. Debt, Net included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K.
The commercial segment’s portfolio of leasable properties continues to expand and diversify. Through wholly-owned subsidiaries and consolidated and unconsolidated joint ventures we are in the process of constructing 739 apartment units, in addition to the 378 apartment units and 107 senior living units that have recently been completed.
Pier Park Crossings, which was developed in two phases, includes 360 completed apartment units in Panama City Beach, Florida. In addition to Pier Park Crossings, we have three apartment communities under development or construction. Watersound Origins Crossings, consisting of 217 units, with 18 units completed as of December 31, 2020, is adjacent to the Watersound Town Center in Watersound, Florida. Sea Sound apartments, an unconsolidated JV consisting of 300 units, is located in Panama City Beach, Florida near the Breakfast Point residential community. Star Avenue apartments, consisting of 240 units, is located in Panama City, Florida.
Our leasing portfolio consists of approximately 908,000 square feet of leasable space for mixed-use, retail, industrial, office and medical uses. Within the leasing portfolio, our mixed-use lease space totals approximately 134,000 square feet. It consists primarily of WaterColor Town Center, WindMark Beach Town Center, WaterSound Gatehouse, WaterColor Crossings and various flex-space buildings. Our retail lease space totals approximately 352,000 square feet. It consists primarily of Pier Park North JV and other leasable properties. Our industrial lease space totals approximately 304,000 square feet, primarily located at VentureCrossings. Our office lease space consists of approximately 96,000 square feet, primarily located in the Beckrich Office Park in Panama City Beach, Florida. Our medical lease space consists of approximately 22,000 square feet. It consists of a medical clinic at the Watersound Town Center and medical space at Beckrich Office Park. Through separate unconsolidated JVs other commercial properties include a 124 room TownePlace Suites by Marriott operated by our JV partner in Panama City Beach, Florida and a Busy Bee branded fuel station and convenience store operated by our JV partner in Panama City Beach, Florida.
We have other commercial projects in the planning, engineering or construction stages. This includes a Publix supermarket totaling approximately 50,000 square feet, a self-storage facility totaling approximately 71,000 square feet and a new multi-tenant commercial building in the Watersound Town Center totaling approximately 20,000 square feet. In addition to the properties listed above, we have a number of projects in various stages of planning, including additional commercial buildings, apartment communities and an additional senior living community.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Results
Revenue and expenses. The following table sets forth a comparison of the results of our operations:
Results of operations in this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and comparisons. For a detailed discussion of results of operations and comparisons for 2019 and 2018, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on February 26, 2020.
Real Estate Revenue and Gross Profit
The following table sets forth a comparison of our total real estate revenue and gross profit for the three years ended December 31, 2020:
(a) Calculated percentage of total real estate revenue and the respective gross margin percentage.
Residential Real Estate Revenue and Gross Profit. During 2020, total residential real estate revenue increased $33.0 million, or 80.3% to $74.1 million, as compared to $41.1 million during 2019. Total residential real estate gross profit increased $23.3 million, to $44.4 million (or gross margin of 59.9%), as compared to $21.1 million, (or gross margin of 51.3%) during 2019. Included in residential real estate revenue for 2018 is $23.1 million for a one-time receipt of RiverTown impact fees related to the 2014 RiverTown transaction, resulting in a gross profit margin of 100.0%. See Note 18. RiverTown Impact Fees included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K for further discussion. During 2020, we sold 509 homesites and had unimproved residential land sales of $1.7 million, compared to 379 homesites sold during 2019. During 2020 and 2019, the average revenue, excluding homesite residuals, per homesite sold was approximately $124,000 and $87,000, respectively. The revenue and gross profit for each period was impacted by the volume of sales within each of the communities, the difference in pricing among the communities and the difference in the cost of the homesite development. The number of homesites sold varied each period due to the timing of homebuilder contractual closing obligations and the timing of development of completed homesites in our residential communities.
Commercial and Rural Real Estate Revenue and Gross Profit. During 2020, we had twenty-three commercial and rural real estate sales totaling approximately 473 acres for $11.7 million resulting in a gross profit margin of 53.0%. Commercial and rural real estate revenue for 2020 included $1.8 million related to the sale of the SouthWood Town Center. During 2019, we had twenty-five commercial and rural real estate sales totaling approximately 1,605 acres for $19.5 million resulting in a gross profit margin of 77.9%. Commercial and rural real estate sales in 2019 included approximately 28 acres totaling $4.3 million in revenue in the SouthWood community. Commercial and rural real estate sales in 2019 also included a sale totaling $9.9 million in revenue related to non-strategic land located in Leon County, Florida, with a gross profit of $9.7 million due to a low historical basis. Revenue from commercial and rural real estate can vary significantly from period to period depending on the proximity to developed areas and mix of real estate sold in each period, with varying compositions of retail, office, industrial and other commercial uses.
Our gross margin can vary significantly from period to period depending on the characteristics of property sold. Sales of rural and timber land typically have a lower cost basis than residential and commercial real estate sales. In addition, our cost basis in residential and commercial real estate can vary depending on the amount of development or other costs spent on the property.
Other Revenue. Other revenue primarily consists of mitigation bank credit sales and title fee revenue.
Hospitality Revenue and Gross Profit
Hospitality revenue increased $1.7 million, or 3.7%, during 2020, as compared to 2019. The increase in the current period was primarily due to an increase in revenue from WaterColor Inn lodging, the WaterSound Beach Club, charter flights, the WaterColor retail store and The Powder Room, which opened in December 2020. The increase in revenue was also related to an increase in the number of members and membership revenue in the current period, partially offset by a decrease related to the receipt of one-time membership reservations fee in the prior period. The increases in the current period were partially offset by a decrease in hospitality revenue due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in shut downs and reduced revenue from mid-March to mid-May, but was partially offset by a recovery from June to December that exceeded revenue as compared to the same periods in 2019. As of December 31, 2020, The Clubs by JOE had 1,563 members, compared with 1,274 members as of December 31, 2019. Gross profit during each 2020 and 2019 includes $1.3 million of business interruption proceeds received for the marinas related to Hurricane Michael. Hospitality had a gross margin during 2020 of 26.4%, compared to 25.2% during 2019. The increase in gross margin is related to an extended vacation season in the current period consistent with delayed school openings, increases in homeschooling and a rise in remote work arrangements, as well as management of expenses and labor, which was partially offset by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic from mid-March to mid-May 2020.
Leasing Revenue and Gross Profit
Leasing revenue increased $3.2 million, or 20.5%, during 2020, as compared to 2019. The increase is primarily due to new leases at Pier Park Crossings apartments, which began leasing in the second quarter of 2019, as well as other new leases and higher rental rates. Gross profit during 2020 includes $0.7 million of business interruption insurance proceeds received for Pier Park Crossings apartments related to Hurricane Michael. Leasing gross margin was 68.6% during 2020, as compared to 69.9% during 2019. Excluding the business interruption proceeds received during the current period, our leasing gross margin was 64.9% during 2020, as compared to 69.9% during 2019. The decrease was primarily due to start-up expenses for new assets in the current period.
Timber Revenue and Gross Profit
Timber revenue increased $2.4 million, or 61.5%, during 2020, as compared to 2019. The increase is primarily due to an increase in the amount of tons sold and product mix changes. The revenue for 2019 was affected by Hurricane Michael’s significant market impact after landfall in October 2018. There were 322,000 tons sold during 2020, as compared to 220,000 tons sold during 2019. Gross margin increased during 2020 to 87.3%, as compared to 84.6% during 2019, primarily due to increased volume and changes in product mix. The cost of timber revenue is primarily fixed, which also resulted in an increase to gross margin for the period.
Other Operating and Corporate Expenses
Other operating and corporate expenses increased $1.5 million during 2020, as compared to 2019. The increase is due to the March 2020 payment of performance incentives and other employee related costs. The increase is also due to professional fees for legal, accounting and tax services related to the growth in operations.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization
Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense increased $2.5 million during 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to new assets placed in service.
Investment Income, Net
Investment income, net primarily includes (i) interest and dividends earned, (ii) accretion of the net discount, (iii) net realized gain or loss from the sale of our available-for-sale investments and equity securities, less other-than-temporary impairment loss, (iv) net unrealized gain or loss related to investments - equity securities, (v) interest income
earned on the time deposit held by a special purpose entity and (vi) interest earned on mortgage notes receivable and other receivables as detailed in the table below:
Investment income, net decreased $5.7 million to $5.0 million for 2020, as compared to $10.7 million for 2019. The decrease in interest and dividend income for 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, is primarily due the change in investments held during the period and lower interest rates. The change in investments held during the period is primarily related to a transition to a more liquid investment strategy and increased capital expenditures. Investment income, net during 2020 and 2019 includes an unrealized loss on investments, net of $4.7 million and $5.3 million, respectively, related to preferred stock.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily includes interest incurred on the Senior Notes issued by Northwest Florida Timber Finance, LLC, project financing, Community Development District (“CDD”) debt and finance leases as detailed in the table below:
Interest expense increased $1.3 million, or 10.6%, in 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily related to the increase in project financing. See Note 11. Debt, Net included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding project financing.
Gain on Land Contribution to Equity Method Investment
Gain on land contribution to equity method investment in 2020 and 2019 was $20.0 million and $2.3 million, respectively. Gain on land contribution to equity method investment for 2020 includes a gain of $15.3 million on land and $0.4 million on additional infrastructure improvements contributed to our unconsolidated Latitude Margaritaville Watersound JV. The $15.3 million gain on land contributed to the Latitude Margaritaville Watersound JV is comprised of $16.6 million for the present value of the land contribution, net of $1.3 million cost basis. The present value of the land contribution was based on our best estimate of the prevailing market rates for the source of credit using an imputed interest rate of 5.75%, the timing of homes sales and an additional performance obligation to provide for infrastructure improvements in the vicinity of the contributed land. Gain on land contribution to equity method investment for 2020 also includes a gain of $4.3 million on land and mitigation credits contributed to FDSJ Eventide, LLC, our unconsolidated JV (the “Sea Sound Apartments JV”). Gain on land contribution to equity method investment for 2019 includes a gain of $0.8 million on land contributed to SJBB, LLC, our unconsolidated JV (the “Busy Bee JV”) and a
gain of $1.5 million on land and mitigation credits contributed to Pier Park TPS, LLC, our unconsolidated JV (the “Pier Park TPS JV”). See Note 4. Joint Ventures included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net primarily includes income from our retained interest investments, gain on insurance recovery, loss from hurricane damage and other income and expense items as detailed in the table below:
Other income, net decreased $2.9 million to $1.3 million during 2020, as compared to $4.2 million in 2019. Other income, net for 2020 and 2019 includes $0.7 million and $5.3 million, respectively, of gain on insurance recovery and $1.1 million and $2.7 million, respectively, of loss from hurricane damage related to Hurricane Michael. See Note 7. Hurricane Michael included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Income Tax Expense
Our income tax expense in 2020 was $13.7 million, compared to $9.4 million in 2019. Our effective tax rate was 23.2% in 2020, as compared to 26.1% in 2019.
Our effective rate for 2020 differed from the federal statutory rate of 21.0% primarily due to state income taxes, income tax credits related to our JV apartment projects and other permanent differences. Our effective rate for 2019 differed from the federal statutory rate of 21.0% primarily due to state income taxes, the change in Florida corporate income tax rate from 5.5% to 4.5%, the benefit recognized for certain investments in QOZs, and other permanent differences.
Segment Results
Residential
The table below sets forth the results of operations of our residential segment:
Real estate revenue includes sales of homesites, homes and other residential land and certain homesite residuals from homebuilder sales that provide us a percentage of the sale price of the completed home if the home price exceeds a negotiated threshold. Hospitality revenue includes some of our short-term vacation rentals. Other revenue includes tap and impact fee credits sold and marketing fees. Certain homesite residuals and other revenue related to homebuilder homesite sales are recognized in revenue at the point in time of the closing of the sale. Other revenue for 2018 includes $23.1 million for a one-time receipt of RiverTown impact fees related to the 2014 RiverTown transaction. See Note 18. RiverTown Impact Fees included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K for further discussion. For 2020 and 2019, real estate revenue includes estimated homesite residuals of $1.9 million and $2.5 million, respectively. For 2020 and 2019, other revenue includes certain estimated fees related to homebuilder homesite sales of $1.9 million and $2.3 million, respectively. Cost of real estate revenue includes direct costs (e.g., development and construction costs), selling costs and other indirect costs.
The following tables set forth our residential real estate revenue and cost of revenue activity:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Homesites. Revenue from homesite sales increased $30.7 million, or 83.0%, during 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the mix and number of homesites sold per community, the timing of homebuilder contractual closing obligations and the timing of development of completed homesites in our residential communities. During 2020 and 2019, the average revenue, excluding homesite residuals, per homesite sold was approximately $124,000 and $87,000, respectively. The increase in average revenue per homesite sold in 2020 was due to the mix of sales from different communities, which included initial sales in the Watersound Camp Creek community and final phase of the WaterColor community. Gross margin increased to 59.5% during 2020, as compared to 49.7% during 2019, primarily due to the mix and number of homesites sold from different communities during each respective period.
Land sale. During 2020 we had unimproved residential land sales for $1.7 million, resulting in a gross profit margin of 76.5%.
Other operating expenses include salaries and benefits, property taxes, marketing, professional fees, project administration, owner association and CDD assessments and other administrative expenses.
Investment income, net primarily consists of interest earned on our notes receivable. Interest expense primarily consists of interest incurred on our portion of the total outstanding CDD debt.
Gain on land contribution to equity method investment for 2020 includes a gain of $15.3 million on land and $0.4 million on additional infrastructure improvements contributed to our unconsolidated Latitude Margaritaville Watersound JV. The $15.3 million gain on land contributed to the Latitude Margaritaville Watersound JV is comprised of $16.6 million for the present value of the land contribution, net of $1.3 million cost basis. The present value of the land contribution was based on our best estimate of the prevailing market rates for the source of credit using an imputed interest rate of 5.75% and an additional performance obligation to provide for infrastructure improvements in the vicinity of the contributed land. See Note 4. Joint Ventures included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Hospitality
The table below sets forth the results of operations of our hospitality segment:
The following table sets forth details of our hospitality segment revenue and cost of revenue:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue from our clubs increased $1.4 million, or 6.7%, during 2020, as compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in revenue for the WaterSound Beach Club and charter flights in the current period. The increase in revenue was also related to an increase in the number of members and membership revenue in the current period, partially offset by a decrease related to the receipt of one-time membership reservations fee in the prior period. In addition, the Camp Creek Golf Club was closed from March to October 2020 for renovations, however the decrease in revenue was offset by an increase in revenue at our Shark’s Tooth Golf Club. As of December 31, 2020, The Clubs by JOE had 1,563 members, compared with 1,274 members as of December 31, 2019. Our clubs gross margin decreased to 34.1% during 2020, compared to 36.8% during 2019. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to an increase in golf course maintenance during renovation of the Camp Creek golf course.
Revenue from our hotel operations, food and beverage operations, some of our short-term vacation rentals and other management services decreased $0.4 million, or 1.7%, during 2020, as compared to 2019. The decrease is due to the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the current period, which resulted in shut downs and reduced revenue from mid-March to mid-May, but was partially offset by a recovery from June to December that exceeded revenue as compared to the same periods in 2019. The decrease was also partially offset by an increase in lodging revenue from the WaterColor Inn during the current period. Gross margin increased to 16.4% during 2020, as compared to 12.7% during 2019, due to an extended vacation season in the current period consistent with delayed school openings, increases in homeschooling and a rise in remote work arrangements related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as management of expenses and labor.
Revenue from other hospitality operations increased $0.7 million, or 58.3%, during 2020, as compared to 2019. The increase was primarily related to an increase in revenue for the WaterColor retail store, as well as the Powder Room, which opened in December 2020. We did not have revenue from our marinas during 2020 and 2019, due to the impact of Hurricane Michael on the marinas. See Note 7. Hurricane Michael included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K for further discussion. Gross profit during each 2020 and 2019 includes $1.3 million related to business interruption insurance proceeds received, which impacted gross margin during each period.
Our hospitality segment gross margin was 26.8% during 2020, as compared to 25.8% during 2019. The increase is related to an extended vacation season in the current period consistent with delayed school openings, increases in homeschooling and a rise in remote work arrangements, as well as management of expenses and labor, which was partially offset by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic from mid-March to mid-May 2020. Gross profit during each 2020 and 2019 includes $1.3 million related to business interruption insurance proceeds received.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may further impact our future hospitality operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain. See Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Other operating expenses include salaries and benefits, occupancy fees, professional fees, property taxes, CDD assessments and other administrative expenses.
Interest expense primarily includes interest incurred from our hospitality project financing.
Commercial
The table below sets forth the results of operations of our commercial segment:
The following table sets forth details of our commercial segment revenue and cost of revenue:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Total leasing revenue increased $3.2 million, or 20.6%, during 2020, as compared to 2019. The increase is primarily due to new leases at Pier Park Crossings apartments, which began leasing in the second quarter of 2019, as well as other new leases and higher rental rates. Cost of leasing revenue during 2020 includes $0.7 million of business interruption insurance proceeds received for Pier Park Crossings apartments related to Hurricane Michael. Leasing gross margin decreased during 2020 to 68.4%, as compared to 70.3% during 2019. Excluding the business interruption proceeds received during 2020, our leasing gross margin was 64.7% during 2020, as compared to 70.3% during 2019, primarily
due start-up expenses for new assets in the current period. As of December 31, 2020, we had net rentable square feet of approximately 908,000, of which approximately 774,000 square feet was under lease. As of December 31, 2019, we had net rentable square feet of approximately 882,000, of which approximately 758,000 square feet was under lease. Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020 we provided tenant rent abatements totaling $0.1 million, along with rent deferrals of $0.4 million, of which $0.1 million was subsequently collected.
The diversity of our commercial segment complements the growth of our residential and hospitality segments. Commercial and rural real estate revenue can vary depending on the proximity to developed areas and the mix and characteristics of commercial and rural real estate sold in each period, with varying compositions of retail, office, industrial and other commercial uses. During 2020, we had twenty-three commercial and rural real estate sales totaling approximately 473 acres for $11.7 million, resulting in a gross profit margin of approximately 53.0%. Commercial and rural real estate revenue for 2020 included $1.8 million related to the sale of the SouthWood Town Center. During 2019, we had twenty-five commercial and rural real estate sales totaling approximately 1,605 acres for $19.5 million, resulting in a gross profit margin of approximately 77.9%. Commercial and rural real estate sales in 2019 included approximately 28 acres totaling $4.3 million in revenue in the SouthWood community. Commercial and rural real estate sales in 2019 also included a sale totaling $9.9 million related to non-strategic land located in Leon County, Florida, with a gross profit of $9.7 million due to a low historical basis. As our focus continues to evolve more towards recurring revenue from leasing operations, we expect to have limited commercial and rural real estate sales. Further, we may continue to transform and operate commercial properties for higher and better use. This may result in certain assets moving from the commercial segment to the hospitality segment.
Timber revenue increased by $2.4 million, or 61.5%, during 2020, as compared to 2019. The increase is primarily due to an increase in the amount of tons sold and product mix changes. The revenue for 2019 was affected by Hurricane Michael’s significant market impact after landfall in October 2018. There were 322,000 tons sold during 2020, as compared to 220,000 tons sold during 2019. The average price per ton sold increased to $15.32 during 2020, as compared to $14.71 during 2019. Timber gross margin increased during 2020 to 87.3%, as compared to 82.1% during 2019, primarily due to increased volume and changes in product mix. The cost of timber revenue is primarily fixed, which also resulted in an increase to gross margin for the period.
Other operating expenses include salaries and benefits, property taxes, CDD assessments, professional fees, marketing, project administration and other administrative expenses.
The increase of $1.7 million in depreciation, amortization and depletion expense during 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to new properties placed in service.
Interest expense primarily includes interest incurred from our commercial leasing project financing and CDD debt.
Gain on land contribution to equity method investment for 2020 includes a gain of $3.9 million on land contributed to our unconsolidated Sea Sound Apartments JV. Gain on land contribution to equity method investment for 2019 includes a gain of $0.8 million on land contributed to our unconsolidated Busy Bee JV and a gain of $1.4 million on land contributed to our unconsolidated Pier Park TPS JV. See Note 4. Joint Ventures included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Other income (expense), net for 2019, also included a $1.2 million gain on insurance recovery for the Pier Park Crossings JV related to Hurricane Michael. See Note 7. Hurricane Michael included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
The total net rentable square feet and percentage leased of leasing properties by location are as follows:
(a) In December 2019, we completed construction of a 60,000 square feet flex space building.
(b) In addition to net rentable square feet there is also space that we occupy or that serves as common area.
(c) Included in net rentable square feet as of December 31, 2020, is 1,500 square feet leased to a consolidated JV.
(d) Included in net rentable square feet as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, is 13,808 square feet of unfinished space.
(e) Construction was completed in 2020.
(f) Included in net rentable square feet as of December 31, 2020, is 1,364 square feet leased to a consolidated JV.
(g) In January 2020, we sold the SouthWood Town Center.
Total units and percentage leased/occupied for apartments and senior living community by location are as follows:
(a) Construction was completed in the first quarter of 2020.
(b) Construction was completed in December 2020. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, a significant number of additional units have been leased.
(c) Construction of the initial buildings was completed in December 2020. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, a significant number of the completed and available units have been leased.
(d) Construction began in the first quarter of 2020. The Sea Sound Apartments JV is unconsolidated and is accounted for under the equity method of accounting.
(e) Construction began in the fourth quarter of 2020.
(f) Construction was completed in the fourth quarter of 2020. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA) issued a license for the facility which allowed operations and initial resident occupancy to begin.
Real Estate Revenue. Commercial real estate revenue for the three years ended December 31, 2020 includes the following:
The total tons sold and relative percentages of total tons sold by major type of timber revenue are as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $106.8 million compared to $185.7 million as of December 31, 2019. During 2020, we transitioned our cash equivalents from commercial paper to short-term U.S. Treasury Bills. Our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 included $11.0 million of U.S. Treasury Money Market Funds and $79.0 million of short-term U.S. Treasury Bills. In addition to cash and cash equivalents, we consider our investments classified as Securities, as being generally available to meet our liquidity needs. Securities are not as liquid as cash and cash equivalents, but they are generally convertible into cash within a relatively short period of time. As of December 31, 2020, we had investments - debt securities in U.S. Treasury Bills of $48.0 million and corporate debt securities of $0.1 million and investments - equity securities in preferred stock investments of $2.6 million. See Note 5. Investments included in Item 15 of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding our investments.
We believe that our current cash position, financing arrangements and cash generated from operations will provide us with sufficient liquidity to satisfy our anticipated working capital needs, expected capital expenditures, principal and interest payments on our long term debt, capital contributions to JVs, Latitude Margaritaville Watersound JV Note commitment, authorized stock repurchases and authorized dividends for the next twelve months. However, we are continuing to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our business, customers, tenants, and industry as a whole. See Part II. Item 1A. Risk Factors.
During 2020, we incurred a total of $162.2 million in capital expenditures, which includes $33.6 million for our residential segment, $85.1 million for our commercial segment, $42.8 million for our hospitality segment and $0.7 million for corporate expenditures. Our 2021 capital expenditures budget exceeds our 2020 expenditures. We anticipate that these future capital commitments will be funded through cash generated from operations, new and existing financing arrangements, cash on hand and cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2020, we had a total of $157.1 million in construction and development related contractual obligations, of which a portion will be funded through committed or new financing arrangements.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had various loans outstanding totaling $161.4 million and $94.5 million, respectively, with maturities from May 2024 through June 2060. The weighted average rate on our variable rate loans as
of December 31, 2020 was 2.2%. See