ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors discussed in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
Overview
Prior to March 16, 2018, we were engaged in the development of mining assets. We never generated any revenue from this business and as of April 30, 2018, all of the assets associated with the mining business were fully reserved against and have no value. On March 16, 2018, we had a change in management, with the resignation of our sole director and chief executive officer and our chief financial officer, and the appointment of a new director and chief executive officer, who became our sole executive officer. With the change of management, we changed our business to developing the business of designing and selling computer equipment which can be used for the mining of cryptocurrency. In April 2019, our sole director and officer resigned and we discontinued the business of designing and selling computer equipment for the cryptocurrency business, from which we did not generate any revenue. On August 14, 2019, the then sole officer and director resigned and Jose Maria Eduardo Gonzalez Romero was elected as our sole officer and director. At the time, Mr. Romero was our largest creditor, having invested $500,000 for the purchase of our 5% convertible notes, which mature on various dates in 2020. We are now in the process of looking for a new business, either through an acquisition or commencing new business activities. Although we have had discussions with potential acquisition candidates, as of the date of this report, we have not signed any agreement, letter of intent or memorandum of understanding with respect to any potential acquisition, and we cannot assure you that we will be able to make any acquisition. Because of our financial condition, the low price and lack of liquidity of our stock, and our stock being traded on the OTC Pink, it is not likely that we will be able to acquire any company other than a company without a history of earnings. In such event, we will need to raise a significant amount of funds. We have no assurance that financing will be available to us on acceptable, if any, terms. If financing is not available on satisfactory terms, we may be unable to continue, develop or expand our operations. Equity financing would result in additional dilution to existing stockholders.
During the period from March through June 2018, we raised $500,000 from the sale of our convertible notes in the principal amount of $500,000 to Mr. Romero, who, at the time, was not a related party. The proceeds of these notes were used to purchase inventory and for working capital purposes, including expenses relating to our status as a public company. Pursuant to the loan agreement, we were to give Mr. Romero a security interest in this equipment. The equipment was never delivered to us in the United States and we are aggressively pursuing the manufacturer of the equipment to either deliver the equipment purchased or refund the purchase including interest and damages. The value of the inventory was written down to zero. We anticipate that in connection with any acquisition or financing, we will pay the principal and interest on the notes to Mr. Romero. The need to make this payment may affect our ability to make an acquisition or, if we can make an acquisition, the terms of the acquisition.
Result of operations
Years Ended July 31, 2020 and 2019
We did not generate any revenues during the years ended July 31, 2020 and 2019.
For the year ended July 31, 2020, we incurred operating expenses of $162,429, primarily stock-based compensation and professional fees, resulting in a loss from operations of $162,429. Other expenses consisted of interest and accretion on convertible notes of $197,570, resulting in a net loss from continuing operations of $359,999, or ($0.00) per share (basic and diluted).
For the year ended July 31, 2019, we incurred operating expenses of $77,622, primarily professional fees, resulting in a loss from operations of $77,622. Other expenses consisted of interest and accretion on convertible notes of $280,151, resulting in a net loss from continuing operations of $357,773, or ($0.00) per share (basic and diluted). Our loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $659,870, or $(0.01) per share (basic and diluted). Our net loss for the year was $1,017,643, or ($0.01) per share (basic and diluted).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes our changes in working capital from July 31, 2019 to July 31, 2020:
The increase in working capital deficiency is primarily due to an increase in convertible note - related party due to amortization of debt discount.
The following tables summarize our cash flows the years ended July 31, 2020 and 2019.
The cash flow used in operating activities for the year ended July 31, 2020 reflects our net loss of $359,999, increased by stock-based compensation of $120,000 and accrued interest and accretion on convertible notes of $197,570, and increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $12,994 and due to related parties of $28,610. The cash flow used in operating activities for year ended July 31, 2019 reflects the net loss from continuing operations of $357,773, increased by accrued interest and accretion on convertible notes of $255,151 and an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $65,871 and decreased by an increase in prepaid expenses of $4,350.
For the years ended July 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any cash flow from investing or financing activities or non-cash transactions.
Going Concern
Our financial statements include a going-concern paragraph. Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. During the year ended July 31, 2020, we incurred a net loss of $359,999. As of July 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $12,713,081 and we have earned no revenues since inception and were not engaged in an active business with the result that our accumulated deficit has increased since July 31, 2020. We intend to seek to either acquire a business or enter into a new business. However, until we engage in an active business or make an acquisition we are likely to not be able to raise any significant debt or equity financing or any funds that we may raise are likely to be on very unfavorable terms. We do not presently have the funds to pay the convertible notes which mature at various dates in 2021. Our ability to begin operations in its new business model is dependent upon, among other things, obtaining financing to commence operations and develop a business plan or making an acquisition. We cannot give any assurance as to our ability to develop or acquire a business or to operate profitably. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates: The preparation of the accompanying consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that directly affect the results of reported assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses, including the valuation of non-cash transactions. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Revenue Recognition:
We recognize revenues in accordance with Topic 606, which requires us to recognize revenues when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers at an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. We Company recognize revenue based on the five criteria for revenue recognition established under Topic 606: 1) identify the contract, 2) identify separate performance obligations, 3) determine the transaction price, 4) allocate the transaction price among the performance obligations, and 5) recognize revenue as the performance obligations are satisfied. We have not realized any revenues from operations, and are not currently engaged in any active business.
Share-based expenses
In accordance with ASC 718 “Compensation - Stock Compensation” we account for stock-based compensation arrangements with employees, nonemployee directors and consultants using a fair value method, which requires the recognition of compensation expense for costs related to all stock-based payments, including stock options, on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations. The fair value method requires the Company to estimate the fair value of stock-based payment awards on the date of grant.
Concentrations of Credit Risk
Our financial instruments that are exposed to concentrations of credit risk primarily consist of its cash and related party payables it will likely incur in the near future. We place our cash with financial institutions of high credit worthiness. At times, our cash balance with a particular financial institution may exceed any applicable government insurance limits. Our management plans to assess the financial strength and credit worthiness of any parties to which it extends funds, and as such, it believes that any associated credit risk exposures are limited.
Net Loss per Share of Common Stock
We calculate net loss per share in accordance with ASC Topic 260, “Earnings per Share”. Basic loss per share is computed by dividing the net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. Diluted loss per share is computed similar to basic loss per share except that the denominator is increased to include the number of additional common shares that would have been outstanding if the potential common stock equivalents had been issued and if the additional common shares were dilutive. Diluted earnings per share excludes all dilutive potential shares if their effect is anti-dilutive.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We have implemented all new pronouncements that are in effect and that may impact our consolidated financial statements and we do not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements or results of operations.