ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this document. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, whose actual outcomes involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those stated in or implied by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors,” "Cautionary Statement regarding Forward-Looking Statements" and elsewhere in this Prospectus. Please see the notes to our Financial Statements for information about our Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements.
Forward Looking Statements
This annually report contains forward-looking statements. These statements relate to future events or our future financial performance. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may”, “should”, “expects”, “plans”, “anticipates”, “believes”, “estimates”, “predicts”, “potential” or “continue” or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. These statements are only predictions and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our or our industry’s actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States, we do not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results.
Our unaudited financial statements are stated in United States Dollars (US$) and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this annually report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and elsewhere in this annually report.
In this annually report, unless otherwise specified, all dollar amounts are expressed in United States dollars and all references to “common shares” refer to the common shares in our capital stock.
As used in this annually report and unless otherwise indicated, the terms “we”, “us”, “our”, "JUPW" and the “Company” mean Jupiter Wellness, Inc.
Company Overview
We were originally incorporated in the State of Delaware on October 24, 2018. Our principal business address is 725 N. Hwy A1A, Suite C-106, Jupiter, FL 33477.
Jupiter Wellness, Inc. is a cutting-edge developer of cannabidiol (CBD) based medical therapeutics and wellness products. The Company’s clinical pipeline of prescription CBD-enhanced skin care therapeutics address indications including eczema, burns, herpes cold sores, and skin cancer. We are in the early stage of manufacturing, distributing, and marketing a diverse line of consumer products infused with CBD. We have a proprietary, line of products: CaniSun, CaniSkin and CaniDermRX. Under the CaniSun brand, we are marketing patent pending CBD-infused sun care lotion formulas containing various sun protection factors, or SPFs. In addition, we are exploring the use of CBD with other prescription and/or over-the-counter, or OTC, consumer products that have potentially therapeutic and medical applications. Specifically, we are exploring the use of such topical solutions for the treatment of eczema, dermatitis (JW-100), and actinic keratosis (JW-_100), a non-prescription lotion/lip balm (JW-200) for the treatment of symptoms of cold sores, and a prescription product for the treatment of burns (JW-101). The CaniDermRX (JW-100) topical solution for the treatment of eczema dermatitis is the lead product candidate and will be further tested in humans as an investigational cosmetic ingredient followed by clinical trials subject to the regulations of the United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) under an investigational new drug, or IND, application. In February 2021, we announced the results of our novel Cannabidiol-Aspartame combination treatment JW-100 clinical trial which has shown it significantly Reduces ISGA Score in Eczema patients. A double blinded placebo controlled interventional study was conducted. Subjects were assigned to apply, at home, one of three treatments: JW-100 (a CBD and aspartame combination topical formulation), a CBD only topical formulation, or a placebo topical formulation. After 14 days, the average reduction in the Investigators Static Global Assessment (ISGA) score was calculated for each group. Additionally, the proportion of subjects achieving (ISGA) score 0 (clear) or 1 (almost clear) with at least 2 grade improvement from baseline was recorded for each arm of the study. 50% of subjects in the JW-100 arm achieved ISGA clear or almost clear (1 or 2) with at least a 2-grade improvement from baseline after treatment versus 20% and 15% in the CBD-only and placebo arms, respectively. The percentage of subjects achieving clear or almost clear with at least a 2-grade improvement from baseline was found to be statistically significant (p=0.028). JW-100, a novel topical formulation containing CBD and aspartame, was shown to significantly reduce ISGA score in atopic dermatitis patients after two weeks of use. The combination of CBD and aspartame was more effective at reducing ISGA scores than CBD alone.
In parallel, we plan to initiate the development of other products. We originally anticipated developmental studies to be completed in 2020, however, these studies were delayed due to COVID-19. We are also actively seeking to acquire or license products in the OTC skin care market that can be infused with CBD and marketed under our CaniSkin and CaniDermRX brand names. There can be no assurances that we will acquire or enter into such partnership or licensing agreements.
The endocannabinoid system, which is a body system affected by CBD, plays a pivotal role in maintaining a healthy skin through modulating pain sensation, cell proliferation and inflammation. Our strategy for treatment of skin indications is, therefore, to focus on the use of CBD containing topical formulations and to explore potential combinations of CBD and other agents that may augment and act synergistically with CBD. We will explore this strategy by conducting controlled clinical trials to try to ultimately gain FDA approval for specific indications.
CaniSun Brand
We developed a CBD-infused sunscreen with broad-spectrum SPF protection. We have completed lab testing for CBD solubility-infusing clear, colorless, odorless, and 99.5% pure CBD isolated with three different sun care active ingredients, homosalate, octisalate and octocrylene, which have already been approved by the FDA. The CBD-infused sun care market is fairly nascent in the United States; we believe that there are currently no major competitors in the category. We see an opportunity to become the leading manufacturer of CBD-infused sun care products, marketing the CaniSun brand through an extensive digital and social media awareness campaign. We announced the launch of our CaniSun sun care line of SPF 30, SPF 50 and SPF 55 face lotion on June 6, 2019. We also sell our CBD-infused lip balm and CBD-infused SPF 30 sunscreen spray on our website Canisun.com.
We currently have additional CaniSun products in various stages of development as follows:
i) CBD-infused SPF 30 Lip Balm;
ii) CBD-infused SPF 15 sunscreen lotion; and
iii) Mineral-based sunscreen lotions (SPF 30 and 50).
All of the products listed above are in the developmental stage, whereby we are finalizing the formula to be used in each product, respectively. For CBD-infused product candidates in development, such as our CBD-infused SPF 30 Lip Balm and CBD-infused SPF 15 sunscreen lotion, we have already identified the sun care active ingredient formula (which has already been FDA approved) to be infused with CBD. Once the respective formulas for each of our products are created, the product candidates will undergo three months of stability testing. Provided that the product candidates pass the stability testing, we intend to sell the products on our CaniSun website. The formula for our mineral-based sunscreen lotion (SPF 30 and 50) (product iii) above) includes certain minerals instead of chemicals typically used in sunscreen lotions.
Overall, we believe that our currently offered sunscreen products comply with the FDA Final Rule for sunscreen products under 21 CFR 352 Sunscreen products for Over-the-Counter Human Use. Therefore, we believe that our sunscreen products fall within the FDA monograph and that premarket approval and testing is not required. Our products have been tested for SPF Evaluation (SPF rating), Critical Wave Length (Broad Spectrum claim) and Water Resistance, each of which is defined within the monograph and labeled accordingly.
All of the test on these products is standard testing for suncare products. Such testing protocols are not intended to test for any effects of adding CBD. In addition to these tests that were conducted to support the claims on the package, each batch is also tested for appearance, color, odor, pH, viscosity, specific gravity, analytical for the sunscreen active ingredients, and microbial content testing.
Our products are tested each time they are manufactured. DCR Labs manufactures our products and has represented to us that it is compliant with the FDA’s Current Good Manufacturing Practice, or “CGMP”, regulations in accordance with 21 CFR 210/211 required for Over-the-Counter drug products. DCR Labs has self-imposed health and safety standards to ensure compliance with the FDA’s CGMPs.
We expect to continually update and expand upon our corporate website and further refine our online retail strategies on an ongoing basis. Jupiterwellness.com is our primary corporate website, which will serve as the primary source of information about us for investors and contain press releases, clinical trial pipeline, lab reports, blog posts, and additional information about each of our brands. We anticipate that each brand will have its own front-facing website dedicated to retail sales and brand specific information. For example, our line of sun care products, CaniSun, has its own website at CaniSun.com and allows for online retail purchase of the entire product line. As we expand our brands (CaniSkin and CaniDermRX), we anticipate utilizing the same strategy and dedicating a new e-commerce website to each brand moving forward. We are also building a website dedicated to servicing our wholesale and larger distributor clients. This website will have more information about each product and provide a central location for larger retailers to find more in-depth information about all of our brands in one place. We plan to leverage our websites with a social media presence across multiple platforms designed to utilize product reviews to increase brand loyalty, brand recognition and sales. The references to our website in this prospectus are inactive textual references only. The information on our website is neither incorporated by reference into this prospectus nor intended to be used in connection with this offering. We also see growth potential in developing retail locations. We intend to utilize cross-promotion marketing campaigns with our products and product category expansion that leverages our existing distribution channels. We have built an e-commerce platform designed to connect us directly to consumers. We use the platform to sell products, educate customers and build brand loyalty.
CaniSkin Brand and CaniDermRX Brand
We are currently developing other products such as CBD-infused skin care lotion under the CaniSkin brand. Specifically, a CBD-infused moisturizing face serum is under development. We must first finalize the formula to be used in the face serum, and, once approved, the product candidate will undergo stability testing. We intend to sell the product, provided it first passes stability testing, on our website for CaniSkin products. Additionally, we are developing innovative dermatological treatments under the CaniDermRX brand that are specialized to treat atopic dermatitis and other dermatological conditions such as burns, skin cancer and herpes cold sores, respectively. Subject to obtaining FDA approval, we intend for our experimental-stage product for the treatment of atopic dermatitis to compete with Dupixent, an FDA-approved leading treatment for atopic dermatitis, and for our experimental-stage product for the treatment of herpes cold sores to compete with Silvadene and Abreva, FDA-approved products for treating herpes cold sores. These products require more extensive testing to show with safety and efficacy.
Our first clinical indication is atopic dermatitis (eczema). We have completed manufacturing of formulations containing CBD and aspartame in an FDA-approved CGMP facility and will be initiating clinical trials of an experimental cosmetic ingredient in this indication to determine efficacy. We expect these studies to be completed in 2021 and cost approximately $120,000. We will not make any medicinal or therapeutic claims based on this trial. In parallel, we have initiated development studies to file an investigational new drug (“IND”) application for FDA regulated clinical studies in this indication. We expect the developmental studies to be completed in the first quarter of 2021 and the IND filing to be submitted in the second quarter of 2021. We originally anticipated developmental studies to be completed in the first quarter of 2020, however, these studies were delayed due to COVID-19. The cost of the developmental studies are estimated to be approximately $250,000.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our unaudited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 and audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP, and the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission. The preparation of the financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements as well as the reported revenue generated, and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”) and are expressed in United States Dollars. Significant accounting policies are summarized below:
Revenue Recognition
The Company generates its revenue from the sale of its products directly to the end user or distributor (collectively the “customer”).
The Company recognizes revenues by applying the following steps in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification 606 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services are transferred to a customer, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the Company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. The Company applies the following five steps in order to determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as it fulfills its obligations under each of its agreements:
• identify the contract with a customer;
• identify the performance obligations in the contract;
• determine the transaction price;
• allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and
• recognize revenue as the performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company’s performance obligations are satisfied when goods or products are shipped on an FOB shipping point basis as title passes when shipped. Our product is generally paid in advance of shipment or standard net 30 days and we offer no specific right of return, refund or warranty related to our products except for cases of defective products of which there have been none to date.
Inventory
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. The Company periodically reviews the value of items in inventory and provides write-downs or write-offs of inventory based on its assessment of market conditions. Write-downs and write-offs are charged to cost of goods sold. Inventory is based upon the average cost method of accounting.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed pursuant to section 260-10-45 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification. Basic net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. If applicable, diluted earnings per share assume the conversion, exercise or issuance of all common stock instruments such as options, warrants, convertible securities and preferred stock, unless the effect is to reduce a loss or increase earnings per share. Warrants are not considered in the calculations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019, as the impact of the potential common shares would be to decrease the loss per share.
Cash
We consider all short-term investments with a maturity of three months or less when purchased to be cash and equivalents for purposes of the statement of cash flows. There were no cash equivalents as December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Foreign Currency Translation
Assets and liabilities in foreign currencies are translated using the exchange rate at the balance sheet date, while revenue and expense accounts are translated at the average exchange rates prevailing during the period. Equity accounts are translated at historical exchange rates. Gains and losses from foreign currency transactions and translation for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and the cumulative translation gains and losses as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were not material.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are generated from sales of the Company’s products. The Company provides an allowance for doubtful collections, which is based upon a review of outstanding receivables, historical collection information, and existing economic conditions. As of December 31, 2020 the Company recorded an allowance of $118,761 against accounts receivable acquired in connection with the acquisition of SRM Entertainment and as of December 31, 2020, the Company had recognized no allowance for doubtful collections.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of our assets and liabilities, which qualify as financial instruments under ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,” approximates the carrying amounts represented in the accompanying balance sheet, primarily due to their short-term nature.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under ASC 740 Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). ASC 740 requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for both the expected impact of differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities and for the expected future tax benefit to be derived from tax loss and tax credit carry forwards. ASC 740 additionally requires a valuation allowance to be established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized.
ASC 740 also clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement process for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. ASC 740 also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim period, disclosure and transition. Based on our evaluation, it has been concluded that there are no significant uncertain tax positions requiring recognition in our financial statements. Since we were incorporated on October 24, 2018, the evaluation was performed for 2018 tax year, which would be the only period subject to examination. We believe that our income tax positions and deductions would be sustained on audit and does not anticipate any adjustments that would result in a material changes to our financial position. Our policy for recording interest and penalties associated with audits is to record such items as a component of income tax expense.
The Company’s deferred tax asset at December 31, 2020 consists of net operating loss carry forwards calculated using federal and state effective tax rates equating to approximately $936,311 less a valuation allowance in the amount of approximately $936,311. Because of the Company’s lack of earnings history, the deferred tax asset has been fully offset by a valuation allowance in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Research and Development
The Company accounts for research and development costs in accordance with the Accounting Standards Codification subtopic 730-10, Research and Development (“ASC 730-10”). Under ASC 730-10, all research and development costs must be charged to expense as incurred. Accordingly, internal research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Third-party research and developments costs are expensed when the contracted work has been performed or as milestone results have been achieved. Company-sponsored research and development costs related to both present and future products are expensed in the period incurred. The Company incurred research and development expenses of $308,367 and $108,957 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Stock Based Compensation
We recognize compensation costs to employees under FASB Accounting Standards Codification 718 “Compensation - Stock Compensation” (“ASC 718”). Under ASC 718, companies are required to measure the compensation costs of share-based compensation arrangements based on the grant-date fair value and recognize the costs in the financial statements over the period during which employees are required to provide services. Share based compensation arrangements include stock options and warrants. As such, compensation cost is measured on the date of grant at their fair value. Such compensation amounts, if any, are amortized over the respective vesting periods of the option grant.
On October 24, 2018, the inception date (“Inception”), we adopted ASU No. 2018-07 “Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting.” These amendments expand the scope of Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (which currently only includes share-based payments to employees) to include share-based payments issued to nonemployees for goods or services. Consequently, the accounting for share-based payments to nonemployees and employees will be substantially aligned.
The value of common stock issued or payable from Inception through December 31, 2020 were based upon the last sales price of our common stock to a third party. From January through September 2019, we had multiple sales of common stock at $0.25 per share. From September through the end of 2019, we sold our stock at $1.00 per share. Issuances and grants throughout 2019 were all based upon the last sales price for sales of our stock for cash to third parties. If and when our shares of common stock are publicly listed, we will use the closing share price on a exchange as a basis for valuing our stock grants.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-07, which simplifies the accounting for nonemployee share-based payment transactions. The amendments specify that Topic 718 applies to all share-based payment transactions in which a grantor acquires goods or services to be used or consumed in a grantor’s own operations by issuing share-based payment awards. The Company has adopted this standard beginning January 1, 2019. The adoption of this standard did not have a significant impact on our results of operations, financial condition, cash flows, and financial statement disclosures.
In May 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”. The new standard provides a five-step approach to be applied to all contracts with customers and also requires expanded disclosures about revenue recognition. The ASU is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, including interim periods and is to be retrospectively applied. The adoption of this standard did not have a significant impact on our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. The adoption of this standard is expected to result in additional financial statement disclosures.
In February 2016, Topic 842, “Leases” was issued to replace the leases requirements in Topic 840, “Leases”. The main difference between previous GAAP and Topic 842 is the recognition of lease assets and lease liabilities by lessees for those leases classified as operating leases under previous GAAP. A lessee should recognize in the balance sheet a liability to make lease payments (the lease liability) and a right-of-use asset representing its right to use the underlying asset for the lease term. For leases with a term of 12 months or less, a lessee is permitted to make an accounting policy election by class of underlying asset not to recognize lease assets and lease liabilities. If a lessee makes this election, it should recognize lease expense for such leases generally on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The accounting applied by a lessor is largely unchanged from that applied under previous GAAP. Topic 842 will be effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within those annual periods and is to be retrospectively applied. The Company has adopted this standard beginning January 1, 2019. The adoption of this standard did not have a significant impact on our results of operations, financial condition, cash flows, and financial statement disclosures.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2020
The following table provides selected financial data about us for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Revenues
We generated $1,065,665 in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $6,455 revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. The large increase is due to the Company having only nominal operations during 2019. In 2019, the Company focused its efforts on formulating, testing and manufacturing its sunscreen and skin care products. In 2020, the Company (i) began marketing its skin care and sunscreen products line, (2) acquired Magical Beasts, LLC, which expanded its product offerings, sales and marketing capabilities (3) added additional product lines to its skin care product line, (4) added a line of hand sanitizer, for a combined sales total of $834,812 and acquired SRM Entertainment Ltd which contributed sales of $230,853.
Operating Expenses
We had total operating expenses of $6,730,300 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $913,893 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were in connection with our daily operations as follows: (i) marketing expenses of $82,367; (ii) research and development of $308,367; (iii) legal and professional expenses of $837,698, consisting of corporate advisory services, registration statement preparation fees, general corporate governance fees; (iv) rent of $61,797; (v) depreciation and amortization of $103,392; (vi) general and administrative expenses of $1,784,456, consisting of payroll and related taxes, travel, meals and entertainment, office supplies and expense and other normal office and administration expenses; (vii) stock based compensation of $2,398,140; (viii) an impairment to Goodwill of $308,690; (ix) an impairment to Intangible Assets of $731,628 and (x) net interest expense of $113,765.
We had total operating expenses of $913,893 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating expenses were in connection with our daily operations as follows: (i) marketing expenses of $74,145 consisting of internet awareness costs, website development, trade shows and promotional displays; (ii) research and development of $108,957 consisting of product development and formulation and clinical research; (iii) legal and professional expenses of $132,318, consisting of corporate advisory services, registration statement preparation fees, intellectual property fees and general corporate governance fees and trademark fees; (iv) rent of $17,783; (v) stock based compensation of $357,904; (vi) general and administrative expenses of $217,610, consisting of accounting fees, consulting fees, payroll and related taxes, Board of Director fees, patent filing expenses, travel, charitable contributions, meals and entertainment, office supplies and expense and other normal office and administration expenses and (vii) net interest expense of $5,176.
Income/Losses
Net losses were $6,289,205 and $925,462 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Impact of Inflation
We believe that inflation has had a negligible effect on operations since inception. We believe that we can offset inflationary increases in the cost of operations by increasing sales and improving operating efficiencies.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have off-balance sheet arrangements, financings, or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons, also known as “variable interest entities.”
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company is in commercialization mode, while continuing to pursue the development of its next generation product as well as new products that are being developed.
We generally require cash to:
• launch sales initiatives,
• fund our operations and working capital requirements,
• develop and execute our product development and market introduction plans,
• fund research and development efforts, and
• pay any expense obligations as they come due.