Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
(Dollar and share amounts in millions except percentages and per share amounts, except where noted otherwise)
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations contains forward-looking statements and should be read in conjunction with Item 1A: Risk Factors, our Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes thereto, as well as other cautionary statements and risks described elsewhere in this 2020 Annual Report, before deciding to purchase, hold or sell shares of our common stock.
OVERVIEW
Looking back at 2020, we took aggressive actions as we navigated through the pandemic to increase our financial flexibility and accelerate our strategic initiatives to better serve customers. As shifts in customer expectations and behavior accelerated, our multi-year investments and strong financial position enabled our transformation into a digital-first business.
For the year, net loss was $690, or $4.39 per diluted share. Generating more than $425 in operating cash flow over the past three quarters, we ended the year with $1,481 in liquidity, including $681 in cash.
While our net sales decreased 32%, which reflected temporary store closures during the first half of 2020, we are encouraged by the continued sequential improvement in topline trends during the second half. Notably, we saw encouraging customer trends in the fourth quarter, including 40% growth in new customers acquired online. In addition, Nordy Club loyalty members represented 40% of our customer base and contributed two-thirds of sales.
During the year, we took the following actions to ensure we can successfully emerge from this pandemic in a stronger position:
•Expense discipline - rebased our cost structure, reflecting more than $300 in permanent overhead reductions
•Market strategy - scaled to top 10 markets, making up more than 50% of sales, providing customers with four times more merchandise selection on average and faster delivery
•Rack - integrated store and online inventory to increase online selection and enable order pickup and store fulfillment capabilities
Going forward, our brand promise of getting “closer to you” is the guiding principle of our growth plans. We are committed to significantly expanding the breadth of who we serve, and where and how we serve them. We are doing this by unlocking the full power of the digital-first platform we have built to capture market share gains, drive profitable growth, and create significant value for our shareholders. We are dedicated to executing on our strategy across our three areas of highest priority:
Winning in our most important markets. We are continuing to scale our market strategy by doubling our exposure from 10 to 20 markets by the end of March 2021, making up 75% of our business. This includes key markets such as San Diego, Houston, Minneapolis and Miami.
Broadening the reach of Nordstrom Rack. We are focused on growing our share of the price-oriented customer segment, which we see as a two billion dollar incremental sales opportunity over time. Our efforts are underway as we recently repositioned 70 stores by reimagining the merchandising offering and store experience.
Increasing the velocity of our digital business. We are focused on more effectively translating the heritage of service that defines us in this digitally connected world. This means delivering personalization at scale by creating greater linkages between digital and physical experiences. As an example, we are currently migrating Nordstromrack.com to the JWN e-commerce platform to enhance the customer experience while creating efficiencies in our infrastructure and operations.
We are grateful for our team’s efforts to strengthen our financial flexibility and accelerate our strategic priorities to serve customers in new and differentiated ways. These actions have put us in a strong position to capitalize on our market share opportunity as customer demand recovers. Heading into 2021 and beyond, we are confident in our ability to deliver profitable sales growth.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
In our ongoing effort to enhance the customer experience, we are focused on providing a seamless experience across our Company. We invested early in our omni-channel capabilities, integrating our operations, merchandising and technology across our stores and online, and in both Nordstrom and Nordstrom Rack brands. While our customers may engage with us through multiple ways, we know they value the integrated brand experience and view us simply as one company, which is ultimately how we view our company. We have one Retail reportable segment and analyze our results on a total company basis, using customer, market share, operational and net sales metrics.
For our comparison and discussion of 2019 and 2018, see Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Part II of our 2019 Annual Report.
Net Sales
The following table summarizes net sales:
In 2020, total Company net sales decreased 31.6% compared with 2019. These declines primarily resulted from COVID-19, and the temporary store closures that occurred in the first half of the year. Digital sales increased 16% compared with 2019 and order pickup as a percentage of digital sales increased compared with 2019 due to accelerated growth from the impacts COVID-19 has had on customer shopping behavior and expanded fulfillment capabilities. During the year, we opened one Nordstrom Rack and two Nordstrom Locals, and closed sixteen Nordstrom stores, six Nordstrom Trunk Club clubhouses and three Jeffrey boutiques.
Nordstrom net sales decreased 29.6% compared with 2019. Nordstrom Rack net sales decreased 35.3% compared with 2019. These declines resulted primarily from the impacts of COVID-19 and temporary store closures in the first half of the year. The average sales price at both Nordstrom and Nordstrom Rack decreased primarily due to customer shopping behavior and category shift. Home, Active and Beauty were the top-performing merchandise categories in 2020.
Credit Card Revenues, Net
Credit card revenues, net include our portion of the ongoing credit card revenue, net of credit losses, pursuant to our program agreement with TD. TD is the exclusive issuer of our consumer credit cards and we perform the account servicing functions. Credit card revenues, net were $358 in 2020, compared with $392 in 2019. This decrease was primarily a result of lower finance charges and late fee revenues throughout the year driven by changes in customer behavior resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and lower interchange revenue from lower spend on our credit cards at other merchants.
Gross Profit
The following table summarizes gross profit:
Gross profit decreased $2,443 primarily due to lower sales volume, and the rate decreased 780 basis points compared with 2019 due to deleverage from lower sales volume and higher markdowns.
Ending inventory as of January 30, 2021 decreased 3.0% compared with prior year. While inventory levels were above our expectations, the majority of the overage reflected current receipts and non-seasonal merchandise and we are taking actions to clear excess seasonal and underperforming categories.
Nordstrom, Inc. and subsidiaries 23
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A is summarized in the following table:
SG&A decreased $646 in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily from lower variable expenses associated with lower sales volume and the permanent reductions in overhead costs, partially offset by COVID-19 charges related primarily to asset impairment from store closures and restructuring charges. SG&A rate increased 840 basis points primarily as a result of deleverage on lower sales volume and higher labor and shipping expenses associated with COVID-19, partially offset by the reduced overhead costs.
Earnings (Loss) Before Interest and Income Taxes
EBIT is summarized in the following table:
EBIT decreased $1,831 in 2020 compared with 2019, as a result of the impacts from COVID-19, deleverage on lower sales volume and higher markdowns, partially offset by permanent reductions in overhead costs. COVID-19 related charges of $303 consisted primarily of asset impairments from store closures, premium pay and benefits and restructuring charges (see Note 1: Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Item 8).
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net is summarized in the following table:
Interest expense, net increased $79 in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to additional interest related to the new 8.750% senior secured notes due May 2025 and the Revolver drawdown, as well as lower capitalized interest in 2020 due to a decrease in capitalized expenditures.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense is summarized in the following table:
The following table illustrates the components of our effective tax rate:
The increase in the effective tax rate for 2020 compared with 2019 was primarily due to the CARES Act that allows us to carry back 2020 losses at the higher tax rate applicable in previous years.
Earnings Per Share
EPS is as follows:
Diluted EPS decreased $7.57 in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to lower sales as a result of COVID-19, higher markdowns and shipping costs, partially offset by permanent reductions in overhead costs and a tax benefit from the CARES Act. COVID-19 related charges reduced diluted EPS by $1.22 per share.
2021 Outlook
We are focused on increasing total shareholder returns through four key financial objectives: accelerating revenue growth, expanding operating profit margin, improving return on invested capital and generating cash flow. While the timing of recovery of customer demand remains uncertain, we have provided the following financial expectations for fiscal 2021, which assume stores remain open during the year:
•Revenue, including retail sales and credit card revenues, is expected to grow more than 25%, with digital representing approximately 50% of sales
•EBIT margin is expected to be approximately 3% of sales
•Income tax rate is expected to be approximately 27%
•Our Leverage Ratio is expected to be approximately 3x by year-end
•For the first half of the year, EBIT is expected to be approximately breakeven, reflecting approximately 45% of total year sales
Nordstrom, Inc. and subsidiaries 25
Adjusted ROIC (Non-GAAP financial measure)
We believe that Adjusted ROIC is a useful financial measure for investors in evaluating the efficiency and effectiveness of the capital we have invested in our business to generate returns over time. In addition, we have incorporated it in our executive incentive measures and we believe it is an important indicator of shareholders’ return over the long term.
Adjusted ROIC is not a measure of financial performance under GAAP and should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, return on assets, net earnings, total assets or other GAAP financial measures. Our method of calculating non-GAAP financial measures may differ from other companies’ methods and therefore may not be comparable to those used by other companies. The financial measure calculated under GAAP which is most directly comparable to Adjusted ROIC is return on assets. The following is a reconciliation of return on assets to Adjusted ROIC:
1 We add back the operating lease interest to reflect how we manage our business. Operating lease interest is a component of operating lease cost recorded in occupancy costs.
2 For leases with property incentives that exceed the ROU assets, we reclassify the amount from assets to other current liabilities and other liabilities and reduce average total assets, as this better reflects how we manage our business.
3 For fiscal year 2020, COVID-19 related charges negatively impacted return on assets by approximately 200 basis points and Adjusted ROIC by approximately 280 basis points. Integration charges, primarily related to Trunk Club, of $32 in fiscal 2019, were primarily non-cash related and negatively impacted return on assets by approximately 30 basis points and Adjusted ROIC by approximately 30 basis points.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
In response to the uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we took action to provide further liquidity and flexibility during these unprecedented times. Our stores were temporarily closed in the first half of the year. We continue to review state and local legal requirements and conditions and may need to close some or all of the stores currently open as COVID-19 and other uncertainties continue to unfold. No matter how customers choose to shop, we are committed to delivering superior services, products and experiences and are ready to serve our customers online, through our applications and other digital means, including virtual styling and selling tools, online order pickup and contactless curbside services. We have taken the following actions in 2020 to increase our cash position and preserve financial flexibility:
•Drew down $800 on our Revolver, of which we subsequently repaid $800 by the end of fiscal 2020, and issued $600 in 8.750% senior secured notes
•Suspended quarterly cash dividends beginning in the second quarter of 2020 and share repurchases
•Achieved expense savings in excess of $400 and further net cash savings in capital expenditures and working capital
We ended fiscal year 2020 with $681 in cash and cash equivalents and $800 of additional liquidity available on our Revolver. In March 2021, subsequent to year end and consistent with the seasonal cash needs of our business, we drew down $200 on our Revolver, which we expect to repay before the end of the first half of the year. With our financial position strengthened, we are prioritizing market share gains and profitable sales growth. In 2021, we expect to receive approximately $500 in income tax refunds in the second or third quarter.
We strive to maintain a level of liquidity sufficient to allow us to cover our seasonal cash needs and to maintain appropriate levels of short-term borrowings. Our ongoing working capital requirements are generally funded primarily through cash flows generated from operations. In addition, we have access to the commercial paper market and can draw on our revolving credit facilities for working capital, capital expenditures and general corporate purposes. In 2020, due to COVID-19 impacts, the incremental financing we drew on in the first quarter of 2020 aided in the funding of our cash requirements. We believe our operating cash flows are sufficient to meet our cash requirements for the next 12 months and beyond.
Over the long term, we manage our cash and capital structure to maximize shareholder return, maintain our financial position, manage refinancing risk and allow flexibility for strategic initiatives. We regularly assess our debt and leverage levels, capital expenditure requirements, debt service payments, dividend payouts, potential share repurchases and other future investments.
The following is a summary of our cash flows by activity:
Operating Activities
The majority of our operating cash inflows are derived from sales. We also receive cash payments for property incentives from developers. Our operating cash outflows generally consist of payments to our merchandise vendors (net of vendor allowances) and shipping carriers, payments to our employees for wages, salaries and other employee benefits and payments to our landlords for rent. Operating cash outflows also include payments for income taxes and interest payments on our short-term and long-term borrowings.
Cash from operating activities decreased by $1,584 between 2020 and 2019 primarily due to a reduction in net earnings from the impacts of COVID-19 and temporary store closures in the first half of the year, partially offset by the benefits of the CARES Act.
Investing Activities
Our investing cash outflows include payments for capital expenditures, including stores, supply chain improvements and technology costs. Our investing cash inflows are generally from proceeds from sales of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $562 between 2020 and 2019 due to a decrease in capital expenditures as the prior period included investments in our Nordstrom NYC store, as well as supply chain costs related to our market strategy. We also reduced non-critical store reinvestment in 2020.
Nordstrom, Inc. and subsidiaries 27
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures, net are summarized as follows:
1 Deferred property incentives are included in our cash provided by operations in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in Item 8. We operationally view the property incentives we receive from our developers and vendors as an offset to our capital expenditures.
1 Rates represent 2021 forecasted amounts.
Capital expenditures as a percentage of net sales were higher in 2016 through 2019 as we made investments in Nordstrom NYC, NRHL, Canada and our Supply Chain Network. Going forward, we expect to maintain our capital expenditure requirement at 3% to 4% of net sales primarily to support investments in technology and our Supply Chain Network.
Financing Activities
The majority of our financing activities include repurchases of common stock, long-term debt proceeds and/or payments and dividend payments.
Cash from financing activities increased $961 between 2020 and 2019 primarily due to the net proceeds from the 8.750% senior secured notes.
Borrowing Activity
During 2020, we issued $600 aggregate principle amount of 8.750% senior secured notes due May 2025. During 2019, we issued $500 aggregate principal amount of 4.375% senior unsecured notes due April 2030. We recorded debt issuance costs incurred as a result of the issuance in other financing activities, net in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. With the proceeds of these new notes, we retired our $500 senior unsecured notes in 2019 that were due May 2020 (see Note 8: Debt and Credit Facilities in Item 8).
Additionally, in the first quarter of 2020, we drew down $800 on our Revolver and paid down $800 during the second through fourth quarters.
In 2018, we fully repaid $47 outstanding on our Puerto Rican unsecured borrowing facility.
Share Repurchases
In August 2018, our Board of Directors authorized a new program to repurchase up to $1,500 of our outstanding common stock, with no expiration date. As a result of uncertainties from COVID-19 impacts, we repurchased no shares of our common stock in 2020, compared with 4.1 shares for an aggregate purchase price of $186 during 2019. We had $707 remaining in share repurchase capacity as of January 30, 2021. The actual timing, price, manner and amounts of future share repurchases, if any, will be subject to the discretion of the Board of Directors, contractual commitments, market and economic conditions and applicable SEC rules.
Dividends
In 2020, we paid dividends of $58, or $0.37 per share, compared with $229, or $1.48 per share, in 2019 (see Note 11: Shareholders’ Equity in Item 8). In determining the dividends to pay, we analyze our dividend payout ratio and dividend yield, while taking into consideration our current and projected operating performance and liquidity.
Free Cash Flow (Non-GAAP financial measure)
Free Cash Flow is one of our key liquidity measures, and when used in conjunction with GAAP measures, we believe it provides investors with a meaningful analysis of our ability to generate cash from our business.
Free Cash Flow is not a measure of financial performance under GAAP and should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, operating cash flows or other financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our method of calculating non-GAAP financial measures may differ from other companies’ methods and therefore may not be comparable to those used by other companies. The financial measure calculated under GAAP which is most directly comparable to Free Cash Flow is net cash (used in) provided by operating activities. The following is a reconciliation of net cash (used in) provided by operating activities to Free Cash Flow:
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAR (Non-GAAP financial measures)
Adjusted EBITDA is one of our key financial metrics to reflect our view of cash flow from net earnings. Adjusted EBITDA excludes significant items which are non-operating in nature in order to evaluate our core operating performance against prior periods. The financial measure calculated under GAAP which is most directly comparable to Adjusted EBITDA is net earnings.
Adjusted EBITDAR is also one of our key financial metrics as it is used to measure compliance with one of our Revolver covenants for the year-ended January 30, 2021. Additionally, as of the fourth quarter of 2020, Adjusted EBITDAR is used as an input in the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio for the covenant. Adjusted EBITDAR reflects the items in Adjusted EBITDA, excludes rent expense as defined by the Revolver, and captures other differences between the contractual requirements in the Revolver and Adjusted EBITDA, including the inclusion or exclusion of certain non-cash charges. The financial measure calculated under GAAP, which is most directly comparable to Adjusted EBITDAR, is net earnings.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAR are not measures of financial performance under GAAP and should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for net earnings, overall change in cash or liquidity of the business as a whole. Our method of calculating non-GAAP financial measures may differ from other companies’ methods and therefore may not be comparable to those used by other companies. The following is a reconciliation of net earnings to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAR:
1 Rent expense, exclusive of amortization of developer reimbursements, is added back for consistency with our debt covenant calculation requirements, and is calculated under the previous lease standard.
2 Other adjusting items to reconcile Adjusted EBITDA to Adjusted EBITDAR as defined by our Revolver covenant include interest income and certain non-cash charges where relevant.
Nordstrom, Inc. and subsidiaries 29
Credit Capacity and Commitments
During the first quarter of 2020, we amended our existing Revolver and drew down $800. As of January 30, 2021, we paid the entirety of the outstanding balance under the facility. The Revolver contains customary representations, warranties, covenants and terms, including paying a variable rate of interest and a commitment fee based on our debt rating. The Revolver is available for working capital, capital expenditures and general corporate purposes. Provided that we obtain written consent from our lenders, we have the option to increase the Revolver by up to $200, to a total of $1,000, and two options to extend the Revolver by one year. For more information about our credit facilities, see Note 8: Debt and Credit Facilities in Item 8.
We maintain trade and standby letters of credit to facilitate our international payments. As of January 30, 2021, we have $8 available and none outstanding under the trade letter of credit and $15 available and $2 outstanding under the standby letter of credit.
Impact of Credit Ratings
Changes in our credit ratings may impact our costs to borrow, whether our personal property secures our Revolver and the debt covenants we follow.
For our Revolver, the interest rate applicable to any borrowings we may enter into depends upon the type of borrowing incurred plus an applicable margin, which is determined based on our credit ratings. At the time of this report, our credit ratings and outlook were as follows:
Should the ratings assigned to our long-term debt improve, the applicable margin associated with any borrowings under the Revolver may decrease, resulting in a lower borrowing cost under this facility. Conversely, should the ratings assigned to our long-term debt worsen, the applicable margin associated with any borrowings under the Revolver may increase, resulting in a higher borrowing cost under this facility.
In June 2020, we amended our program agreement with TD to eliminate the prior requirement to post collateral and extend the term of the agreement until April 2024.
Debt Covenants
As of January 30, 2021, we met all of our covenants while our Leverage Ratio exceeded four. Under our current debt covenants, if our Leverage Ratio is greater than four or our unsecured debt is rated below BBB- with a stable outlook at Standard & Poor’s or Baa3 with a stable outlook at Moody’s, any outstanding borrowings under our Revolver will be secured by substantially all our personal property and we will be precluded from repurchasing shares or paying dividends on our common stock. For more information about our debt covenants, see Note 8: Debt and Credit Facilities in Item 8.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and the expected effect on our liquidity and cash flows as of January 30, 2021. We expect to fund these commitments primarily with operating cash flows generated in the normal course of business and credit available to us under existing and potential future facilities.
Included in the required debt repayments disclosed above are estimated total interest payments of $1,972 as of January 30, 2021, payable over the remaining life of the debt.
The operating lease obligations in the table above do not include payments for variable lease costs that are required by most of our lease agreements. These costs include variable payments related to real estate taxes, common area maintenance costs and additional rent payments based upon a percentage of our sales, which totaled $100 in 2020.
Purchase obligations primarily consist of inventory purchase orders and capital expenditure commitments.
Other long-term liabilities consist of workers’ compensation and other liability insurance reserves and postretirement benefits. The payment amounts presented above were estimated based on historical payment trends. Other long-term liabilities not requiring cash payments, such as property incentives that exceed the associated ROU asset, were excluded from the table above. Also excluded from the table above are unrecognized tax benefits of $36, as we are unable to reasonably estimate the timing of future cash payments, if any, for these liabilities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In management’s opinion, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have a material current or future effect on our financial condition or financial statements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP in the U.S. requires that we make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities during the reporting period. Uncertainties regarding such estimates and assumptions are inherent in the preparation of financial statements and actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions. The following discussion highlights the estimates we believe are critical and should be read in conjunction with the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Our management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting estimates with the Audit and Finance Committee of our Board of Directors, and the Audit and Finance Committee has reviewed our disclosures that follow.
Sales Return Reserve
We reduce sales and cost of sales by an estimate of future customer merchandise returns, which is calculated based on historical and expected return patterns, and record a sales return allowance and an estimated returns asset. We record the impact of the sales return allowance in our separate Nordstrom and Nordstrom Rack brands. The majority of our returns from both digital and physical sales come through our stores. As a result of COVID-19 and the related change in customer buying trends, we have experienced declines in our online return rates, which historically are higher than our overall average return rates. Accordingly, we have adjusted our estimates of future return rates to reflect recent experience. Estimating future returns requires substantial judgement based on current and historical trends and actual returns may vary from our estimates. A 10% change in the sales return allowance net of the estimated returns assets would have had an approximately $15 impact on our EBIT for the year ended January 30, 2021. Due to the continued volatility surrounding COVID-19, we may not anticipate changes in return trends or the impact of the sales return reserve accurately in our results.
The Nordy Club Loyalty Program and Gift Cards
We record breakage revenue on unused points, unredeemed Nordstrom Notes and gift cards based on expected customer redemption. We estimate breakage for The Nordy Club and gift cards based on historical trends. Actual redemptions may vary from our estimates. We have seen a reduction in redemption rate trends of Nordstrom Notes and gift cards, leading to increased breakage rates. A one percentage point change in our gift card breakage rate would impact our EBIT by approximately $40 for the year ended January 30, 2021.
Merchandise Inventories
Merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market value using the retail inventory method. Under the retail method, the valuation of inventories is determined by applying a calculated cost-to-retail ratio to the retail value of ending inventory. Inherent in the retail inventory method are certain management judgments that may affect the ending inventory valuation as well as gross profit. To determine if the retail value of our inventory should be marked down, we consider current and anticipated demand, customer preferences, age of the merchandise and fashion trends. We record excess and obsolescence based on historical trends and specific identification.
We take physical inventory counts and adjust our records accordingly. Following each physical inventory cycle, we adjust shrinkage to actual results and an estimate is recorded for shrinkage from the count date to year end. We evaluate and determine our estimated shrinkage rate, which is based on a percentage of sales, using the most recent physical inventory and historical results.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
When facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying values of buildings, equipment and ROU assets may be impaired, we compare the carrying value to the related projected future cash flows, among other quantitative and qualitative analyses. Cash flow analysis requires judgment regarding many factors, such as revenues, growth rates, expenses and capital expenditures.
These projections are inherently subject to uncertainties and while we believe the inputs and assumptions utilized in our future cash flows are reasonable, our estimates may change in the near term based on our future performance.
Income Taxes
We pay income taxes based on the tax statutes, regulations and case law of the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Our income tax expense and deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect our best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. Tax expense may be affected by numerous items, such as changes in tax law, changes in business operations, the results of tax audits and changes to our forecasts of income and loss due to economic and other conditions, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining consolidated tax expense.
Nordstrom, Inc. and subsidiaries 31
Deferred tax assets and liabilities arise from differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities and for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. The deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated using the enacted tax rates and laws expected to be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. In evaluating the likelihood of realizing the benefit of our deferred tax assets, we consider all available evidence, including historical results and projected future taxable income. The assumptions about future taxable income require the use of significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying business.
We recorded a valuation allowance against certain foreign deferred tax assets as of January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020 and intend to maintain the valuation allowance until there is sufficient evidence to support its reversal. We believe there is a reasonable possibility within the next 12 months sufficient positive evidence may become available to allow us to reach a conclusion the valuation allowance will no longer be needed. Release of the valuation allowance would result in the recognition of certain foreign deferred tax assets and decrease our income tax expense for the period the release is recorded.
The benefits of uncertain tax positions are recorded in our financial statements only after determining it is more likely than not the uncertain tax positions would sustain challenge by taxing authorities. We are periodically audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities related to our tax filing positions and allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. Although we believe our liabilities for uncertain tax positions are reasonable, because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in an outcome that is materially different from our current estimated liability. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period of resolution.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 1: Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Item 8 for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and the impact these standards are anticipated to have on our results of operations, liquidity or capital resources.