ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition of The Joint Corp. for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto, and other financial information contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
Our principal business is to develop, own, operate, support and manage chiropractic clinics through franchising and the sale of regional developer rights and through direct ownership and management arrangements throughout the United States.
We seek to be the leading provider of chiropractic care in the markets we serve and to become the most recognized brand in our industry through the rapid and focused expansion of chiropractic clinics in key markets throughout North America and potentially abroad. We saw over 584,000 new patients in 2020, despite the pandemic and with approximately 27% of those new patients visiting a chiropractor for the first time. We are not only increasing our percentage of market share, but expanding the chiropractic market.
Key Performance Measures. We receive monthly performance reports from our system and our clinics which include key performance indicators per clinic including gross sales, comparable same-store sales growth, or “Comp Sales,” number of new patients, conversion percentage, and member attrition. In addition, we review monthly reporting related to system-wide sales, clinic openings, clinic license sales, and various earnings metrics in the aggregate and per clinic. We believe these indicators provide us with useful data with which to measure our performance and to measure our franchisees’ and clinics’ performance. Comp Sales include the sales from both company-owned or managed clinics and franchised clinics that in each case have been open at least 13 full months and exclude any clinics that have closed. System-wide sales include sales at all clinics, whether operated by us or by franchisees. While franchised sales are not recorded as revenues by us, management believes the information is important in understanding the overall brand’s financial performance, because these sales are the basis on which we calculate and record royalty fees and are indicative of the financial health of the franchisee base.
Key Clinic Development Trends. As of December 31, 2020, we and our franchisees operated or managed 579 clinics, of which 515 were operated or managed by franchisees and 64 were operated as company-owned or managed clinics. Of the 64 company-owned or managed clinics, 23 were constructed and developed by us, and 41 were acquired from franchisees.
Our current strategy is to grow through the sale and development of additional franchises, build upon our regional developer strategy, and continue to expand our corporate clinic portfolio within clustered locations. The number of franchise licenses sold for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 121, compared with 126 and 99 licenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We ended 2020 with 22 regional developers who were responsible for 83% of the 121 licenses sold during the year. This strong result reflects the power of the regional developer program to accelerate the number of clinics sold, and eventually opened, across the country.
In addition, we believe that we can accelerate the development of, and revenue generation from, company-owned or managed clinics through the accelerated development of greenfield units and the further selective acquisition of existing franchised clinics. We will seek to acquire existing franchised clinics that meet our criteria for demographics, site attractiveness, proximity to other clinics and additional suitability factors.
We believe that The Joint has a sound concept, which was further validated through its resiliency during the pandemic and will benefit from the fundamental changes taking place in the manner in which Americans access chiropractic care and their growing interest in seeking effective, affordable natural solutions for general wellness. These trends join with the preference we have seen among chiropractic doctors to reject the insurance-based model to produce a combination that benefits the consumer and the service provider alike. We believe that these forces create an important opportunity to accelerate the growth of our network.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on our business, financial condition, cash flows and results of operations in 2020. Virus-related concerns, temporary clinic closures and government-imposed restrictions resulted in reduced patient traffic and spending trends and in membership freezes and cancellations in our clinics during 2020. This negative impact on our franchisees’ clinics has also negatively impacted our royalty and advertising fee revenue. Approximately 10% of our system-wide clinics were closed during April, with some clinics beginning to reopen in May. Approximately 99% of our clinics have reopened as of the date of this report, although some are operating on reduced hours. Our corporate clinics and headquarters have been able to operate without any furloughs or lay-offs as we implemented enhanced sanitary measures to ensure patient and employee safety. Our new sanitary and safety measures include cleaning of instruments between each patient use, removal of non-essential items, physical distancing, and masks for all Joint staff. Due to the government-imposed restrictions, our results of operations were most negatively impacted during the month of April. In order to rebuild, we launched our summer promotional activity during the second and third quarters of 2020, which included incentives to unfreeze wellness plan memberships, free chiropractic care to new patients, and a recovery promotion, which was aimed at lapsed patients and former plan members. Our summer promotion, coupled with the easing of government restrictions, have resulted in improvement in most of our key metrics, including gross sales, Comp Sales, patient traffic, and new patient conversion rate. In addition, the attrition rate among existing patients has remained relatively stable during the second half of the year. Despite improvements during the second half of the year, significant uncertainty remains about the duration and extent of the impact on our business of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our 2020 revenue and earnings were negatively impacted compared to our pre-COVID-19 pandemic expectations, and the pandemic may have a negative impact on our revenue and net income in 2021. Even as government restrictions are lifted and clinics reopen, the ongoing economic impacts and health concerns associated with the pandemic may continue to affect patient behavior and spending levels and could result in reduced visits and patient spending trends that adversely impact our financial position and results of operations. In addition, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic depends on factors beyond our knowledge or control, including the duration and severity of the outbreak, other additional significant increases in the number or severity of cases in future periods, and actions taken to contain its spread and mitigate its public health effects. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we took the following steps to preserve liquidity and ensure the Company’s financial flexibility in 2020:
•Reviewed discretionary operating expenses and deferred certain capital expenditures and hiring.
•Drew down the $2 million of our revolving credit facility with J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. in March, noting we have an additional $5.5 million under a developmental line of credit that is unavailable for general corporate purposes.
•Secured a $2.7 million loan under CARES Act Paycheck Protection Program in April, bringing total unrestricted cash to $21 million as of December 31, 2020.
Significant Events and/or Recent Developments
We continue to deliver on our strategic initiatives and to progress toward sustained profitability.
For the year ended December 31, 2020:
•Comp Sales of clinics that have been open for at least 13 full months increased 9%.
•Comp Sales for mature clinics open 48 months or more increased 5%.
•System-wide sales for all clinics open for any amount of time grew 18% to $260 million.
Despite the government-imposed restrictions and reduced traffic during the second quarter of 2020, we saw over 584,000 new patients in 2020, compared with 585,000 new patients in 2019, with approximately 27% of those new patients having never been to a chiropractor before. We are not only increasing our percentage of market share, but expanding the chiropractic market. These factors, along with reduced discretionary operating expenses, drove improvement in our bottom line.
During the first quarter of 2020, we entered into a regional developer agreement for the states of Iowa, Nebraska, South Dakota and the county of Rock Island in the state of Illinois for which we received approximately $201,000. The agreement requires the opening of a minimum of 18 clinics over a seven-year period. In addition, during the third quarter of 2020, we entered into a regional developer agreement for the state of Wisconsin and the remaining available territories within the state of
Illinois for which we received approximately $340,000. The agreement requires the opening of a minimum of 19 clinics over a ten-year period.
On December 31, 2020, we entered into an agreement under which we repurchased the right to develop franchises in various counties in North Carolina. The total consideration for the transaction was $1,039,500. We carried a deferred revenue balance associated with this transaction of $36,781, representing the fee collected upon the execution of the regional developer agreement. We accounted for the termination of development rights associated with unsold or undeveloped franchises as a cancellation, and the associated deferred revenue was netted against the aggregate purchase price.
On January 1, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement under which the Company repurchased the right to develop franchises in various counties in Georgia. The total consideration for the transaction was $1,388,700. The Company carried a deferred revenue balance associated with this transaction of $35,679, representing the fee collected upon the execution of the regional developer agreement. The Company accounted for the termination of development rights associated with unsold or undeveloped franchises as a cancellation, and the associated deferred revenue was netted against the aggregate purchase price.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we acquired one clinic for $534,000 and constructed and developed three new corporate clinics.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our operating results may fluctuate significantly as a result of a variety of factors, including the timing of new clinic sales and clinic openings and closures, the magnitude of expenses related to the foregoing, the economic condition of the markets in which our clinics are located, general economic conditions, consumer confidence in the economy, consumer preferences, competitive factors, and disease epidemics and other health-related concerns, such as the current COVID-19 pandemic.
Significant Accounting Polices and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our accounting estimates on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We have discussed the development and selection of significant accounting policies and estimates with our Audit Committee.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets consist primarily of re-acquired franchise and regional developer rights and customer relationships. We amortize the fair value of re-acquired franchise rights over the remaining contractual terms of the re-acquired franchise rights at the time of the acquisition, which range from one to eight years. In the case of regional developer rights, we amortize the acquired regional developer rights over the remaining contractual terms at the time of the acquisition, which range from two to seven years. The fair value of customer relationships is amortized over their estimated useful life which ranges from two to four years.
Goodwill
Goodwill consists of the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in the acquisitions of franchises. Goodwill and intangible assets deemed to have indefinite lives are not amortized but are subject to annual impairment tests. As required, we perform an annual impairment test of goodwill as of the first day of the fourth quarter or more frequently if events or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. No impairments of goodwill were recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Long-Lived Assets
We review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recovered. We look primarily to estimated undiscounted future cash flows in its assessment of whether or not long-lived assets are recoverable. As a result of the current COVID-19 pandemic, we evaluated whether the carrying values of the long-lived assets in certain corporate clinics were recoverable at the end of the first quarter of 2020. We
did not identify any triggering event during the remainder of 2020. No impairments of long-lived assets were recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for share-based payments by recognizing compensation expense based upon the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. We determine the estimated grant-date fair value of restricted shares using the closing price on the date of the grant and the grant-date fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes-Merton model. In order to calculate the fair value of the options, certain assumptions are made regarding the components of the model, including risk-free interest rate, volatility, expected dividend yield and expected option life. Changes to the assumptions could cause significant adjustments to the valuation. We recognize compensation costs ratably over the period of service using the straight-line method. Forfeitures are estimated based on historical and forecasted turnover, which is approximately 5%.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily through our company-owned and managed clinics and through royalties, franchise fees, advertising fund contributions, IT related income and computer software fees from our franchisees.
Revenues from Company-Owned or Managed Clinics. We earn revenue from clinics that we own and operate or manage throughout the United States. In those states where we own and operate the clinic, revenues are recognized when services are performed. We offer a variety of membership and wellness packages which feature discounted pricing as compared with our single-visit pricing. Amounts collected in advance for membership and wellness packages are recorded as deferred revenue and recognized when the service is performed. Any unused visits associated with monthly memberships are recognized on a month-to-month basis. We recognize a contract liability (or a deferred revenue liability) related to the prepaid treatment plans for which we have an ongoing performance obligation. We recognize this contract liability, and recognize revenue, as the patient consumes his or her visits related to the package and we perform the services. Based on a historical lag analysis and an evaluation of legal obligation by jurisdiction, we concluded that any remaining contract liability that exists after 12 to 24 months from transaction date will be deemed breakage. Breakage revenue is recognized only at that point, when the likelihood of the patient exercising his or her remaining rights becomes remote.
Royalties and Advertising Fund Revenue. We collect royalties from our franchisees, as stipulated in the franchise agreement, equal to 7% of gross sales and a marketing and advertising fee currently equal to 2% of gross sales. Royalties, including franchisee contributions to advertising funds, are calculated as a percentage of clinic sales over the term of the franchise agreement. The franchise agreement royalties, inclusive of advertising fund contributions, represent sales-based royalties that are related entirely to our performance obligation under the franchise agreement and are recognized as franchisee clinic level sales occur. Royalties and marketing and advertising fees are collected bi-monthly two working days after each sales period has ended.
Franchise Fees. We require the entire non-refundable initial franchise fee to be paid upon execution of a franchise agreement, which typically has an initial term of ten years. Initial franchise fees are recognized ratably on a straight-line basis over the term of the franchise agreement. Our services under the franchise agreement include: training of franchisees and staff, site selection, construction/vendor management and ongoing operations support. We provide no financing to franchisees and offer no guarantees on their behalf. The services we provide are highly interrelated with the franchise license and as such are considered to represent a single performance obligation.
Software Fees. We collect a monthly fee from our franchisees for use of our proprietary or selected chiropractic or customer relationship management software, computer support, and internet services support. These fees are recognized ratably on a straight-line basis over the term of the respective franchise agreement.
Regional Developer Fees. During 2011, we established a regional developer program to engage independent contractors to assist in developing specified geographical regions. Under the original program, regional developers paid a license fee for each franchise they received the right to develop within the region. In 2018, the program was revised to grant exclusive geographical territory and establish a minimum development obligation within that defined territory. Regional developer fees are non-refundable and are recognized as revenue ratably on a straight-line basis over the term of the regional developer agreement, which is considered to begin upon the execution of the agreement. Our services under regional developer agreements include site selection, grand opening support for the clinics, sales support for identification of qualified franchisees, general operational support and marketing support to advertise for ownership opportunities. The services we provide are highly interrelated with the development of the territory and the resulting franchise licenses sold by the regional developer and as such are considered to
represent a single performance obligation. In addition, regional developers receive fees which are funded by the initial franchise fees collected from franchisees upon the sale of franchises within their exclusive geographical territory and a royalty of 3% of sales generated by franchised clinics in their exclusive geographical territory. Fees related to the sale of franchises within their exclusive geographical territory are initially deferred as deferred franchise costs and are recognized as an expense in franchise cost of revenues when the respective revenue is recognized, which is generally over the term of the related franchise agreement. Royalties of 3% of gross sales generated by franchised clinics in their regions are also recognized as franchise cost of revenues as franchisee clinic level sales occur, which is funded by the 7% royalties collected from the franchisees in their regions. Certain regional developer agreements result in the regional developer acquiring the rights to existing royalty streams from clinics already open in the respective territory. In those instances, the revenue associated from the sale of the royalty stream is recognized over the remaining life of the respective franchise agreements.
Leases
We adopted, effective the first quarter of 2019, accounting guidance related to leases. The guidance, among other changes, requires lessees to recognize a right-of-use ("ROU") asset and a lease liability in the balance sheet for most leases, but retains an expense recognition model similar to the previous guidance. The lease liability is measured at the present value of the fixed lease payments over the lease term and the ROU asset is measured at the lease liability amount, adjusted for lease prepayments, lease incentives received and the lessee’s initial direct costs. Determining the lease term and amount of lease payments to include in the calculation of the ROU asset and lease liability for leases containing options requires the use of judgment to determine whether the exercise of an option is reasonably certain and if the optional period and payments should be included in the calculation of the associated ROU asset and liability. In making this determination, all relevant economic factors are considered that would compel us to exercise or not exercise an option. When available, we use the rate implicit in the lease to discount lease payments; however, the rate implicit in the lease is not readily determinable for substantially all of our leases. In such cases, we estimate our incremental borrowing rate as the interest rate we would pay to borrow an amount equal to the lease payments over a similar term, with similar collateral as in the lease, and in a similar economic environment. We estimate these rates using available evidence such as rates imposed by third-party lenders in recent financings or observable risk-free interest rate and credit spreads for commercial debt of a similar duration, with credit spreads correlating to our estimated creditworthiness.
For operating leases that include rent holidays and rent escalation clauses, we recognize lease expense on a straight-line basis over the lease term from the date we take possession of the leased property. Pre-opening costs are recorded as incurred in general and administrative expenses. We record the straight-line lease expense and any contingent rent, if applicable, in general and administrative expenses on the consolidated income statements. Many of our leases also require us to pay real estate taxes, common area maintenance costs and other occupancy costs which are also included in general and administrative expenses on the consolidated income statements.
Income Taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for both the expected impact of differences between the financial statement amount and the tax basis of assets and liabilities and for the expected future tax benefit to be derived from tax losses and tax credit carryforwards.
We record a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets when it is considered more likely than not that all or a portion of our deferred tax assets will not be realized. In making this determination, we are required to give significant weight to evidence that can be objectively verified. It is generally difficult to conclude that a valuation allowance is not needed when there is significant negative evidence, such as cumulative losses in recent years. Forecasts of future taxable income are considered to be less objective than past results. Therefore, cumulative losses weigh heavily in the overall assessment.
In addition to considering forecasts of future taxable income, we are also required to evaluate and quantify other possible sources of taxable income in order to assess the realization of our deferred tax assets, namely the reversal of existing temporary differences, the carry back of losses and credits as allowed under current tax law, and the implementation of tax planning strategies. Evaluating and quantifying these amounts involves significant judgments. Each source of income must be evaluated based on all positive and negative evidence; this evaluation involves assumptions about future activity.
In 2019, we continued to maintain a full valuation allowance on the deferred tax assets due to the recent cumulative losses as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we recorded an income tax benefit of $7.8 million primarily due to the reduction in the valuation allowance. The valuation allowance was reduced because the weight of evidence regarding the future realizability of the deferred tax assets had become predominately positive and realization of the deferred tax assets was more likely than not. The positive evidence considered in our assessment of the realizability of the deferred tax assets included the
generation of significant positive cumulative income for the three-year period ended December 31, 2020 and projections of future taxable income. Based on our earnings performance trend and expected continued profitability, management determined it was more likely than not that all of our deferred tax assets would be realized. The negative evidence considered included historical loss in 2017, marginal pre-tax income generated in 2018, and general economic uncertainties related to the impact of the pandemic. However, management has concluded that positive evidence outweighed this negative evidence.
Significant judgment is also required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions. We establish accruals for uncertain tax positions when we believe that the full amount of the associated tax benefit may not be realized. If we prevail in matters for which accruals have been established previously or pay amounts in excess of reserves, there could be an effect on our income tax provisions in the period in which such determination is made.
We regularly assess the tax risk of our tax return filing positions and we have not identified any material uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial results encompasses our consolidated results and results of our two business segments: Corporate Clinics and Franchise Operations.
Total Revenues
Components of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, are as follows:
The reasons for the significant changes in our components of total revenues are as follows:
Consolidated Results
•Total revenues increased by $10.2 million, primarily due to the continued expansion and revenue growth of our franchise base and the continued revenue growth and expansion of our company owned or managed clinics portfolio, which was partially offset by the negative impact of the pandemic.
Corporate Clinics
•Revenues from company-owned or managed clinics increased, primarily due to improved same-store growth, as well as the expansion of our corporate-owned or managed clinics portfolio, which was partially offset by the negative impact of the pandemic.
Franchise Operations
•Royalty fees and advertising fund revenue increased, due to an increase in the number of franchised clinics in operation along with continued sales growth in existing franchised clinics. These increases were partially offset by the
sales decline in the existing franchised clinics due to the pandemic. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, there were 515 and 453 franchised clinics in operation, respectively.
•Franchise fees increased due to an increase in executed franchise agreements, as these fees are recognized ratably over the term of the respective franchise agreement. For the year ended December 31, 2020, there were executed franchise license sales or letters-of-intent for 121 franchise licenses, compared to 126 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
•Regional developer fees increased due to the sale of additional developer territories and the related revenue recognition over the life of the regional developer agreements. We entered into two new regional developer agreements in 2020 collectively covering five states and one new regional developer agreement in 2019 covering a number of counties in each of three states. Given the ratable recognition of the revenue, the agreements executed during the course of 2019 now have a full year of recognition in 2020.
•Software fees revenue increased due to an increase in our franchise clinic base and the related revenue recognition over the term of the franchise agreement as described above.
•Other revenues primarily consist of merchant income associated with credit card transactions.
Cost of Revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019, the total cost of revenues increased primarily due to an increase in regional developer royalties of $0.9 million, which is in line with an increase in franchise royalty revenues of 17%, coupled with a larger portion of our franchise base operating in regional developer territories.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses increased $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by an increase in advertising fund expenditures from a larger franchise base and increased local marketing expenditures by the company-owned or managed clinics.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the amortization of intangibles related to the 2019 acquisitions, coupled with depreciation expenses associated with the expansion of our corporate-owned or managed clinics portfolio in 2019.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in payroll and related expenses, as well as operating expenses to support continued clinic count and revenue growth in both operating segments. As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 62% and 63%, respectively. General and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue were relatively flat for the current year period primarily due to lower than anticipated revenue growth due to the pandemic, which was mostly offset by the revenue growth during the second half of 2020. Despite the negative impact of the pandemic on our pre-COVID-19 revenue growth expectations, we continued to operate our corporate clinics and headquarters without any furloughs or lay-offs while working to increase sanitary measures to ensure patient and employee safety.
Income from Operations
Consolidated Results
Consolidated income from operations increased by $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the improved operating income in both the corporate clinics and the franchise operations segments, partially offset by increased expenses in the unallocated corporate segment discussed below.
Corporate Clinics
Our corporate clinics segment had income from operations of $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.1 million compared to income from operations of $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to:
•An increase in revenues of $6.0 million from company-owned or managed clinics primarily due to improved same-store growth, as well as the expansion of our corporate-owned or managed clinics portfolio; partially offset by
•A $4.8 million increase in operating expenses primarily driven by: (i) an increase in payroll-related expenses due to a higher head count to support the expansion of our corporate clinic portfolio, (ii) an increase in depreciation and administration expense due to the amortization of intangibles related to the 2019 acquisitions, coupled with depreciation expenses associated with the expansion of our corporate-owned or managed clinics portfolio in 2019, and (iii) an increase in selling and marketing expenses due to increased local marketing expenditures by the company-owned or managed clinics.
Franchise Operations
Our franchise operations segment had income from operations of $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.6 million, compared to income from operations of $11.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to:
•An increase of $4.3 million in total revenues due to an increase in the number of franchised clinics in operation along with continued sales growth in existing franchised clinics; partially offset by
•An increase of $1.0 million in cost of revenues primarily due to (i) an increase in regional developer royalties and (ii) an increase of $1.7 million in operating expenses. The increase in operating expenses reflects the
increase in our franchise base, which resulted in (a) an increase in payroll-related expenses due to a higher head count, and (b) an increase in selling and marketing expenses.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the effective tax rates were (143.3)% and 1.4%, respectively. The fluctuation in the effective rate was primarily attributable to the reversal of the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets on December 31, 2020. In 2019, a full valuation allowance was established on all deferred tax assets due to historical losses in certain prior years and uncertainty about future earnings forecast. The valuation allowance was reduced in 2020 because the weight of evidence regarding the future realizability of the deferred tax assets had become predominately positive. Please see Note 9, “Income Taxes” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and short-term bank deposits of $20.6 million. We generated $11.2 million of cash flow from operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020. In February 2020, we executed a line of credit agreement, which provides a credit facility of up to $7.5 million, including a $2.0 million revolver and $5.5 million development line of credit. On March 18, 2020, we drew down $2.0 million under the credit agreement as a precautionary measure in order to further strengthen our cash position and provide financial flexibility in light of the uncertainty in the global markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, on April 10, 2020, we received a loan in the amount of approximately $2.7 million from JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). We will continue to preserve cash, and while we deferred the majority of our planned 2020 capital expenditures given the dynamic nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, our long-term goal and growth opportunities remain unchanged. We currently plan to resume the acquisition and development of company-owned or managed clinics in 2021 and beyond and to continue to progress towards our goal, targeting geographic clusters where we are able to increase efficiencies through a consolidated real estate penetration strategy, leveraged cooperative advertising and marketing and general corporate and administrative operating efficiencies.
In addition to $20.6 million of unrestricted cash on hand as of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity are expected to be cash flows from operations and proceeds from the credit facility, debt financings or equity issuances, and/or proceeds from the sale of assets. We expect our available cash and cash flows from operations and the credit facility to be sufficient to fund our short-term working capital requirements. In addition, we believe we will be able to fund future liquidity and capital requirements through cash flows generated from operating activities for a period of at least twelve months from the date our financial statements are issued. Our long-term capital requirements, primarily for acquisitions and other corporate initiatives, could be dependent on our ability to access additional funds through the debt and/or equity markets. From time to time, we consider and evaluate transactions related to our portfolio and capital structure, including debt financings, equity issuances, purchases and sales of assets, and other transactions. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the levels of our cash flows from operations for 2021 may be impacted. There can be no assurance that we will be able to generate sufficient cash flows or obtain the capital necessary to meet our short and long-term capital requirements.
Analysis of Cash Flows
Net cash provided by operating activities was $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to: (i) the collection of tenant leasehold improvement allowance of $0.7 million, (ii) an increase in revenue over the prior year period, (iii), impacts of cost containment initiatives, and (iv) the sale of two regional developer agreements for which we received approximately $0.5 million, which were partially offset by an increase in general and administrative expenses over the prior year period.
Net cash used in investing activities was $4.6 million and $7.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, this included acquisition of a business for $0.5 million, purchases
of property and equipment for $3.2 million, and reacquisition and termination of regional developer rights for $1.0 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, this included acquisitions of businesses for $3.1 million, purchases of property and equipment for $3.5 million, and reacquisition and termination of regional developer rights for $0.7 million.
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities was $5.6 million and $(0.6) million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, this included proceeds from: (i) the credit facility, net of related fees of $1.9 million, (ii) the loan under the CARES Act Paycheck Protection Program of $2.7 million, and (iii) the exercise of stock options of $1.0 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, this included proceeds from exercise of stock options of $0.5 million and repayments on notes payable of $1.1 million
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please see Note 1, “Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements that may impact our financial statements.
Contractual Obligations and Risk
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 and the effect that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.