Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Kairos Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on August 26, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses that we have not yet selected (“Business Combination”). We have not selected any specific business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, engaged in any substantive discussions directly or indirectly, with any business combination target with respect to an initial business combination with us.
Our Sponsor is Kairos Alpha Acquisition LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our registration statements for the initial public offering became effective on January 5, 2021. On January 8, 2020, we consummated our initial public offering of 24,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $240.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $13.3 million, inclusive of approximately $8.4 million in deferred underwriting commissions. Our underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full and on January 12, 2020, purchased an additional 3,600,000 units (the “Over-Allotment Units”), generating additional gross proceeds of $36.0 million (the “Over-Allotment”), and incurring additional offering costs of approximately $2.0 million, inclusive of approximately $1.3 million of deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 7,300,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds of approximately $7.3 million. In connection with the consummation of the sale of additional units pursuant to the underwriters’ over-allotment option on January 12, 2020, we sold an additional 720,000 private placement warrants to our Sponsor at $1.00 per private placement warrant generating additional gross proceeds of approximately $0.7 million received us on January 8, 2021.
Upon the closing of our initial public offering, the over-allotment, and the private placement, $276.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of our initial public offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement were placed in the trust account located in the United States, with Continental acting as trustee, and will be invested by the trustee only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a business combination.
If we are unable to complete a business combination by January 8, 2023 or an Extension Period thereafter, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to the Company’s obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, was in preparation for an Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest.
For the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $36,000, which consisted of general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $0.1 million in cash and a working capital deficit of approximately $0.2 million.
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2020 had been satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from our sponsor to cover for certain expenses on behalf of us in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, and a loan of approximately $280,000 pursuant to the Note issued to our Sponsor. Subsequent to the closing of our initial public offering and Over-Allotment, the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account will be used to satisfy our liquidity. We fully repaid the Note to our Sponsor on January 8, 2021. In addition, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor may, but is not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans (as defined below). To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan (as defined below).
Based on the foregoing, we believe that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On August 31, 2020, our sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain expenses on our behalf in exchange for issuance of 5,750,000 founder shares, or approximately $0.004 per share. The purchase price of the founder shares was determined by dividing the amount of cash contributed to the company by the number of founder shares issued. On September 10, 2020, HS Chronos purchased 3,287,412 founder shares from our sponsor for $14,293.10, or $0.004 per share. As of March 29, 2021, our initial shareholders own 25.7% of our issued and outstanding shares. In January 2021, we declared a share dividend satisfied by way of issuance of 0.2 of a share for each ordinary share, resulting in our sponsor holding an aggregate of 2,955,106 founder shares (up to 285,212 shares of which were subject to forfeiture depending on the extent to which the underwriters’ over-allotment option was exercised) and HS Chronos holding an aggregate of 3,944,894 founder shares (up to 614,788 shares of which were subject to forfeiture depending on the extent to which the underwriters’ over-allotment option was exercised). Our initial shareholders did not intend to purchase any units in our initial public offering. After the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full, no shares are subject to forfeiture.
The initial shareholders have agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their founder shares until the earlier to occur of: (i) one year after the completion of our initial business combination or (ii) the date following the completion of our initial business combination on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of the shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the closing price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 120 days after our initial business combination, the founder shares will be released from the lockup.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 7,300,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant with our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $7.3 million. In connection with the consummation of the sale of additional Units pursuant to the underwriters’ over-allotment option on January 12, 2020, we sold an additional 720,000 Units to the Sponsor at $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating additional gross proceeds of approximately $0.7 million received by us on January 8, 2021.
The private placement warrants are identical to the Public Warrants sold as part of the Units in our initial public offering, except that our Sponsor and HS Chronos have agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any of the private placement warrants (except to certain permitted transferees) until 30 days after the completion of our initial Business Combination. The private placement warrants are also not redeemable by us so long as they are held by our Sponsor and HS Chronos or their respective permitted transferees.
If we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the private placement warrants will expire worthless. The private placement warrants will be non-redeemable and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by our Sponsor or its permitted transferees.
Related Party Loans
On August 28, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan us up to $300,000 to be used for the payment of costs related to our initial public offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). The Note was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of June 30, 2021 or the completion of our initial public offering. We borrowed approximately $280,000 under the Note, and then fully repaid the Note on January 8, 2020.
In addition, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, other initial shareholders, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. To date, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Administrative Support Agreement
We agreed to pay our Sponsor a total of $20,000 per month, commencing on the effective date of our initial public offering, for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support, of which Mr. de St. Paer, the Company’s Chief Financial Officer, will be paid $10,000 per month.
Other Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of founder shares, private placement warrants, and securities that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, if any, are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company registers such securities. These holders will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company registers such securities. In addition, these holders will have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of our initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus to purchase up to 3,600,000 additional Units at our initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On January 12, 2020, the underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, excluding 1,980,000 units purchased by HS Chronos, or approximately $5.1 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of our initial public offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $9.7 million in the aggregate is payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay our sponsor a monthly fee of $20,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative and support services, of which Mr. de St. Paer, our Chief Financial Officer, is paid $10,000 per month. We began incurring these fees on January 5, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of our initial business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or approximately $9.7 million in the aggregate is payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.