ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is intended to provide readers of our consolidated financial statements with the perspectives of management. MD&A presents in narrative form information regarding our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results. This should allow the readers of this report to obtain a comprehensive understanding of our businesses, strategies, current trends and future prospects. MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes included in this Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
Kaman Corporation ("The Company") currently operates as a single segment that conducts business in the aerospace and defense, industrial and medical markets. The Company produces and markets proprietary aircraft bearings and components; super precision, miniature ball bearings; proprietary spring energized seals, springs and contacts; complex metallic and composite aerostructures for commercial, military and general aviation fixed and rotary wing aircraft; and safe and arming solutions for missile and bomb systems for the U.S. and allied militaries. The Company also manufactures and supports our K-MAX® manned and unmanned medium-to-heavy lift helicopters and restores, modifies and supports our SH-2G Super Seasprite maritime helicopters.
Our strategy is to continuously differentiate ourselves through leveraging innovation to drive organic growth and acquiring value by developing businesses and product lines, all focused around a best in class operations excellence model. We continue to focus on highly engineered parts, automation and best in class engineering and seek to design our technology and solutions into our customer’s products. This strategy requires a relentless focus on recruiting, developing, and retaining top talent, while deploying an operating model focused on continuous improvement. We strive to find the right balance in the markets we serve: aerospace and defense, commercial aviation, medical and industrial. Having a stronger diversified portfolio of businesses and products allows us leverage our broad capabilities and to make intelligent choices around our research and development expenditures. Fundamentally we will continue investing in those high value creating opportunities, which will drive stronger total shareholder returns and cash flow.
Executive Summary
In the year ended December 31, 2020, consolidated net sales from continuing operations increased by 3.0% to $784.5 million due to the contribution of $77.0 million in total sales from Bal Seal, partially offset by a 7.1% decrease in organic sales. Gross margin remained relatively flat at 31.3% compared to 31.6% in the prior year period. This performance was driven in part by a higher volume of sales from our lower margin structures programs and the mix of bearings products, mostly offset by the addition of the higher margin product portfolio at Bal Seal and the mix of joint programmable fuze ("JPF") sales. Absent the addition of selling, general and administrative expenses ("S,G&A") from Bal Seal and acquisition-related costs, S,G&A decreased, driven by lower employee-related costs as we began to realize the benefits of the workforce reductions implemented and lower costs as a result of the precautions taken by our employees and the restrictions imposed to limit the spread of COVID-19, including lower travel expenses and trade show costs and a decrease in group health costs due to the limited number of elective procedures being performed. In the third quarter, we recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $50.3 million due to a decline in earnings compared with forecasts used in prior periods for our Aerosystems reporting unit. The Company considered this decline, as well as the updated forecasts for the reporting unit, which indicated the forecasted cash flows for this reporting unit were lower than amounts previously forecasted. Additionally, a $36.3 million impairment charge was recorded associated with the anticipated sale of our United Kingdom ("UK") Composites business as the estimated fair value of the business based on the anticipated transaction was less than the book value of its assets. The impairment charges were the main drivers of the GAAP diluted loss per share from continuing operations of $2.54.
Other financial highlights
•Loss from continuing operations, net of tax was $70.4 million, a 224.8% decrease compared to the prior year. This decrease reflects the goodwill impairment charge and loss on the anticipated sale of our UK Composites business.
•Cash flows provided by operating activities of continuing operations were $16.5 million for 2020, a decrease of $26.0 million. This change was largely driven by lower net earnings.
•Total unfulfilled performance obligations ("backlog") decreased 21.8% to $631.2 million, mostly driven by deliveries under our JPF program and lower orders of bearings products as a result of the impact of the novel coronavirus ("COVID-19").
COVID-19 Discussion
The impact of COVID-19 and the precautionary measures instituted by governments and businesses to mitigate the spread, including limiting non-essential gatherings of people, ceasing all non-essential travel, ordering certain businesses and government agencies to cease non-essential operations at physical locations and issuing “shelter-in-place” orders, have contributed to a general slowdown in the global economy and significant volatility in financial markets, including a decrease in our stock price. We are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business and across the geographies in which we operate and serve customers, and we are working to assess the extent to which it will impact our customers, suppliers and other business partners.
Impact on our Business
Kaman is operating as an essential business in the United States and in most of the markets in which it operates around the world. While we did not incur significant disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, our structures facility in Mexico and joint venture in India were temporarily closed during the second quarter, due to mandates by their local governments. We have been able to largely offset the impacts of our Mexico facility temporary closure by satisfying our customer requirements out of our Jacksonville facility. We were also able to largely offset the impacts of our joint venture in India due to on-time deliveries before the business was required to halt production. Both facilities were open throughout the third and fourth quarters and continue to remain open through the date of this filing. During 2020, we implemented furloughs at two domestic businesses and two foreign businesses. The furloughs provided savings of $3.4 million in the current year. We also elected to eliminate certain open positions and implemented workforce reductions at the majority of our facilities, which are expected to provide annualized savings of $19.0 million. During the fourth quarter, we continued to evaluate our workforce in light of the impacts of COVID-19. Workforce reductions resulted in severance costs of $3.5 million in 2020. Additionally, while certain of our customers and suppliers have temporarily shut down operations, disruptions to our supply chain have been limited to date and we continue to meet the demands of our customers.
Despite our efforts to mitigate the risks associated with COVID-19, our operations continue to be adversely impacted, as approximately 50% of our 2020 sales were anticipated to be in commercial end markets, which were particularly impacted by the effects of the pandemic. Of total expected sales, approximately 30% was anticipated to be to commercial aerospace customers. Furthermore, direct and indirect sales to Boeing and Airbus were expected to account for approximately 40% of commercial aerospace sales. During the second quarter, we began to see order deferrals and cancellations resulting in declines in our commercial aerospace programs, which continued into the second half of 2020. More specifically, we have had lower sales of our commercial bearings products to Boeing and Airbus and decreases in our medical programs due to the limited number of elective procedures being performed. Our defense and safe and arm devices end markets have not been impacted by COVID-19 and we do not expect future declines due to COVID-19 on the results of these end markets.
Steps to Protect our Workforce
The health and safety of our employees, their families and communities, and our customers are our highest priorities. We have allocated significant resources to protect our workforce and attempt to reduce the impact of COVID-19 on our communities and our customers. To maintain employee productivity and minimize the risk of exposure while working, we have implemented policies and procedures to allow our employees to work with confidence knowing that their health and safety is a key priority.
Work-from-home guidelines and travel bans were implemented in March, and all employees who are able to work from home have been encouraged to do so for the foreseeable future to limit contact points and reduce the risk of exposure. To support a higher volume of employees working from home, we have upgraded our remote capabilities, and our human resources department has made training materials available on how to overcome the challenges of working from home.
For those on-site, we have implemented segregated workspaces to increase physical distancing within our facilities, improve the traceability of employee contacts, and limit risk of exposure while in the facility. We have also restricted free flow of employees throughout the factories and prevented non-essential employees and business associates from entering these facilities. We have developed detailed plans on how to respond quickly to an ill employee showing symptoms or a confirmed case within a facility. In addition, we implemented mandatory daily temperature checks for all persons entering our facilities. Face masks have been made available to all employees and are required in production facilities, those areas where required by law, and strongly encouraged in all other areas.
Resources are available to our employees via the Company's benefits website, which include the latest news on COVID-19, steps to prevent illness, resources for mental health, including coping with stress, supporting employees in a time of uncertainty and managing anxiety and stress, and resources for children and family activities.
Our senior management team meets regularly to review the status of our operations, including the health and safety of our employees, and the impact of COVID-19 on our customers, suppliers and communities. Our Board of Directors are updated regularly on the realized and expected impacts of COVID-19 and the Company's response to COVID-19, including steps to protect the workforce and cost-savings initiatives. A communications cadence has been developed to provide regular updates to our employees to keep them informed on what is happening within the organization, including risk identification and mitigation and relevant information and resources to support them during these challenging times. Additionally, the management team has benchmarked our efforts with peer companies to adopt best practices, improve our processes and share challenges that we are facing as we manage through the crisis. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impact on our business, our Chairman and former Chief Executive Officer voluntarily agreed to reduce his annual base salary by 20% for the balance of the year, and our non-employee directors agreed to temporarily reduce their quarterly cash retainer payments by 20% for the second and third fiscal quarters of 2020. In addition, the base salaries of our other executive officers were temporarily reduced by 15%, and the base salaries of our other U.S. based corporate officers and certain of our subsidiary senior management teams were temporarily reduced by 10% through the end of the third quarter of 2020.
Looking Ahead
Despite efforts to mitigate the risks associated with COVID-19, we expect our operations to continue to be adversely impacted through at least the first half of 2021. We continued to see order deferrals and cancellations resulting in declines in commercial aerospace products through the end of 2020. As the pandemic continues, we anticipate further challenges in our commercial and medical end markets. Our defense and safe and arm devices end markets have not been impacted by COVID-19 and we do not expect future declines due to COVID-19 on the results of these end markets. We look forward to improved performance in the second half of 2021; however, the extent to which COVID-19 may adversely impact the Company depends on future developments, which are highly uncertain and unpredictable at this time.
Refer to the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of the Management's Discussion and Analysis for information on the impact of COVID-19 on the liquidity of the Company and Item 1A, Risk Factors, for the Company’s risk factor(s) on the potential impacts of COVID-19 on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
Acquisitions and divestitures
•In December 2020, the Company committed to a plan to sell its UK Composites division and received approval from its Board of Directors. Subsequent to the end of the year, the transaction closed on February 2, 2021.
•In January 2020, we completed the acquisition of Bal Seal Engineering, Inc. ("Bal Seal") for a purchase price $317.5 million.
Awards and recognition
•In August 2020, Kaman Composites Vermont ("KCV"), a division of Kaman Corporation, was named Rotary and Mission Systems Elite Supplier by Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation.
Management changes
•In August 2020, Neal J. Keating announced his retirement as President and CEO of the Company and Ian K. Walsh was appointed President and CEO as of September 8, 2020. Mr. Keating will continue to serve as Executive Chairman through the date of the 2021 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, at which time he is expected to retire from the Board.
•Richard R. Barnhart, Executive Vice President of the Company and President of Kaman Aerospace Group, retired from the Company as of September 30, 2020.
•Gregory T. Troy, Senior Vice President - Human Resources & Chief Human Resources Officer, retired from the Company as of January 31, 2021. Megan A. Morgan was appointed Vice President - Human Resources and Chief Human Officer as of February 1, 2021.
•Russell J. Bartlett was appointed the Company's Chief Operating Officer, effective January 4, 2021
•Kristen M. Samson was appointed the Company's Chief Marketing Officer, effective January 18, 2021.
•In November 2020, the Board of Directors appointed Michelle J. Lohmeier and Aisha M. Barry as directors, effective immediately. The appointments increase the size of the Board to eleven directors.
Other key events
•In January 2021, the Agencia Nacional de Aviação Civil ("ANAC") in Brazil issued the Type Certificate for the Kaman K-1200 K-MAX® helicopter. We have been marketing the K-MAX® helicopter to various Brazilian operators, power line, oil and gas firms, and engineering companies over the past two years, and this certification clears the path for K-MAX® operations in Brazil.
•In September 2020, we received a follow-on order for Lots 17 and 18 of our current Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile contract with Lockheed Martin Corporation. The order has an expected value of approximately $10.6 million with performance beginning in 2021 through 2023.
•In August 2020, we received an order under Option 15 of our JPF contract with the USG. This order has an expected value of approximately $57.3 million for the procurement of JPFs for 25 foreign militaries.
•In August 2020, KCV entered into a new Long Term Agreement ("LTA") with a major engine original equipment manufacturer to manufacture components for both existing production and newly developed engine programs. The LTA has a potential value of $118 million and initial deliveries are expected in the second half of 2021.
•In May 2020, the United States Forest Service awarded Kaman Air Vehicles 40% of all Type 1, large helicopters exclusive use contracts, to K-MAX® helicopter operators. These four-year contracts ensure immediate resources are available when the need for firefighting arises.
•In March 2020, as we evaluated the uncertainty associated with the COVID-19 outbreak, we elected to borrow $200 million under our $800 million revolving credit facility. We have since repaid these borrowings in full.
•In 2020, we identified workforce reductions to be completed in 2020 as part of our comprehensive review of our general and administrative functions in order to improve operational efficiency and to align the Company's costs with its revenues. The workforce reductions are expected to provide annualized cost savings of approximately $13.2 million.
•In February 2020, Kaman Air Vehicles entered into a strategic distribution agreement with Trust International Group. This reseller agreement provides Trust International with exclusive rights to market the K-MAX® medium-to-heavy lift helicopter and its spare parts in the United Arab Emirates.
RESULTS FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS
During the third quarter of 2019, we completed the sale of our Distribution business for total cash consideration of $700.0 million, excluding certain working capital adjustments. As a result of the sale, the Distribution business results met the criteria for the presentation of discontinued operations. The results presented below represent the results of continuing operations. See Note 2, Discontinued Operations and Liabilities Held for Sale, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K for further details.
Refer to Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 for a discussion of the change in results of continuing operations from the earliest year presented.
Net Sales from Continuing Operations
Net sales for 2020 increased when compared to 2019, primarily due to the contribution of $77.0 million of sales from our Bal Seal acquisition. This increase was partially offset by a 7.1% decrease in organic sales, driven by lower sales of $63.2 million in our commercial, business and general aviation programs, $6.5 million in our medical and industrial and other commercial programs and $5.0 million in our defense programs, partially offset by an increase in sales of $20.6 million on our safe and arm device programs. Foreign currency exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact of $1.8 million on net sales.
The decrease in sales under our commercial, business and general aviation programs were primarily attributable to lower sales volume of our commercial bearings products, driven by lower sales to Boeing and Airbus due to the impacts of COVID-19, lower sales under certain structures programs and the K-MAX® program. These decreases, totaling $70.7 million, were partially offset by higher sales on our Boeing Wing-to-Body Fairing program and Bell Commercial helicopter program.
The decrease in sales under our defense programs, excluding safe and arm devices was primarily attributable to the absence of sales under our SH-2G program for Peru, a decrease in sales under the AH-1Z program and a certain structures program, and lower sales volume of spares for the SH-2 program with New Zealand. These decreases, totaling $24.2 million, were partially offset by higher sales volume of our defense bearings products and an increase in sales on the Combat Rescue Helicopter program.
Sales under our medical and industrial and other commercial programs decreased when compared to the corresponding period in 2019. This was attributable to lower sales volume of our bearings products and decreases in sales under our imaging program and measuring programs.
The increase in sales under our safe and arm device product programs was primarily attributable to higher direct commercial sales of our JPF to foreign militaries and an increase in sales on our MK54 fuzing program, partially offset by lower sales under our JPF program with the USG.
Gross Profit from Continuing Operations
Gross profit for 2020 increased when compared to 2019. This was primarily attributable to higher direct commercial sales of our JPF to foreign militaries, higher sales and associated gross profit on defense bearings products and the contribution of $29.1 million in gross profit from our Bal Seal acquisition. These increases, totaling $62.4 million, were partially offset by lower sales and associated gross profit on our commercials bearings products, our JPF program with the USG and certain structures programs.
Selling, General & Administrative Expenses (S,G&A) from Continuing Operations
The increase in S,G&A expenses for 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to $36.6 million in additional S,G&A from our Bal Seal acquisition, which includes $11.1 million of intangible amortization expense associated with the purchase accounting for the acquisition. Additionally, we incurred $10.8 million of nonrecurring costs in the period, which consisted of $8.5 million of Bal Seal acquisition costs and $2.3 million in third party costs associated with our efforts to reduce general and administrative expenses.These increases were partially offset by lower organic S,G&A driven by a decrease in employee-related costs, including lower incentive compensation costs and lower salary and wage expenses as a result of the workforce reductions implemented to support our cost savings initiative, a decrease in group health costs due to the limited number of elective procedures being performed as a result of COVID-19, and a decrease in travel expenses and trade show costs due to restrictions imposed to limit the spread of COVID-19.
Costs from Transition Services Agreement
Upon closing the sale of the Distribution business, the Company entered into a transition services agreement ("TSA") with the buyer, pursuant to which the Company agreed to support the information technology, human resources and benefits, tax and treasury functions of the Distribution business for six to twelve months. The buyer had the option to extend the support period for up to an additional year for certain services. The buyer exercised the option to extend the support period for up to a maximum of an additional year for certain information technology services. The buyer has the right to terminate individual services at any point over the renewal term and began to terminate certain services during the third quarter of 2020. All services are expected to be terminated by the end of the first quarter of 2021. The Company incurred $12.5 million and $4.7 million in costs associated with the TSA in the years ending December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. These costs are partially offset by $8.4 million and $3.7 million in income earned from the TSA included in income from transition services agreement, which is below operating income on the Company's Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Cost of Acquired Retention Plans
Bal Seal's previous owner implemented employee retention plans prior to our acquisition in the first quarter of 2020. Upon closing, we funded $24.7 million of the purchase price into escrow accounts associated with these employee retention plans. Eligible participants received an allocation of the escrow balances one year following the acquisition date. Upon acquisition, Bal Seal had $1.9 million in costs accrued for these employee retention plans; therefore, we incurred $22.8 million in compensation expense associated with these retention plans in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Goodwill and Other Intangibles Impairment
During the third quarter of 2020, we identified a triggering event for possible impairment of our Aerosystems reporting unit based on a decline in earnings compared to forecasts used in prior periods and projections, which indicated the projected cash flows for this reporting unit were lower than amounts previously forecasted. We performed a quantitative analysis on the Aerosystems reporting unit using an income methodology based on management's estimates of forecasted cash flows, with those cash flows discounted to present value using rates commensurate with the risks associated with those cash flows. In addition, management used a market-based valuation method involving analysis of market multiples of revenues and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("EBITDA") for (i) a group of comparable companies and (ii) recent transactions, if any, involving comparable companies. The quantitative analysis resulted in a conclusion that the fair value of the Aerosystems reporting unit was $56.1 million below its carrying value; therefore, goodwill was impaired. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $50.3 million for the Aerosystems reporting unit, which represented the entire goodwill balance for the reporting unit.
In 2018, we identified a triggering event for possible impairment of long-lived intangible assets at a certain asset group within the Company's United Kingdom ("UK") business based on an analysis of historical performance, the current forecast for the remainder of the year and the loss of future orders from one of its customers. We performed a recoverability test by comparing the undiscounted cash flows of the asset group to its carrying value, and the estimated future cash flows of the business did not exceed the carrying value of the assets. Based on these results, we calculated the fair value of the asset group using an income approach, which resulted in an impairment charge of $10.0 million, or the remaining balance of the customer lists/relationships at a certain asset group within the U.K. business.
Impairment of Assets Held for Sale
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company committed to a plan and received approval from its Board of Directors to sell its UK Composites division. At December 31, 2020, the assets of the UK Composites business were considered impaired as the estimated fair value of the disposal group was lower than the estimated carrying value of the UK Composites business. As a result, $24.3 million in assets were written off and the remaining loss related to the anticipated sale of the disposal group of $12.0 million was accrued for in liabilities held for sale, current portion on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets, resulting in a total loss of $36.3 million recorded to impairment on assets held for sale on the Company's Consolidated Statements of Operations in the year ended December 31, 2020. Of this amount, $22.9 million relates to the cumulative translation adjustment balance for the UK Composites division. Subsequent to the end of the year, the transaction closed on February 2, 2021.
Restructuring Costs from Continuing Operations
Following the sale of our former distribution business, we announced that we would undertake a comprehensive review of our general and administrative functions in order to improve operational efficiency and to align our costs with our revenues. We identified information technology functions to be outsourced, workforce reductions and other reductions in certain general and administrative expenses to be completed in 2020 to support the cost savings initiative. These actions resulted in $4.0 million in severance costs in the year ended December 31, 2020, and are expected to provide annualized cost savings of approximately $13.2 million, contributing to total annualized cost savings of approximately $18.2 million since the announcement of the cost savings initiative. In 2019, the Company's corporate office incurred $0.9 million in associated severance expense.
In addition to the severance costs associated with the cost savings initiative discussed above, we incurred $0.5 million in severance costs as we integrated the acquisition of Bal Seal in year ended December 31, 2020. This action is expected to provide annual cost savings of approximately $1.2 million.
During the second quarter of 2020, the Company implemented workforce reductions, including temporary furloughs, and elected to eliminate certain open positions as a response to the unprecedented hardships brought on by COVID-19. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded severance costs of $3.5 million related to workforce reductions, which were included in restructuring costs on the Company's Consolidated Statements of Operations. These actions are expected to provide annualized cost savings of approximately $19.0 million.
During the third quarter of 2017, we announced restructuring activities at certain businesses to support the ongoing effort of improving capacity utilization and operating efficiency to better position the Company for increased profitability and growth. Such actions included workforce reductions and the consolidation of operations, with the majority completed by the end of 2019. In the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recorded $0.3 million, $0.6 million, and $6.0 million, respectively, in costs associated with the restructuring activities.
In 2018, we incurred $1.4 million in other non-related restructuring costs associated with the termination of certain distributor agreements and separation costs associated with certain employees not included in restructuring activities discussed above.
(Gain) Loss on Sale of Business
During 2018, we sold our U.K. Tooling business. This sale did not qualify for the reporting of discontinued operations within the consolidated financial statements. In the year ended December 31, 2018, we incurred a loss of $5.7 million associated with the sale. Of this amount, $1.7 million related to the foreign currency translation reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) to net income. In the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company incurred an additional loss of $3.7 million associated with the write-off of note receivables recorded for the remaining amounts to be collected on the sale of the UK Tooling business as this balance was deemed not likely to be collected. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we collected $0.5 million of the note receivables written off in 2019.
Operating (Loss) Income from Continuing Operations
We had an operating loss of $84.3 in 2020, compared to operating income of $53.4 in 2019. This change was primarily attributable to the goodwill impairment charge associated with the Aerosystems reporting unit recorded in the third quarter, the impairment loss on the anticipated sale of the UK Composites business, costs incurred related to the TSA, an increase in restructuring costs and costs associated with the purchase accounting for the Bal Seal acquisition as discussed above. These changes were partially offset by increases in gross profit on certain programs as discussed above and the contribution of gross profit from Bal Seal.
Interest Expense, Net from Continuing Operations
Interest expense, net generally consists of interest charged on our Credit Agreement, which includes a revolving credit facility and a term loan under our previously existing credit facility, and our convertible notes and the amortization of debt issuance
costs, offset by interest income. The increase in interest expense, net for 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to lower interest income earned on marketable securities and higher average borrowings in the current period, partially offset by the absence of interest expense associated with our previous term loan facility.
Effective Income Tax Rate from Continuing Operations
The effective tax rate represents the combined federal, state and foreign tax effects attributable to pretax earnings for the year. The comparison of the effective tax rate from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 to the corresponding rate in the prior period was impacted by the pretax loss in the current period. The rate was unfavorably impacted by the impairment charge on the UK Composites business as a result of the anticipated sale, for which no associated tax benefit was recognized in the current period. Due to an entity classification election in 2019 related to the investment in the Company's UK business, which had the effect of treating the subsidiary as a disregarded entity for U.S. tax purposes, a loss was recorded resulting in a significant tax benefit recognized by the Company in 2019. Additionally, the Company recognized additional benefits from research and development credits relating to research completed in the three prior years. See Note 16, Income Taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K for further details.
Backlog
Backlog decreased from 2019 to 2020, primarily driven by revenue recognized for deliveries of direct commercial JPF orders and sales outpacing orders of bearings products as a result of the impacts of COVID-19.
Other Matters
Information regarding our various environmental remediation activities and associated accruals can be found in Note 19, Commitments and Contingencies, and Note 13, Environmental Costs, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Long-Term Contracts
For long-term contracts, we generally recognize sales and cost of sales over time because of continuous transfer of control to the customer, which allows for recognition of revenue as work on a contract progresses. For those programs for which there is a continuous transfer of control to the customer, we recognize sales and profit on a cost-to-cost basis, in which case sales and profit are recorded based upon the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs to complete the contract. Conversely, revenue on certain programs, such as the K-MAX® program and on direct commercial sales under our JPF program, is recognized at a point in time, with revenue being recognized upon transfer to the end customer. See Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K for additional information regarding the effects of adjustments in profit estimates on long-term contracts for which revenue is recognized over time.
Major Programs/Product Lines
Defense Markets
A-10
In 2019, the USAF awarded Boeing a contract to provide up to 112 new wing assemblies and up to 15 wing kits through 2030 and we announced that we had been awarded a contract by Boeing to manufacture wing control surfaces and structural assemblies in support of the USAF's A-10 Thunderbolt Advanced Wing Continuation Kitting ("ATTACK") program. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our program backlog was $35.7 million and $36.5 million, respectively.
Bearings
Our bearings products are included on numerous military platforms manufactured in North America, South America, Asia and Europe. These products are used as original equipment and/or specified as replacement parts by the manufacturers. The most significant portion of our military bearings sales is derived from U.S. military platforms, such as the AH-64 helicopter, Virginia Class submarine and Joint Strike Fighter aircraft, and sales in Europe for the Typhoon program. These products are primarily proprietary self-lubricating, ball and roller bearings for aircraft flight controls, turbine engines and landing gear, and helicopter driveline couplings.
BLACK HAWK
The Sikorsky BLACK HAWK helicopter cockpit program involves the manufacture of cockpits, including the installation of all wiring harnesses, hydraulic assemblies, control pedals and sticks, seat tracks, pneumatic lines and the composite structure that holds the windscreen for most models of the BLACK HAWK helicopter. We delivered 53 cockpits in 2020 as compared to the 66 cockpits delivered in 2019. In July 2017, we announced that we had entered into a new multi-year contract with Sikorsky to manufacture H-60 cockpits under the Department of Defense MY IX H-60 procurement authorization. The term of the agreement is five years, beginning in 2018 and ending in 2022. Included in backlog at December 31, 2020 and 2019, was $47.0 million and $53.0 million, respectively, for orders on this program. We anticipate cockpit deliveries to total 67 in 2021.
AH-1Z
We manufacture sheet metal details and subassemblies for the increased capability AH-1Z attack helicopter, which is produced by Bell Helicopter for the U.S. Marine Corps. We are on contract through Lot 16 and are currently negotiating Lots 17 and 18. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our backlog for this program was $11.2 million and $17.6 million, respectively.
FMU-152 A/B - Joint Programmable Fuze
We manufacture the JPF, an electromechanical bomb safe and arming device, which allows the settings of a weapon to be programmed in flight. Sales of these fuzes can be direct to the USAF, Foreign Military Sales ("FMS") through the USG and DCS to foreign militaries that, although not funded by the USG, require regulatory approvals from the USG.
A total of 48,749 fuzes were delivered in 2020. We expect to deliver 30,000 to 35,000 fuzes in 2021. Total JPF backlog at December 31, 2020 was $214.7 million. Of this amount, JPF backlog that requires future export approvals, licenses or authorizations from the USG allowing for the sale of these products outside of the United States was not material. The receipt of export approvals, licenses or authorizations are subject to political and geopolitical conditions which could impact the timing and/or our ability to sell these products outside of the United States. Given the change in Administration, there can be no assurance that backlog with appropriate approvals will be recognized due to potential future policies to cease shipments to certain countries. Total JPF backlog at December 31, 2019 was $356.8 million.
JPF - USG
Revenue for JPF USG programs is recognized over time when costs are incurred as work progresses on the program. The Company currently provides the FMU-152 A/B to the USAF, but the U.S. Navy currently utilizes a different fuze - the FMU-139. In 2015, NAVAIR solicited proposals for a firm fixed price production contract to implement improvements to the performance characteristics of the FMU-139 (such improved fuze having been designated the FMU-139 D/B), and, the USAF had stated that, if and when a contract is awarded and production begins, the funds associated with the FMU-152 A/B will be redirected to the FMU-139 D/B. During the third quarter of 2015, the U.S. Navy announced that a competitor was awarded the contract for the FMU-139 D/B. In the event the FMU-139 D/B program proceeds as planned and the USAF redirects the funds associated with the FMU-152 A/B to the FMU-139 D/B, our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows may be materially adversely impacted. During the third quarter of 2019, our competitor announced that it received its first production order from the U.S. Navy to manufacture the FMU-139 D/B. Due to the complexity of this program and the pending status of the USAF's final decision to redirect funds to the FMU-139 D/B, the timing and magnitude of the impact on the Company's financial statements are not certain; however, the Company continues to see demand for the FMU-152 A/B. In 2020, we have continued to satisfy the requirements for orders for both the USAF and foreign militaries under Option 14, which has a total value of approximately $121.4 million. During the third quarter of 2020, we completed our pricing negotiations for Options 15 and 16 with the USG and we received an order under Option 15 with an expected value of approximately $57.3 million for the procurement of fuzes for 25 foreign militaries. We expect future orders under Option 16 to extend FMU-152 A/B deliveries into 2023. Refer to Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this Form 10-K for further details on the risks associated with our JPF-USG program.
JPF - DCS
Revenue for DCS programs is generally recognized at the point in time when control is transferred to the customer. The Company continues to see strong demand for DCS fuzes. During 2019, we were awarded two DCS contracts totaling approximately $90.0 million. During 2018, we were awarded a DCS contract totaling approximately $324.0 million, of which $307.5 million was included in backlog. The remaining $16.5 million relates to potential penalties payable to the customer in the event the offset requirements of the contract are not met, which remained excluded from backlog at December 31, 2020. This agreement is designed to return economic value to the foreign country by requiring us to engage in activities supporting local defense or commercial industries, promoting a balance of trade, developing in-country technology capabilities or addressing other local development priorities. The offset agreement may be satisfied through activities that do not require a direct cash payment, including transferring technology, providing manufacturing, training and other consulting support to in-country projects and the purchase by third parties of supplies from in-country vendors. This agreement may also be satisfied through the Company's use of cash for activities, such as subcontracting with local partners, purchasing supplies from in-country vendors, providing financial support for in-country projects and making investments in local ventures. The offset requirements associated with this contract could extend for several years and have a notional value of approximately $194.0 million, which is equal to sixty percent of the total contract value as defined by the agreement with the customer. The amount ultimately applied against the offset agreement is based on negotiations with the customer and may require cash outlays that represent only a fraction of the notional value in the offset agreement. The Company continues to work with the customer to further define the requirements to satisfy the offset agreement. The satisfaction of the offset requirements will be determined by the customer and is expected to occur over a seven-year period. Additionally, this contract provides for potential penalties payable to the customer of up to 10% of the total contract value in the event that we default on the contract and we are unable to fulfill our contractual commitments.
Direct commercial sales are primarily concentrated with two Middle Eastern customers. Sales to these customers require export approvals, licenses and other authorizations from the USG and given the recent change in Administration and the current composition of the U.S. Congress, there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain the necessary approvals, licenses and authorizations. In the event that we are unable to obtain the regulatory approvals, licenses or other authorizations needed to effectuate sales to these Middle Eastern customers, our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows would be adversely impacted. Refer to Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this Form 10-K for further details on the risks associated with our DCS contracts.
Commercial Markets
K-MAX®
During 2015, we announced that we were resuming production of commercial K-MAX® aircraft. The aircraft are being manufactured at our Jacksonville, Florida and Bloomfield, Connecticut facilities. The first fifteen helicopters from the reopened commercial production line were accepted by our customers through December 2020. During 2019, we announced that we are developing the next generation K-MAX® unmanned aircraft system that will allow operators to have the capability to fly either manned or unmanned missions. We expect to offer unmanned system kits for new production and existing aircraft in 2022. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our backlog for this program was $20.9 million and $13.1 million, respectively.
777 / 767
In 2019, we signed a multi-year follow-on contract with Boeing for the production of fixed trailing edge ("FTE") assemblies for the Boeing 777 and 767 commercial aircraft. Annual quantities will vary, as they are dependent upon the orders Boeing receives from its customers. To date, Kaman has provided approximately 1,435 FTE kits and assemblies for each of the 777 and 767 programs since 1995 and 1986, respectively. During 2020, on average, we delivered two and one-half shipsets per month on the Boeing 777 platform and two and one-half shipsets per month on the Boeing 767 platform, which includes one shipset per month associated with a military tanker derivative of the 767. For 2021, we estimate deliveries on the 777 program to be one and one-half shipsets per month and on the 767 program to be three shipsets per month which includes one shipset per month associated with a military tanker derivative of the 767. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our backlog for these programs was $28.7 million and $25.8 million, respectively.
On February 21, 2021, Boeing recommended grounding active Boeing 777 aircraft equipped with a particular engine model following an engine failure. In the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue associated with the Boeing 777 aircraft was approximately 1% of total sales.
Bearings
Our bearings products are included on commercial airliners and regional/business jets manufactured in North and South America, Europe and Asia and are used as original equipment and/or specified as replacement parts by airlines and aircraft manufacturers. These products are primarily proprietary self-lubricating, ball and roller bearings for aircraft flight controls, turbine engines, landing gear and helicopter driveline couplings. The most significant portion of our commercial sales is derived from Boeing, Airbus and Bombardier platforms, such as the Boeing 737, 747, 777 and 787, the Airbus A320, A330, A350 and A380, and the Bombardier Global 7500. Additionally, our bearings offerings include super precision miniature ball bearings used primarily in aerospace applications, dental products, surgical power tools, analytical devices and various industrial applications. Our commercial bearings products were particularly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect recovery in sales related to single-aisle aircraft to occur over the next three years, while the recovery for sales related to twin-aisle aircraft to be more gradual over the next decade.
In the first quarter of 2019, the Federal Aviation Administration ("FAA") issued an order to suspend all 737 MAX aircraft in the U.S. and by U.S. aircraft operators following two fatal 737 MAX accidents. Boeing suspended deliveries until the FAA and other civil aviation authorities worldwide granted the clearance to return the aircraft to service. In November 2020, the FAA lifted the orders to suspend operations of the Boeing 737 MAX and in early 2021, airlines around the globe have begun to clear the Boeing 737 MAX for flying. In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $5.6 million and $19.9 million in revenue associated with the sale of our products that are utilized on the 737 MAX aircraft fleet. Any future reductions in the production rate or lower than anticipated production levels than previously anticipated could have an adverse impact on our financial position, results of operations and/or cash flows.
Springs, Seals and Contacts
Our precision springs, seals and contacts are used in the medical technology, aerospace and defense and industrial end markets. These products improve the performance and reliability of components in high cost of failure environments, such as powered surgical tools, orthopedic implants, pumps, monitors, active implantables and other critical medical equipment. These offerings are also used within radar systems, fuel pumps, hydraulics, navigation systems, motors and robotics.
Learjet 85
In 2010, our U.K. Composites operation was awarded a contract to manufacture composite passenger entry and over-wing exit doors for the Learjet 85, a mid-sized business jet built primarily from composites and featuring advances in aerodynamics, structures and efficiency; however, in October 2015, Bombardier Inc. announced the cancellation of its Learjet 85 business aircraft program. At December 31, 2020, our net balance sheet exposure on the program was $3.2 million. During 2016, we filed suit against our customer to recover this amount. Although we expect to recover the full amount of our claim, there can be no assurance that we will prevail in the litigation.
For a discussion of other matters, see Note 19, Commitments and Contingencies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Discussion and Analysis of Cash Flows
We assess liquidity in terms of our ability to generate cash to fund working capital requirements and investing and financing activities. Significant factors affecting liquidity include: cash flows generated from or used by operating activities, capital expenditures, investments in our business and its programs, acquisitions, divestitures, dividends, availability of future credit, adequacy of available bank lines of credit and factors that might otherwise affect the Company's business and operations generally, as described under the heading “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” in Item 1A of Part I of this Form 10-K.
COVID-19
We anticipate that the disruptions and delays resulting from the spread of COVID-19 and the measures instituted by governments and businesses to mitigate its spread will impact our liquidity in the next twelve months. In consideration of the potential future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, we borrowed approximately $200.0 million under our Credit Agreement in the first quarter of 2020 to provide additional financing flexibility and readily accessible liquidity. The proceeds from the borrowing were available for working capital adjustments, ongoing operating needs and general corporate
purposes. In the third quarter, we paid down $100.0 million of the $200.0 million we had borrowed under our Credit Agreement and in the fourth quarter we paid down the remaining $100.0 million. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $104.4 million of cash on our Consolidated Balance Sheet, excluding any restricted cash. We are closely managing our daily cash flows to optimize our liquidity position. We also continue to closely monitor the collectability of our receivables from commercial aerospace customers as we recognize there may be delays in payments due to the impacts of COVID-19 on our customers. As of the date of this filing, we do not believe there has been any material impact on the collectability of these receivables. In addition to the daily reviews of collections and payables, management meets with our business units on a regular basis to review liquidity.
During 2020, the Company reduced hiring activities, limited discretionary spending and implemented workforce reductions and the aforementioned temporary salary reductions amongst senior management and the Board. We evaluated our capital investment projects and reduced spending for the year. Despite the impacts of COVID-19, we did continue to pay our regular quarterly dividend during 2020 and also contributed $10.0 million to our pension plan. As of the date of this filing, we believe the Company has adequate liquidity due to the cash we have on hand, the bank financing we have available to us and the other actions we have taken to enhance financial flexibility and reduce the potential impact of the pandemic on the Company.
A summary of our consolidated cash flows from continuing operations is as follows:
(1) Free Cash Flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, is defined as net cash provided by operating activities less expenditures for property plant and equipment, both of which are presented in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. See Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Non-GAAP Financial Measures, in this Form 10-K.
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased in 2020 compared to 2019. This change was largely driven by lower net earnings, contributions to the pension plan and lower accounts payable, partially offset by higher working capital requirements on the JPF DCS program and the K-MAX® program in the prior year. Our cash flows for 2020 were also impacted by the delay in the collection of a significant JPF DCS receivable which was expected in the fourth quarter of 2020 and has now pushed into 2021.
Net cash used in investing activities was $318.7 million in 2020, compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $628.3 million in 2019. This change was primarily attributable to cash used to acquire Bal Seal in the current period versus proceeds received from the sale of the Distribution business in the prior period.
Net cash used in financing activities decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to lower net repayments of our credit facility and a decrease in purchases of treasury shares, partially offset by lower proceeds from the exercise of employee stock awards.
Refer to Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 for a discussion of the change in cash flows from the earliest year presented.
Material Cash Commitments
The Company considers its material contractual obligations when assessing its liquidity.
Debt and Related Interest Payments
We rely on debt financing as a source of liquidity for our business activities, including both convertible notes and our revolving credit facility. Under the convertible notes, $199.5 million of principal liability is due in 2024. No amounts were outstanding under the revolving credit agreement at December 31, 2020. The Company is contractually obligated to make interest payments on our debt, which are estimated to be $56.8 million as of December 31, 2020, of which $14.1 million will be paid within one year. Interest payments on debt are calculated based on the applicable rate and payment dates for each instrument. For variable-rate instruments, interest rates and payment dates are based on management’s estimate of the most likely scenarios for each relevant debt instrument. For further information on debt and the related interest payments, refer to Financing Arrangement discussed below and Note 14, Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Leasing
Future rental payments for operating and financing leases total $14.6 million and $6.5 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2020. For further information on leasing obligations, including the timing of these payments, refer to Note 20, Leases, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Purchase Obligations
The Company has entered into purchase commitments with suppliers for materials and supplies as part of the ordinary course of business, consulting arrangements and support services. Obligations of at least $50,000 total $200.8 million as of December 31, 2020, of which $154.2 million will be paid within one year. Included within these amounts is $0.3 million of purchase obligations which will not be paid by the Company in 2021 due to the sale of the UK Composites business on February 2, 2021.
Transition Services Agreement
We entered into a transition services agreement upon the closing the sale of the Company's Distribution business. We agreed to support the information technology, human resources and benefits, tax and treasury functions of the Distribution business for six to twelve months from the date of sale. The buyer has exercised the option to extend the support period for up to a maximum of an additional year for certain IT services. The buyer has the right to terminate individual services at any point over the renewal term and began to terminate certain services in 2020. All services are expected to be terminated by the end of the first quarter of 2021. We expect to incur $0.7 million in costs under our transition services agreement within the next year. For further information on the TSA, refer to Note 2, Discontinued Operations and Liabilities Held for Sale, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Additionally, upon closing of the sale of the Distribution business, the Company entered into separate trademark, trade name and domain license agreements with certain licensees. Under each such agreement, the Company granted the licensee a non-exclusive, royalty-free license to use certain registered service marks, common law service marks, trade names and domain names owned by the Company for a period of five years after the closing date, subject to the licensee's agreement to use commercially reasonable efforts to phase its use of such service marks and domain names as soon as it is reasonably practicable prior to the expiration of the term. These agreements, and the licenses granted therein, apply only within North America.
Retention Payments
Upon closing the acquisition of Bal Seal, the Company funded $24.7 million associated with employee retention plans into escrow accounts. This amount and related interest was included in restricted cash on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2020. Eligible participants received an allocation of the escrow balance in January 2021.
Other
Our other long-term obligations, which include obligations under the Company's long-term incentive plan, deferred compensation plan, environmental liabilities, acquisition holdbacks and unrecognized tax benefits, total $52.6 million at December 31, 2020, of which $15.8 million will be paid within one year. For further information on these obligations refer to Note 13, Environmental Costs; Note 16, Income Taxes; Note 18, Other Long-Term Liabilities; and Note 19, Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During 2020, the Company and the USG entered into a Guaranty Agreement, pursuant to which the Company agreed to guarantee the full, complete and satisfactory performance of its subsidiary, Kaman Precision Products, Inc. ("KPPI") under all current and future contracts with the USG. As of the date of this filing, the only contract in place between KPPI and the USG relates to the production and sale of the JPF. KPPI is currently fulfilling the requirements of Option 14 and has completed pricing negotiations on Options 15 and 16. The guarantee was provided in lieu of a periodic financial capability review by the Financial Capacity Team ("FCT") of the Defense Contract Management Agency ("DCMA"). The Company is unable to estimate the maximum potential amount of future payments under the guarantee as it is dependent on costs incurred by the USG in the event of default. Although the Company believes the risk of default is low given the maturity and operational performance of the JPF program, there can be no assurance that the guarantee will not have a material adverse effect on the Company's results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no significant off-balance sheet arrangements other than purchase obligations, the guarantee discussed above and $165.4 million of outstanding standby letters of credit, all of which were under the revolving credit facility. Of this amount, $146.2 million letters of credit relate to a JPF DCS contract.
In addition to the impacts of COVID-19, our working capital requirements and the material cash commitments discussed above, one or more of the following items could have an impact on our liquidity during the next 12 months:
•the matters described in Note 19, Commitments and Contingencies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, including the cost of existing environmental remediation matters discussed in Note 13, Environmental Costs;
•contributions to our qualified pension plan and Supplemental Employees’ Retirement Plan (“SERP”);
•deferred compensation payments to officers;
•income tax payments;
•costs associated with acquisitions and corporate development activities;
•capital expenditures;
•research and development expenditures;
•repurchase of common stock under the 2015 Share Repurchase Program;
•payment of dividends;
•costs associated with the start-up of new programs; and
•the timing of payments and extension of payment terms by our customers.
Financing Arrangements
We continue to rely upon bank financing as an important source of liquidity for our business activities including acquisitions. We believe this, when combined with cash generated from operating activities, will be sufficient to support our anticipated cash requirements for the foreseeable future. However, we may decide to raise additional debt or equity capital to support other business activities including potential future acquisitions. We regularly monitor credit market conditions to identify potential issues that may adversely affect, or provide opportunities for, the securing and/or pricing of additional financing, if any, that may be necessary to continue with our growth strategy and finance working capital requirements. Refer to Note 14, Debt, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Form 10-K for further information on our Financing Arrangements.
Convertible Notes
2024 Notes
During May 2017, we issued $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior unsecured notes due May 2024 (the "2024 Notes") pursuant to an indenture (the "Indenture"), dated May 12, 2017, between the Company and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. In connection therewith, we entered into certain capped call transactions that cover, collectively, the number of shares of the Company's common stock underlying the 2024 Notes. The 2024 Notes bear 3.25% interest per annum on the principal amount, payable semiannually in arrears on May 1 and November 1 of each year, beginning on November 1, 2017. The 2024 Notes will mature on May 1, 2024, unless earlier repurchased by the Company or converted. We will settle any conversions of the 2024 Notes in cash, shares of the Company's common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at the Company's election.
The sale of the Distribution business in the third quarter of 2019 was deemed to be a "Fundamental Change" and a "Make-Whole Fundamental Change" pursuant to the terms and conditions of the indenture governing the 2024 Notes. As a result, the sale triggered the right of the holders of our 2024 Notes to require us to repurchase all of the 2024 Notes, or any portion thereof that is a multiple of $1,000 principal amount on September 27, 2019. The aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes validly tendered and not validly withdrawn was $0.5 million, representing 0.25% of all outstanding notes. Holders of such notes receive the purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2024 Notes being purchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The following table illustrates the dilutive effect of securities issued under the 2024 Notes at various theoretical average share prices for our stock as of December 31, 2020:
Credit Agreement
On December 13, 2019, the Company closed an amended and restated $800.0 million Credit Agreement (the "Credit Agreement") with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent and as Collateral Agent. The Credit Agreement amends and restates the Company's previously existing credit facility in its entirety to, among other things: (i) extend the maturity date to December 13, 2024; (ii) increase the aggregate amount of revolving commitments from $600.0 million to $800.0 million; (iii) remove the existing term loan credit facility; (iv) modify the affirmative and negative covenants set forth in the facility; and (v) effectuate a number of additional modifications to the terms and provision of the facility, including its pricing. Capitalized terms used but not defined within this discussion of the Credit Agreement have the meanings ascribed thereto in the Credit Agreement.
Interest rates on amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement are variable based on LIBOR. The LIBOR benchmark has been the subject of national, international, and other regulatory guidance and proposals for reform. In July 2017, the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority announced that it intends to stop persuading or compelling banks to submit rates for calculation of LIBOR after 2021. In November 2020, the ICE Benchmark Association announced its intention to delay the timeline for the retirement of LIBOR until mid-2023.These reforms may cause LIBOR to perform differently than in the past and LIBOR may ultimately cease to exist after 2023. Alternative benchmark rate(s) may replace LIBOR and could affect the Company's debt securities, derivative instruments, receivables, debt payments and receipts. At this time, it is not possible to predict the effect of any changes to LIBOR, any phase out of LIBOR or any establishment of alternative benchmark rates. Any new benchmark rate will likely not replicate LIBOR exactly, which could impact our contracts which terminate after 2023. There is uncertainty about how applicable law, the courts or the Company will address the replacement of LIBOR with alternative rates on variable rate retail loan contracts and other contracts that do not include alternative rate fallback provisions. In addition, any changes to benchmark rates may have an uncertain impact on our cost of funds and our access to the capital markets, which could impact our liquidity, financial position or results of operations.
At December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding amounts on the Credit Agreement. In addition, we are required to pay a quarterly commitment fee on the unused revolving loan commitment amount at a rate ranging from 0.150% to 0.250% per annum, based on the Senior Secured Net Leverage Ratio. Fees for outstanding letters of credit range from 1.125% to 1.625%, based on the Senior Secured Net Leverage Ratio. Total average bank borrowings under our revolving credit facility and previously existing term loan facility during the year ended December 31, 2020, were $111.9 million compared to $70.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following table shows the amounts available for borrowing under the Company's revolving credit facility:
(1) The Company has entered into standby letters of credit issued on the Company's behalf by financial institutions, and directly issued guarantees to third parties primarily related to advances received from customers and the guarantee of future performance on certain contracts. Letters of credit generally are available for draw down in the event the Company does not perform its obligations.
(2) Of these amounts, $146.2 million letters of credit relate to a certain JPF DCS contract in both periods.
(3) Amounts available for borrowing subject to EBITDA as of December 31, 2019 reflect the minimum borrowing capacity under EBITDA, subject to adjustments.
Other Sources/Uses of Capital
Advance Payments
We received $97.2 million in advance payments in 2018, which relate to $146.2 million in letters of credit for a JPF DCS contract, including the offset agreement. In the event that we default on the contract and we are unable to fulfill our contractual commitments, our customer has the ability to draw on the letters of credit.
Pension
Management regularly monitors its pension plan asset performance and the assumptions used in the determination of our benefit obligation, comparing them to actual experience. We continue to believe the assumptions selected are valid due to the long-term nature of our benefit obligation.
We contributed $10.0 million to the qualified pension plan during 2020. We did not make any contributions to the qualified pension plan in 2019. In 2021, we expect to contribute $10.0 million to the qualified pension plan. We paid $0.5 million in SERP benefits during both 2020 and 2019. We expect to pay $2.8 million in SERP benefits in 2021.
Effective December 31, 2015, the qualified pension plan was frozen with respect to future benefit accruals. Under U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standard ("CAS") 413 we must calculate the USG’s share of any pension curtailment adjustment resulting from the freeze. Such adjustments can result in an amount due to the USG for pension plans that are in a surplus position or an amount due to the contractor for plans that are in a deficit position. During the fourth quarter of 2016, we accrued a $0.3 million liability representing our estimate of the amount due to the USG based on our pension curtailment adjustment calculation which was submitted to the USG for review in December 2016. We have maintained our accrual at $0.3 million as of December 31, 2020. There can be no assurance that the ultimate resolution of this matter will not have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
For more information refer to Note 17, Pension Plans, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Acquisitions
On January 3, 2020, the Company completed the acquisition of Bal Seal, at a purchase price of approximately $317.5 million. We continue to identify and evaluate potential acquisition candidates, the purchase of which may require the use of additional capital. No acquisitions were completed in 2019 or 2018. For a discussion of the Bal Seal acquisition, see Note 3, Business Combinations, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Share-based Arrangements
In 2021, the Company modified its long-term incentive program to increase the emphasis on equity and permit the more timely reporting of long-term incentive compensation payouts. The long-term incentive awards granted to our Named Executive Officers (“NEOs”) in February 2021 consist of a combination of service-based restricted shares ("RSAs") and performance share units settled in shares ("PSUs"), as opposed to the cash-based awards that had been utilized before. The Committee believes this will increase the alignment of interests between our NEOs and shareholders, and help build stock ownership by new executives, striking a reasonable balance between awards focused on executive retention and those linked to the Company’s long-term financial performance. RSAs will vest over a three-year period on each of the first three anniversaries of the date of grant. Performance-based awards will continue to be based on total shareholder return ("TSR") and return on total invested capital ("ROIC") over a three-year performance period, each of which will remain equally weighted in determining payouts. Expense associated with the RSAs and PSUs will be dependent on the grants issued in 2021. Historically, the Company has granted the majority of the awards in the first quarter of the year, which will be reported in our First Quarter Form 10-Q. Any further grants in 2021 will be reported in the quarterly filings thereafter. As of December 31, 2020, future compensation costs related to non-vested stock options and restricted stock grants is $4.9 million. The Company anticipates that this cost will be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.9 years.
Stock Repurchase Plans
On April 29, 2015, we announced that our Board of Directors approved a share repurchase program ("2015 Share Repurchase Program") authorizing the repurchase of up to $100.0 million of the common stock, par value $1.00 per share, of the Company. We repurchase shares to offset the annual issuance of shares under our employee stock plans, but the timing and actual number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of factors including stock price, market conditions, corporate and regulatory requirements, capital availability and other factors, including acquisition opportunities. During 2020, we repurchased 290,000 shares, for approximately $13.5 million, under the 2015 Share Repurchase Program, bringing the total number of shares repurchased through the life of the 2015 Share Repurchase Program to 1,880,422 shares. Although approximately $2.2 million remains available for repurchases under this authorization, we do not intend to effectuate any additional share repurchases until the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and any related impact on our business, results of operations and cash flows have subsided.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Management believes that the non-GAAP measures used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K provide investors with important perspectives into our ongoing business performance. We do not intend for the information to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related GAAP measures. Other companies may define the measures differently. We define the non-GAAP measures used in this report and other disclosures as follows:
Organic Sales
Organic Sales is defined as "Net Sales" less sales derived from acquisitions completed during the preceding twelve months. We believe that this measure provides management and investors with a more complete understanding of underlying operating results and trends of established, ongoing operations by excluding the effect of acquisitions, which can obscure underlying trends. We also believe that presenting Organic Sales enables a more direct comparison to other businesses and companies in similar industries. Management recognizes that the term "Organic Sales" may be interpreted differently by other companies and under different circumstances.
Free Cash Flow
Free cash flow is defined as GAAP “Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities” in a period less “Expenditures for property, plant & equipment” in the same period. Management believes Free Cash Flow provides an important perspective on our ability to generate cash from our business operations and, as such, that it is an important financial measure for use in evaluating the Company's financial performance. Free Cash Flow should not be viewed as representing the residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures such as dividends to shareholders or acquisitions, as it may exclude certain mandatory expenditures such as repayment of maturing debt and other contractual obligations. Management uses Free Cash Flow internally to assess overall liquidity.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our significant accounting policies are outlined in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosures based upon historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant. We are also responsible for evaluating the propriety of our estimates, judgments and accounting methods as new events occur. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Management periodically reviews the Company’s critical accounting policies, estimates and judgments with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. The most significant areas currently involving management judgments and estimates are described below.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
Methodology
We recognize sales and profit based upon either (1) the over time method, in which sales and profit are recorded based upon the ratio of costs incurred to date to estimated total costs to complete the performance obligation, or (2) the point-in-time method, in which sales are recognized at the time control is transferred to the customer. For long-term contracts, we generally recognize sales and income over time because of continuous transfer of control to the customer. Revenue is generally recognized using the cost-to-cost method based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation, which allows for recognition of revenue as work on a contract progresses.
On January 1, 2018, the Company adopted Accounting Standard Codification 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, using the modified retrospective method. As a result, the Company applied ASC 606 only to contracts that were not completed as of January 1, 2018. Prior to the adoption of ASC 606, for long-term contracts, we generally recognized sales and income
based on the percentage-of-completion method accounting, which allowed for recognition of revenue as work on a contract progressed. We recognized sales and profit based upon either (1) the cost-to-cost method, in which sales and profit were recorded based upon the ratio of costs incurred to estimated total costs to complete the contract, or (2) the units-of delivery method, in which sales were recognized as deliveries were made and cost of sales was computed on the basis of the estimated ratio of total contract cost to total contract sales.
Management performs detailed quarterly reviews of all of our significant long-term contracts. Based upon these reviews, we record the effects of adjustments in profit estimates each period. If at any time management determines that in the case of a particular contract total costs will exceed total contract revenue, we record a provision for the entire anticipated contract loss at that time.
Judgment and Uncertainties
The over time revenue recognition model requires that we estimate future revenues and costs over the life of a contract. Revenues are estimated based upon the original contract price, with consideration being given to exercised contract options, change orders and, in some cases, projected customer requirements. Contract costs may be incurred over a period of several years, and the estimation of these costs requires significant judgment based upon the acquired knowledge and experience of program managers, engineers and financial professionals. Estimated costs are based primarily on anticipated purchase contract terms, historical performance trends, business base and other economic projections. The complexity of certain programs as well as technical risks and uncertainty as to the future availability of materials and labor resources could affect the Company’s ability to accurately estimate future contract costs.
The following table illustrates the amount of revenue recognized for performance obligations satisfied over time versus the amount of revenue recognized for performance obligations satisfied at a point in time.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
While we do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood there will be a material change in estimates or assumptions used to calculate our long-term revenues and costs, estimating the percentage of work complete on certain programs is a complex task. As a result, changes to these estimates could have a significant impact on our results of operations. These programs include the Sikorsky BLACK HAWK program, the JPF program with the USG, the Boeing A-10 program, the AH-1Z program, our other Bell Helicopter programs and several other programs. Estimating the ultimate total cost of these programs is challenging due to the complexity of the programs, unanticipated increases in production requirements, the nature of the materials needed to complete these programs, change orders related to the programs and the need to manage our customers’ expectations. These programs are an important element in our continuing strategy to increase operating efficiencies and profitability as well as broaden our business base. Management continues to monitor and update program cost estimates quarterly for these contracts. A significant change in an estimate on one or more of these programs could have a material effect on our financial position and results of operations. The company recognized a reduction in revenue of $7.0 million and $4.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, due to changes in profit estimates. The amount of revenue recognized from performance obligations satisfied (or partially satisfied) in previous periods was $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Methodology
The allowance for doubtful accounts represents management’s best estimate of probable losses inherent in the receivable balance. These estimates are based on known past due amounts and historical write-off experience, as well as trends and factors impacting the credit risk associated with specific customers. In an effort to identify adverse trends for trade receivables, we perform ongoing reviews of account balances and the aging of receivables. Amounts are considered past due when payment has not been received within a predetermined time frame based upon the credit terms extended. For our government and commercial contracts, we evaluate, on an ongoing basis, the amount of recoverable costs. The recoverability of costs is evaluated on a contract-by-contract basis based upon historical trends of payments, program viability and the customer’s credit-worthiness.
Judgment and Uncertainties
Write-offs are charged against the allowance for doubtful accounts only after we have exhausted all collection efforts. Actual write-offs and adjustments could differ from the allowance estimates due to unanticipated changes in the business environment as well as factors and risks associated with specific customers.
Of the accounts receivable on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020, approximately $64.0 million relates to delays in payments on outstanding receivables related to a customer contract. Of this amount, $32.4 million in outstanding receivables were over twelve months past due. The Company continues to receive payments from this customer for recent shipments under this contract and expects to receive payment on the outstanding receivables. While the Company has determined that these receivable amounts continue to be collectible, to the extent these balances are not collected, this would have a material impact on the Company's liquidity, financial position and results of operations.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our allowance for doubtful accounts was $2.0 million and $1.2 million, respectively. Receivables written off, net of recoveries, in 2020 and 2019 were $1.4 million and $0.8 million, respectively.
Currently we do not believe that we have a significant amount of risk relative to the allowance for doubtful accounts. A 10% change in the allowance would have a $0.2 million effect on pre-tax earnings.
Inventory Valuation
Methodology
We have four types of inventory (a) raw materials, (b) contracts in process, (c) other work in process and (d) finished goods. Raw material includes certain general stock materials but primarily relates to purchases that were made in anticipation of specific programs that have not been started as of the balance sheet date. Raw materials are stated at the lower of the cost of the inventory or its fair market value. Contracts in process, other work in process and finished goods are valued at production cost comprised of material, labor and overhead. Contracts in process, other work in process and finished goods are reported at the lower of cost or net realizable value.
Judgment and Uncertainties
The process for evaluating inventory obsolescence or market value often requires the Company to make subjective judgments and estimates concerning future sales levels, quantities and prices at which such inventory will be sold in the normal course of business. We adjust our inventory by the difference between the estimated market value and the actual cost of our inventory to arrive at net realizable value. Changes in estimates of future sales volume may necessitate future write-downs of inventory value. At December 31, 2020, $60.4 million of K-MAX® inventory was included in contracts and other work in process and finished goods, of which management believes that approximately $19.9 million will be sold after December 31, 2021, based upon the anticipation of additional aircraft manufacturing and supporting the fleet for the foreseeable future. We believe the inventory is stated at net realizable value, although lack of demand for spare parts in the future could result in additional write-downs of the inventory value. Overall, management believes that our inventory is appropriately valued and not subject to further obsolescence in the near term.
At December 31, 2020, $6.3 million of SH-2G(I) inventory was included in contracts and other work in process inventory on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets. Management believes $5.3 million of the SH-2G(I) inventory will be sold after December 31, 2021. This balance represents spares requirements and inventory to be used in SH-2G programs.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
Management reviews the K-MAX® inventory balance on an annual basis to determine whether any additional write-downs are necessary. We believe this inventory is stated at net realizable value, although lack of demand for spare parts in the future could result in additional write-downs of the inventory value. Overall, management believes that our inventory is appropriately valued and not subject to further obsolescence in the near term. If such a write-down were to occur, this could have a significant impact on our operating results. A 10% write-down of the December 31, 2020 K-MAX® inventory balance would have affected pre-tax earnings by approximately $6.0 million in 2020.
The balance of SH-2G(I) inventory projected to be sold after December 31, 2020, represents spares requirements and inventory to be used to support the SH-2G programs in future periods and as such is appropriately valued as of December 31, 2020.
Business Combinations
Methodology
On January 3, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Bal Seal for consideration of $317.5 million. In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, we recognized the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed separately from goodwill and measured the respective assets and liabilities at their acquisition-date fair values. Goodwill for the acquisition of $95.1 million was determined based on the consideration transferred less the net value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their acquisition-date fair values.
Judgment and Uncertainties
As part of the acquisition, management identified four classes of intangible assets acquired related to Bal Seal, consisting of customer relationships, developed technologies, trade name and acquired backlog. The fair value of the intangible assets of $110.3 million was determined using an income methodology based on management’s estimates of forecasted cash flows, with those cash flows discounted to present value using rates commensurate with the risks associated with those cash flows, specifically a multi-period, excess earnings method for customer relationships and backlog and the relief-from-royalty method for the trade name and developed technologies. Significant judgment was applied with respect to estimates of forecasted cash flows, more specifically, the estimated revenue growth rates to determine the fair value of all of the intangible assets and the estimated profit rates used to determine the fair value of the customer relationship intangible assets. Management evaluated the reasonableness of the revenue growth rates and profit rates based on consideration of the past performance, general economic conditions in the markets served by Bal Seal and industry-specific performance statistics.
A discount rate of 10% was utilized for customer relationships, developed technologies and the trade name and a discount rate of 8% was utilized for backlog to reflect the risk and uncertainty in the financial markets and specifically in our internally developed earnings projections. A change in these assumptions could materially affect the valuation of the identified intangible assets. Management evaluated the reasonableness of the discount rates based on consideration of the cost of capital of comparable businesses and other industry factors.
Effect if Actual Results Differ from Assumptions
As with all assumptions, there is an inherent level of uncertainty and actual results, to the extent they differ from those assumptions, could have a material impact on fair value. For example, multiples for a comparable business could deteriorate due to changes in technology or a downturn in economic conditions. A reduction in customer demand would impact our assumed growth rate resulting in a reduced fair value. Potential events or circumstances could have a negative effect on the estimated fair value. The loss of a major customer or program could have a significant impact on the future cash flows of the acquired business. Advances in technology by our competitors could result in our products becoming obsolete.
We do not currently believe there to be a reasonable likelihood that actual results will vary materially from estimates and assumptions used to value the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to an impairment charge that could be material.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Methodology
Goodwill and certain intangible assets that have indefinite lives are evaluated at least annually for impairment. The annual evaluation is generally performed during the fourth quarter, using forecast information. All intangible assets are also reviewed for possible impairment whenever changes in conditions indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. For reporting units that qualify for a qualitative assessment, management will perform the quantitative impairment test after a period of three years has elapsed since the test was last performed.
In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, we test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level and other long-lived intangible assets (excluding goodwill) for impairment at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are available. The identification and measurement of goodwill impairment involves the estimation of fair value of the reporting unit as compared to its carrying value. The identification and measurement of other long-lived intangible asset impairment involves the estimation of future cash flows of the business unit as compared to its carrying value. Goodwill is tested one level below the segment level, and components are not aggregated for purposes of goodwill testing.
The carrying value of goodwill as of December 31, 2020 was $247.2 million. The specific reporting units contributing to the total goodwill balance were as follows: Precision Products Orlando ("KPP-Orlando"), $41.4 million; Specialty Bearings and Engineered Products, $110.7 million; and Bal Seal, $95.1 million. During the third quarter of 2020, we identified a triggering event for possible impairment of our Aerosystems reporting unit based on a decline in earnings compared to forecasts used in prior periods and updated forecasts which indicated the forecasted cash flows for this reporting unit were lower than amounts previously forecasted. We performed a quantitative analysis on the Aerosystems reporting unit using an income methodology based on management's estimates of forecasted cash flows, with those cash flows discounted to present value using rates commensurate with the risks associated with those cash flows. In addition, management used a market-based valuation involving analysis of market multiples of revenues and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("EBITDA") for (i) a group of comparable companies and (ii) recent transactions, if any, involving comparable companies. The quantitative analysis resulted in a conclusion that the fair value of the Aerosystems reporting unit was $56.1 million below its carrying value; therefore, goodwill was impaired. In 2020, we recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $50.3 million for the Aerosystems reporting unit, which represented the entire goodwill balance associated with this reporting unit. See Note 12, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding these assets.
The carrying value of other intangible assets as of December 31, 2020, was $150.2 million. During the third quarter of 2018, management identified a triggering event for possible impairment at a certain asset group in its UK business based on a review of historical performance, the current forecast for the remainder of the year and the loss of future orders from one of its significant customers, requiring the Company to evaluate the intangible assets for impairment. No such triggering events were identified in 2020 or 2019. See Note 12, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding these assets.
Judgment and Uncertainties
In years that management performs a qualitative assessment we consider the following qualitative factors: general economic conditions in the markets served by the reporting units carrying goodwill, relevant industry-specific performance statistics, changes in the carrying value of the individual reporting units and assumptions used in the most recent fair value calculation, including forecasted results of operations, the weighted average cost of capital and recent transaction multiples.
We performed a qualitative assessment for the KPP-Orlando reporting unit. The results of this analysis indicated that it is more likely than not that goodwill is not impaired and this reporting unit did not need to proceed to a quantitative assessment.
For the quantitative impairment tests, management estimated the fair value of the reporting units using an income methodology based on management's estimates of forecasted cash flows, with those cash flows discounted to present value using rates commensurate with the risks associated with those cash flows. In addition, management used a market-based valuation method involving analysis of market multiples of revenues and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) for (i) a group of comparable public companies and (ii) recent transactions, if any, involving comparable companies. In estimating the fair value of the reporting units, a weighting of 80% to the income approach and 20% to the market-based valuation method was selected, consistent with the prior year. A higher weighting was applied to the estimate derived from the income approach as it is based on management's assumptions specific for the reporting units, which are the outcome of an internal planning process. While the selected companies in the market based valuation method have comparability to the reporting units, they may not fully reflect the market share, product portfolio and operations of the
reporting units. The estimated fair value of the reporting units is adjusted for an excess net working capital assumption, which represents management's identification of specific contract-related assets that will generate cash flows in the future.
In performing our quantitative tests for the reporting units, we assumed a terminal growth rate of 3.0%. The discount rate utilized to reflect the risk and uncertainty in the financial markets and specifically in our internally developed earnings projections ranged from 9.5% - 10.25% for these reporting units. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the results of our tests for goodwill impairment.
An impairment loss is recognized for any excess of the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s goodwill over the implied fair value of that goodwill. The implied fair value of goodwill is determined by allocating the fair value of the reporting unit in a manner similar to a purchase price allocation. The residual fair value after this allocation is the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill. The results of the quantitative tests indicated that the the fair values of the reporting units exceeded the respective carrying values; therefore, no impairment charge was recorded for the Specialty Bearings and Bal Seal reporting units.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
We performed the quantitative impairment test for the Specialty Bearings and Bal Seal reporting units. Specialty Bearings' fair values exceeded its respective carrying value in excess of 100% and Bal Seal's fair value exceeded the carrying value by approximately 8%. A one percentage point decrease in our terminal growth rate or an increase of one percentage point in our discount rate would not result in a fair value calculation less than the carrying value for these reporting units. In the third quarter of 2020, we identified a triggering event for possible impairment at the Aerosystems reporting unit. The fair value of the Aerosystems reporting unit was $56.1 million below its carrying value. We recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $50.3 million for the Aerosystems reporting unit in the third quarter of 2020, which represented the entire goodwill balance associated with this reporting unit.
During the third quarter of 2018, we identified a triggering event for possible impairment at a certain asset group in our UK business based on a review of its historical performance, the current forecast for the remainder of the year and the loss of future orders from one of our significant customers, requiring us to evaluate the intangible assets for impairment. We performed a recoverability test on the intangibles for a certain asset group in our UK business by comparing the undiscounted cash flows of the asset group to its carrying value, and the estimated future cash flows of the business did not exceed the carrying value of the assets. Based on these results, we calculated the fair value of the asset group using an income approach, which resulted in an impairment charge of $10.0 million, or the remaining balance of the customer lists/relationships at a certain asset group within the UK business.
As with all assumptions, there is an inherent level of uncertainty and actual results, to the extent they differ from those assumptions, could have a material impact on fair value. For example, multiples for similar type reporting units could deteriorate due to changes in technology or a downturn in economic conditions. A reduction in customer demand would impact our assumed growth rate resulting in a reduced fair value. Potential events or circumstances could have a negative effect on the estimated fair value. The loss of a major customer or program could have a significant impact on the future cash flows of the reporting unit(s). Advances in technology by our competitors could result in our products becoming obsolete.
We do not currently believe there to be a reasonable likelihood that actual results will vary materially from estimates and assumptions used to test goodwill and other intangible assets for impairment losses. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to an impairment charge that could be material.
Long-Term Incentive Programs
Methodology
The Company maintains a Management Incentive Plan, which provides for cash and share-based payment awards, including non-statutory stock options, restricted stock, stock appreciation rights and long-term incentive program ("LTIP") awards. We determine the fair value of our non-qualified stock option awards at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes model. We determine the fair value of our restricted share awards at the date of grant using the closing price the day prior to the grant.
LTIP awards provide certain senior executives an opportunity to receive long-term incentive award payments, generally in cash, for achieving targets established by the Personnel Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors. Prior to 2018, LTIP grants were based on the Company’s financial results compared to the Russell 2000 indices for the same periods based upon the following metrics: (a) average return on total capital, (b) average earnings per share growth and (c) total return to shareholders for the performance period. Beginning in 2018, the performance metrics were changed to the following: (a) average return on
total capital and (b) total return to shareholders, both compared to the Russell 2000 indices for the same performance period. No awards will be payable if the Company’s performance is below the 25th percentile of the designated indices. The maximum award is payable if performance reaches the 75th percentile of the designated indices. Awards will be paid out at 100% at the 50th percentile. Awards for performance between the 25th and 75th percentiles are determined by straight-line interpolation between 0% and 200%.
In order to estimate the liability associated with LTIP awards, management must make assumptions as to how our current performance compares to current Russell 2000 data based upon the Russell 2000’s historical results. This analysis is performed on a quarterly basis. When sufficient Russell 2000 data for a year is available, which typically will not be until May or June of the following year, management will adjust the liability to reflect its best estimate of the total award. Actual results could differ significantly from management’s estimates. The total estimated liability as of December 31, 2020, was $15.3 million.
Judgment and Uncertainties
Option-pricing models and generally accepted valuation techniques require management to make assumptions and to apply judgment to determine the fair value of our awards. These assumptions and judgments include estimating the future volatility of our stock price, expected dividend yield, future employee turnover rates and future employee stock option exercise behaviors. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate.
Our LTIP requires management to make assumptions regarding the likelihood of achieving long-term Company goals as well as estimate future Russell 2000 results.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
We do not currently believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the estimates or assumptions we use to determine cash and share-based compensation expense. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to changes in cash and share-based compensation expense that could be material.
If actual results are not consistent with the assumptions used, the share-based compensation expense reported in our financial statements may not be representative of the actual economic cost of the share-based compensation. A 10% change in our share-based compensation expense from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, would have affected pre-tax earnings by approximately $0.5 million in 2020.
Due to the timing of availability of the Russell 2000 data, there is a risk that the amount we have recorded as LTIP expense could be different from the actual payout. A 10% increase in the total estimated liability for our LTIP would result in a reduction of 2020 pretax earnings of $1.5 million.
Pension Plans
Methodology
We maintain a qualified defined benefit pension, as well as a non-qualified Supplemental Employees Retirement Plan ("SERP") for certain key executives. See Note 17, Pension Plans, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K for further discussion of these plans.
Expenses and liabilities associated with each of these plans are determined based upon actuarial valuations. Integral to these actuarial valuations are a variety of assumptions including expected return on plan assets and discount rates. We regularly review these assumptions, which are updated at the measurement date, December 31st. In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, the impact of differences between actual results and the assumptions are accumulated and generally amortized over future periods, which will affect expense recognized in future periods.
We utilize a "spot rate approach" in the calculation of pension interest and service cost. The spot rate approach applies separate discount rates for each projected benefit payment in the calculation of pension interest and service cost.
Judgment and Uncertainties
The discount rate represents the interest rate used to determine the present value of future cash flows currently expected to be required to settle the pension obligation. Management uses the Financial Times Stock Exchange ("FTSE") Pension Liability Index for discount rate assumptions. This index was designed to provide a market average discount rate to assist plan sponsors in valuing the liabilities associated with postretirement obligations. Additionally, we reviewed the changes in the general level of interest rates since the last measurement date noting that overall rates had decreased when compared to 2019.
Based upon this information, we used a 2.34% discount rate as of December 31, 2020, for the qualified defined benefit pension plan. This rate takes into consideration the participants in our pension plan and the anticipated payment stream as compared to the Above Median Double-A Curve. For the SERP, we used the same methodology as the pension plan and derived a discount rate of 1.78% in 2020 for the benefit obligation. The difference in the discount rates is primarily due to the expected duration of SERP payments, which is shorter than the anticipated duration of benefit payments to be made to the average participant in the pension plan. The qualified defined benefit pension plan and SERP used discount rates of 3.14% and 2.76% at December 31, 2019, respectively, for purposes of calculating the benefit obligation.
The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets represents the average rate of earnings expected on the funds invested to provide for anticipated benefit payments. The expected return on assets assumption is developed based upon several factors. Such factors include current and expected target asset allocation, our expected returns by asset class type and our expected investment performance. Beginning in 2020, the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is 6.5%. Historically, the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets was 7.5%.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
During 2020, the pension plan generated net periodic benefit income and as a result, the sensitivity analysis calculates the change on pension income rather than on pension expense. A lower discount rate increases the present value of benefit obligations which increases pension expense; however, this is more than offset by a reduction in interest costs resulting in net pension income. A one percentage point decrease in the assumed discount rate would have increased pension income in 2020 by $1.3 million. A one percentage point increase in the assumed discount rate would have decreased pension income in 2020 by $0.8 million.
A lower expected rate of return on pension plan assets would increase pension expense. For 2020 and 2019, the expected rate of return on plan assets was 6.5% and 7.5%, respectively. A one-percentage point increase/decrease in the assumed return on pension plan assets would have changed pension income in 2020 by approximately $6.6 million. During 2020, the actual return on pension plan assets of 17.6% was higher than our expected long-term rate of return on pension plan assets of 6.5%.
Income Taxes
Methodology
Deferred tax assets and liabilities generally represent temporary differences between the recognition of tax benefits/expenses in our financial statements and the recognition of these tax benefits/expenses for tax purposes.
We establish reserves for deferred taxes when, despite our belief that our tax return positions are valid and defensible, we believe that certain positions may not prevail if challenged. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the progress of a tax audit or changes in tax legislation. Our effective tax rate includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that we consider appropriate. This rate is then applied to our quarterly operating results. In the event that there is a significant unusual or one-time item recognized in our operating results, the tax attributable to that item would be separately calculated and recorded at the same time as the unusual or one-time item.
As of December 31, 2020, we had recorded $32.4 million of deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances. The realization of these benefits is dependent in part on future taxable capital gains and tax planning strategies designed to realize the benefit associated with the capital loss. For those jurisdictions where the expiration of tax loss or credit carryforwards or the projection of operating results indicates that realization is not likely, a valuation allowance is provided.
Judgment and Uncertainties
Management believes that sufficient income will be earned in the future to realize deferred income tax assets, net of valuation allowances recorded. The realization of these deferred tax assets can be impacted by changes to tax laws or statutory tax rates and future taxable income levels.
Our effective tax rate on earnings was 9.9% for 2020. This rate was unfavorably impacted by the impairment charge on the UK Composites business as a result of the anticipated sale, for which no associated tax benefit was recognized in the current period. Due to an entity classification election in 2019 related to the investment in the Company's UK business, which had the effect of treating the subsidiary as a disregarded entity for U.S. tax purposes, a loss was recorded, resulting in a significant tax benefit recognized by the Company in 2019. Additionally, the Company recognized additional benefits from research and development credits relating to research completed in the three prior years. Our effective tax rate is based on expected or reported income or loss, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgment is required in determining our effective tax rate and in evaluating our tax positions.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
We do not anticipate a significant change in our unrecognized tax benefits within the next twelve months. We file tax returns in numerous U.S. and foreign jurisdictions, with returns subject to examination for varying periods, but generally back to and including 2015. It is our policy to record interest and penalties on unrecognized tax benefits as income taxes. A one percentage point increase/decrease in our tax rate would have affected our 2020 earnings by $0.8 million.
RECENT ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
A summary of recent accounting standards is included in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Form 10-K.