Item 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our discussion and analysis below is focused on our 2020 and 2019 financial results, including comparisons of our year-over-year performance between these years. Discussion and analysis of our 2018 fiscal year specifically, as well as the year-over-year comparison of our 2019 financial performance to 2018, are located under Part II, Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019, filed with the SEC on January 24, 2020, which is available on our investor relations website at investor.kbhome.com and the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview. Revenues are generated from our homebuilding and financial services operations. The following table presents a summary of our consolidated results of operations (dollars in thousands, except per share amounts):
During 2020, we, like many companies worldwide, experienced dramatic variability in market conditions that produced stark differences in our quarterly results over the course of the year. In part, our results reflect several strategic adjustments we made in response to the extreme fluctuations we experienced in our 2020 operating environment, both quarter-to-quarter and within quarters. These adjustments were precipitated by rapid changes in public health requirements and guidelines and reflected our efforts to address the significant challenges they presented while also striving to protect the safety of our employees, customers and business partners; meeting a strong and sustained upswing in consumer demand for our homes; managing our capital requirements; and aligning our workforce for our short- and long-term business needs. Although we continue to navigate an uncertain economic landscape, based on the substantial net orders we generated in the 2020 second half and our robust backlog at the end of the year, we are confident about our growth prospects in 2021 and beyond.
Following a particularly strong 2020 first quarter, in which we had the highest revenues, net orders, ending backlog and ending backlog value for any first quarter since 2007 and increased our net income by 99% year over year, the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and the institution of COVID-19 control responses in our served markets, including quarantines, “stay-at-home” orders and similar mandates, during the second quarter severely impacted global and national economies (with the U.S. entering a recession), the housing market and our business. Amid extraordinary economic disruptions; a sudden rise in unemployment; significant stock market and secondary mortgage market volatility; uncertainty about how to effectively contain COVID-19’s spread; weakened consumer confidence; and our swift closing of our sales centers, model homes and design studios to the public and shift to virtual sales tools and appointment-only personalized home sales processes, where permitted, we saw a drastic decrease in demand for new homes (including homes ordered in the first quarter) and our order pace slowed significantly. Along with a considerable increase in home purchase cancellations, largely reflecting our proactive efforts to
assure a backlog of qualified homebuyers amid the pandemic-induced economic downturn, we experienced a sizable reduction in our 2020 second quarter net orders. Due to this reduction in net orders, we entered the third quarter with 14% fewer homes in backlog as compared to the previous year. Further, our construction activities were restricted in many jurisdictions, and completely shut down in some of them, and together with the reduced availability or capacity of some municipal and private services necessary to build and deliver homes, and supply chain disruptions, our cycle times became extended. This caused home delivery delays during most of the second quarter, which tempered our revenues for the period.
With the easing of restrictive public health orders to varying degrees in our served markets beginning in May 2020 and the associated ability to open our communities to walk-in traffic, following appropriate safety protocols and applicable public health guidelines, complemented by our enhanced virtual selling capabilities, as discussed under Item 1 - Business, our net orders began to rebound significantly. This positive momentum continued through the 2020 second half, largely fueled by the combination of historically low mortgage interest rates, a limited supply of resale inventory, an underproduction of new homes over the past decade, favorable demographic trends and consumers’ increasing desire to own a home. Reflecting this strong demand, our 2020 third and fourth quarter net orders rose to their respective highest levels since 2005. Though this sharp rise in net orders in the second half generated a substantial expansion in our backlog, as discussed below, our deliveries and revenues for our third and fourth quarters were moderated primarily by the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic in our 2020 second quarter.
During the 2020 second quarter and most of the third quarter, in prioritizing cash preservation and liquidity in light of lingering uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, we limited our investments in land and land development, resulting in a 24% decrease in those quarters combined as compared to the corresponding year-earlier periods. With the sustained strong housing demand over the 2020 second half, we intensified our investments, resulting in a 63% year-over-year increase in the fourth quarter, to measurably expand our lot pipeline and support community growth in the future. For 2020, we invested a total of $1.69 billion in land and land development, compared to $1.62 billion in 2019.
Although the trajectory and strength of the current housing recovery remains uncertain, and could be slowed or reversed by a number of factors, including a widespread resurgence in COVID-19 infections, whether due to the spread of any variants of the virus or otherwise, combined with the seasonal flu and others discussed above under Item 1A - Risk Factors, and our business, including our margins, could be negatively affected by labor and supply constraints and rising and volatile raw material prices, particularly for lumber, as was the case during 2020, we believe we are well-positioned to operate effectively and generate profitable growth in 2021.
Financial and Operational Highlights. Reflecting the above-described impact from the COVID-19 pandemic and related COVID-19 control responses, within our homebuilding operations, housing revenues of $4.15 billion for 2020 were down 8% from the prior year due to a 10% decrease in homes delivered, partly offset by a 2% increase in the overall average selling price of those homes. In 2020, homebuilding operating income decreased 4% year over year to $316.5 million, which included total inventory-related charges of $28.7 million and severance charges of $6.7 million. The severance charges were associated with workforce reductions made during the second quarter in light of the sharp reduction in business activity and highly uncertain outlook at the time, as discussed above. In 2019, homebuilding operating income included $17.3 million of inventory-related charges. As a percentage of homebuilding revenues, our homebuilding operating income for 2020 improved 30 basis points year over year to 7.6%. Excluding inventory-related charges for both periods and the above-mentioned severance charges in the 2020 period, our homebuilding operating income margin improved 70 basis points to 8.4% from 2019. Our housing gross profits for 2020 decreased 5% from 2019 mainly due to lower housing revenues, partly offset by a 60 basis point improvement in our housing gross profit margin to 18.9%.
The year-over-year increase in our housing gross profit margin in 2020 primarily reflected a mix shift of homes delivered, a favorable pricing environment that enabled us to increase selling prices in many of our communities, lower relative amortization of previously capitalized interest, and a slight decrease in sales incentives, partly offset by an increase in inventory-related charges.
Our selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues increased 30 basis points from the prior year to 11.3%, primarily due to the above-mentioned severance charges and reduced operating leverage from lower housing revenues, partly offset by our targeted actions, including workforce reductions in the 2020 second quarter, to reduce overhead costs. Excluding the severance charges in 2020, our selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues were 11.2%.
Our net income and diluted earnings per share for 2020 each rose 10% year over year. In 2019, our net income and diluted earnings per share included a $6.8 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt.
Net Orders, Backlog and Community Count. The following table presents information about our net orders, cancellation rate, ending backlog, and community count for the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
(a)Net order value represents the potential future housing revenues associated with net orders generated during a period, as well as homebuyer selections of lot and product premiums and design studio options and upgrades for homes in backlog during the same period.
(b)Cancellation rate represents the total number of contracts for new homes cancelled during a period divided by the total (gross) orders for new homes generated during the same period.
Net Orders. In 2020, net orders from our homebuilding operations grew 4% from 2019, reflecting strong year-over-year increases of 31%, 27% and 42% in the first, third and fourth quarters, respectively, partly offset by a decrease of 57% in the second quarter due to the negative impact from the COVID-19 pandemic and related control responses. The year-over-year net order growth in the 2020 first, third and fourth quarters was largely driven by the factors described above with respect to our second half performance. We also believe our Built-to-Order model, which, as described above under Item 1 - Business, provides personalization and choice, was a key factor that contributed to our strong net orders during these periods. In 2020, the growth in our overall net orders compared to 2019 reflected a 7% increase in monthly net orders per community to 4.6, partly offset by a 3% decrease in our overall average community count, which is discussed below under “Community Count.”
The value of our 2020 net orders rose 8% from 2019 as a result of the growth in net orders and a 4% increase in the overall average selling price of those orders, with these factors driving net order value expansion in three of our four homebuilding reporting segments, ranging from 9% in our Southwest segment to 13% in our Central segment. Net order value in our Southeast segment declined 8% year over year due to a decrease in net orders, as the average selling price of those orders remained relatively flat.
Backlog. The number of homes in our backlog at November 30, 2020 increased 54% from the previous year, mainly due to the substantial increase in our net orders during the 2020 third and fourth quarters. The potential future housing revenues in our backlog at November 30, 2020 grew 63% year over year, reflecting the higher number of homes in our backlog and a 6% increase in the average selling price of those homes. The increases in the number of homes in backlog and our backlog value reflected strong growth in each of our four homebuilding reporting segments, with increases in backlog value ranging from 34% in our Southwest segment to 93% in our West Coast segment. Substantially all of the homes in our backlog at November 30, 2020 are expected to be delivered during the year ending November 30, 2021.
Community Count. Our average community count for 2020 declined 3% from the previous year, reflecting decreases of 12% in our Southwest and Southeast homebuilding reporting segments and 3% in our Central segment, partly offset by a 10% increase in our West Coast segment. Our ending community count for 2020 was down 6% from the prior year. The year-over-year decreases in both our average and ending community counts primarily reflected the close-out of communities earlier than planned due to our accelerated, demand-driven net order pace, our reduced investments in land and land development in the 2020 second and third quarters, and delays in community openings due in part to the negative impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic.
HOMEBUILDING
The following table presents a summary of certain financial and operational data for our homebuilding operations (dollars in thousands, except average selling price):
The following tables present information about our homes delivered, net orders, cancellation rates as a percentage of gross orders, net order value, average community count, and ending backlog (number of homes and value) by homebuilding reporting segment (dollars in thousands):
As discussed above under Item 1 - Business, the composition of our homes delivered, net orders and backlog shifts with the mix of our active communities and the corresponding average selling prices of the homes ordered and/or delivered at these communities in any particular period, and it changes as new communities open and existing communities wind down or close out. In addition, with our Built-to-Order model, the selling prices of individual homes within a community may vary due to differing lot sizes and locations, home square footage, and option and upgrade selections. These intrinsic variations in our business limit the effective comparability of our homes delivered, net orders and backlog as well as their corresponding values between sequential and year-over-year periods, in addition to the effect of prevailing economic or housing market conditions in or across any particular periods.
Revenues. Homebuilding revenues of $4.17 billion in 2020 decreased from 2019, reflecting declines in both housing and land sale revenues largely caused by the negative impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic discussed above under “Overview.”
Housing revenues in 2020 decreased 8% from the previous year, as a 10% decrease in homes delivered was partly offset by a 2% increase in the overall average selling price of those homes. In 2020, homes delivered were tempered primarily by the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related COVID-19 control responses, including the substantial year-over-year decline in our 2020 second quarter net orders. The overall average selling price of our homes delivered rose in 2020 as compared to 2019, largely due to the favorable pricing environment in the 2020 second half that enabled us to increase prices in many of our communities.
Land sale revenues for 2020 decreased 37% from 2019. Generally, land sale revenues fluctuate with our decisions to maintain or decrease our land ownership position in certain markets based upon the volume of our holdings, our business strategy, the strength and number of developers and other land buyers in particular markets at given points in time, the availability of opportunities to sell land at acceptable prices and prevailing market conditions.
Operating Income. Our homebuilding operating income decreased 4% in 2020, as compared to the previous year, due to a decline in housing gross profits, partly offset by a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses. In 2020, homebuilding operating income included total inventory-related charges of $28.7 million, as discussed in Note 7 - Inventory Impairments and Land Option Contract Abandonments in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, and severance charges of $6.7 million. The severance charges were associated with workforce reductions made during the 2020 second quarter and were estimated at implementation to yield annualized savings of approximately $40 million allocated between construction and land costs and selling, general and administrative expenses. In 2019, homebuilding operating income included $17.3 million of inventory-related charges. As a percentage of homebuilding revenues, our homebuilding operating income for 2020 improved 30 basis points year over year to 7.6%. Excluding inventory-related charges for both periods and the above-mentioned severance charges in 2020, our homebuilding operating income margin improved 70 basis points to 8.4% in 2020 from 7.7% in 2019.
In 2020, housing gross profits decreased by $42.4 million, or 5%, to $785.3 million from $827.6 million in 2019. The year-over-year decrease in 2020 reflected the lower volume of homes delivered, partly offset by an increase in the housing gross profit margin. Housing gross profits for 2020 and 2019 included the respective inventory-related charges described above.
Our housing gross profit margin for 2020 increased 60 basis points from the previous year, mainly as a result of a shift in the mix of homes delivered and a favorable pricing environment (approximately 40 basis points); lower amortization of previously capitalized interest as a percentage of housing revenues (approximately 40 basis points); and a decrease in sales incentives, reflecting strong housing demand (approximately 10 basis points). These items were partly offset by an increase in inventory-related charges (approximately 30 basis points).
We incur interest principally from our borrowings to finance land acquisitions, land development, home construction and other operating and capital needs. The amount of interest incurred generally fluctuates based on the average amount of debt outstanding for the period and/or the interest rate on that debt. In 2020, interest incurred totaled $124.1 million, down 13% from $143.4 million in 2019, mainly due to our lower average debt level. All interest incurred during 2020 and 2019 was capitalized as the average amount of our inventory qualifying for interest capitalization was higher than our average debt level for each period. As a result, we had no interest expense for 2020 or 2019.
Interest amortized to construction and land costs associated with housing operations totaled $129.3 million in 2020 and $156.1 million in 2019. The year-over-year decrease in interest amortized in 2020 mainly reflected fewer homes delivered and the reduction in our interest incurred. As a percentage of housing revenues, the amortization of previously capitalized interest associated with housing operations was 3.1% for 2020 and 3.5% for 2019. Interest amortized to construction and land costs in 2020 and 2019 included $.4 million and $.7 million, respectively, of amortization of previously capitalized interest related to land sales that occurred during those years.
Excluding the amortization of previously capitalized interest associated with housing operations and the above-mentioned inventory-related charges in the applicable periods, our adjusted housing gross profit margin increased 50 basis points to 22.7% in 2020 from 22.2% in 2019. The calculation of adjusted housing gross profit margin, which we believe provides a clearer measure of the performance of our business, is described below under “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Selling, general and administrative expenses for 2020 decreased 5% from the prior year, primarily reflecting the lower number of homes delivered and our targeted actions to reduce overhead costs, partly offset by the above-mentioned severance charges of $6.7 million we recorded in the 2020 second quarter. As a percentage of housing revenues, our selling, general and administrative expenses rose 30 basis points in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to decreased operating leverage from lower housing revenues, partly offset by the lower expenses. Excluding the severance charges recorded in 2020, our selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues rose 20 basis points year over year to 11.2%.
The following table presents the components of our selling, general and administrative expenses (dollars in thousands):
(a)Marketing expenses in 2020 and 2019 reflect our adoption of Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC 606”) effective December 1, 2018, as described in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
(b)Commission expenses include sales commissions on homes delivered paid to internal sales counselors and/or external real estate brokers.
Interest Income. Interest income, which is generated from short-term investments, totaled $2.6 million in 2020 and $2.2 million in 2019. Generally, increases and decreases in interest income are attributable to changes in the interest-bearing average balances of short-term investments and fluctuations in interest rates.
Equity in Income (Loss) of Unconsolidated Joint Ventures. Our equity in income of unconsolidated joint ventures totaled $12.5 million in 2020, compared to equity in loss of unconsolidated joint ventures of $1.5 million in 2019. The improved results primarily reflected 99 homes delivered from an unconsolidated joint venture in California in 2020, compared to no homes delivered from unconsolidated joint ventures in 2019. Further information regarding our investments in unconsolidated joint ventures is provided in Note 9 - Investments in Unconsolidated Joint Ventures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt. Our $6.8 million loss on early extinguishment of debt in 2019 was associated with our optional redemption of $350.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our 8.00% senior notes due 2020 (“8.00% Senior Notes due 2020”) prior to their maturity date.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This report contains information about our adjusted housing gross profit margin, adjusted income tax expense, adjusted net income, adjusted diluted earnings per share, adjusted effective tax rate, and ratio of net debt to capital, none of which are calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). We believe these non-GAAP financial measures are relevant and useful to investors in understanding our operations and the leverage employed in our operations, and may be helpful in comparing us with other companies in the homebuilding industry to the extent they provide similar information. However, because they are not calculated in accordance with GAAP, these non-GAAP financial measures may not be completely comparable to other companies in the homebuilding industry and, thus, should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to operating performance and/or financial measures prescribed by GAAP. Rather, these non-GAAP financial measures should be used to supplement their respective most directly comparable GAAP financial measures in order to provide a greater understanding of the factors and trends affecting our operations.
Adjusted Housing Gross Profit Margin. The following table reconciles our housing gross profit margin calculated in accordance with GAAP to the non-GAAP financial measure of our adjusted housing gross profit margin (dollars in thousands):
(a)Represents inventory impairment and land option contract abandonment charges associated with housing operations.
(b)Represents the amortization of previously capitalized interest associated with housing operations.
Adjusted housing gross profit margin is a non-GAAP financial measure, which we calculate by dividing housing revenues less housing construction and land costs excluding (1) housing inventory impairment and land option contract abandonment charges (as applicable) recorded during a given period and (2) amortization of previously capitalized interest associated with housing operations, by housing revenues. The most directly comparable GAAP financial measure is housing gross profit margin. We believe adjusted housing gross profit margin is a relevant and useful financial measure to investors in evaluating our performance as it measures the gross profits we generated specifically on the homes delivered during a given period. This non-GAAP financial measure isolates the impact that the housing inventory impairment and land option contract abandonment charges, and the amortization of previously capitalized interest associated with housing operations, have on housing gross profit margins, and allows investors to make comparisons with our competitors that adjust housing gross profit margins in a similar
manner. We also believe investors will find adjusted housing gross profit margin relevant and useful because it represents a profitability measure that may be compared to a prior period without regard to variability of housing inventory impairment and land option contract abandonment charges, and amortization of previously capitalized interest associated with housing operations. This financial measure assists us in making strategic decisions regarding community location and product mix, product pricing and construction pace.
Adjusted Income Tax Expense, Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted Diluted Earnings Per Share and Adjusted Effective Tax Rate. The following table reconciles our income tax expense, net income, diluted earnings per share and effective tax rate calculated in accordance with GAAP to the non-GAAP financial measures of adjusted income tax expense, adjusted net income, adjusted diluted earnings per share and adjusted effective tax rate, respectively (in thousands, except per share amounts):
(a)For the year ended November 30, 2020, income tax expense and the related effective tax rate reflected the favorable impacts of $18.7 million of federal energy tax credits we earned from building energy-efficient homes, $12.0 million of excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation, partly offset by $5.7 million of non-deductible executive compensation expense under Internal Revenue Code 162(m). For the year ended November 30, 2019, income tax expense and the related effective tax rate reflected the favorable impacts of $5.3 million of excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation, a $4.4 million deferred tax asset valuation allowance reversal and $4.3 million of federal energy tax credits we earned from building energy-efficient homes, partly offset by $5.3 million of non-deductible executive compensation expense and a $1.9 million non-cash charge due to the re-measurement of deferred tax assets based on a reduction in certain state income tax rates. For the year ended November 30, 2018, income tax expense and adjusted income tax expense, as well as the related effective tax rate and adjusted effective tax rate, included the favorable impacts of the reduction in the federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21%, effective January 1, 2018, $10.7 million of federal energy tax credits we earned from building energy-efficient homes, a $2.1 million net benefit from a reduction in our deferred tax asset valuation allowance, and $1.0 million of excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation as a result of our adoption of Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-09, “Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting” (“ASU 2016-09”), effective December 1, 2017.
Our adjusted income tax expense, adjusted net income, adjusted diluted earnings per share and adjusted effective tax rate are non-GAAP financial measures, which we calculate by excluding a non-cash charge of $112.5 million recorded in 2018 from our reported income tax expense, net income, diluted earnings per share and effective tax rate, respectively. This charge was primarily due to our accounting re-measurement of our deferred tax assets based on the above-noted reduction in the federal corporate income tax rate under the TCJA. The most directly comparable GAAP financial measures are our income tax expense, net income, diluted earnings per share and effective tax rate. We believe that these non-GAAP measures are meaningful to investors as they allow for an evaluation of our operating results without the impact of the TCJA-related charge.
Ratio of Net Debt to Capital. The following table reconciles our ratio of debt to capital calculated in accordance with GAAP to the non-GAAP financial measure of our ratio of net debt to capital (dollars in thousands):
The ratio of net debt to capital is a non-GAAP financial measure, which we calculate by dividing notes payable, net of homebuilding cash and cash equivalents, by capital (notes payable, net of homebuilding cash and cash equivalents, plus stockholders’ equity). The most directly comparable GAAP financial measure is the ratio of debt to capital. We believe the ratio of net debt to capital is a relevant and useful financial measure to investors in understanding the degree of leverage employed in our operations.
HOMEBUILDING REPORTING SEGMENTS
Below is a discussion of the financial results of each of our homebuilding reporting segments. Further information regarding these segments, including their pretax income (loss), is included in Note 2 - Segment Information in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report. The difference between each homebuilding reporting segment’s operating income (loss) and pretax income (loss) is generally due to the equity in income (loss) of unconsolidated joint ventures, which is also presented in Note 2 - Segment Information in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, and/or interest income and expense.
The financial results for each of our homebuilding reporting segments for the year ended November 30, 2020 were negatively affected by the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, as discussed above under “Overview.” In three of our four homebuilding reporting segments, we delivered fewer homes in 2020 compared to the previous year largely as a result of the significant decrease in our net orders in the 2020 second quarter.
West Coast. The following table presents financial information related to our West Coast homebuilding reporting segment for the years indicated (dollars in thousands, except average selling price):
This segment’s revenues in 2020 and 2019 were generated from both housing operations and land sales. Housing revenues of $1.75 billion in 2020 declined 8% from $1.90 billion in 2019, reflecting a lower number of homes delivered, partly offset by an increase in the average selling price of those homes. The year-over-year increase in the average selling price of homes delivered in 2020 was primarily due to product and geographic mix shifts of homes delivered and the favorable pricing environment in this segment. Land sale revenues were nominal in 2020 and totaled $8.6 million in 2019.
This segment’s operating income in 2020 decreased from the previous year, mainly reflecting lower housing gross profits, partly offset by lower selling, general and administrative expenses. Housing gross profits declined due to decreases in both housing revenues and the housing gross profit margin. The decrease in the housing gross profit margin was primarily due to a mix shift of homes delivered and an increase in inventory-related charges. Inventory-related charges impacting the housing gross profit margin totaled $21.9 million in 2020, compared to $15.6 million in 2019. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues for 2020 were flat with the previous year as the favorable impacts of overhead cost reductions and lower legal fees were offset by reduced operating leverage as a result of lower housing revenues.
Southwest. The following table presents financial information related to our Southwest homebuilding reporting segment for the years indicated (dollars in thousands, except average selling price):
In 2020 and 2019, this segment’s revenues were generated from both housing operations and land sales. Housing revenues for 2020 grew 3% year over year to $780.7 million, reflecting increases in both the number of homes delivered and the average selling price of those homes. The growth in the number of homes delivered was attributable to our Nevada operations. The higher average selling price was mainly due to shifts in the product and geographic mix of homes delivered, and the favorable pricing environment in this segment. Land sale revenues totaled $16.1 million in 2020 and $9.5 million in 2019.
This segment’s operating income increased $22.2 million from 2019 primarily due to higher housing and land sale gross profits. The year-over-year increase in housing gross profits reflected growth in housing revenues and an increase in the housing gross profit margin. The improvement in the housing gross profit margin was largely due to lower relative amortization of previously capitalized interest, a mix shift of homes delivered, a favorable pricing environment, and increased operating leverage due to higher housing revenues. Land sales generated profits of $2.0 million in 2020, compared to a loss of $.5 million in 2019. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues for 2020 improved from 2019 mainly as a result of increased operating leverage due to higher housing revenues and overhead cost reductions.
Central. The following table presents financial information related to our Central homebuilding reporting segment for the years indicated (dollars in thousands, except average selling price):
In 2020, revenues for this segment were generated solely from housing operations. In 2019, revenues for this segment were generated from both housing operations and land sales. Housing revenues in 2020 declined 5% from $1.26 billion in 2019 due to a decrease in the number of homes delivered, partly offset by an increase in the average selling price of those homes. The increase in the average selling price reflected shifts in product and geographic mix of homes delivered, and the favorable pricing environment in this segment. Land sale revenues totaled $8.3 million in 2019.
This segment’s operating income for 2020 increased $2.5 million from 2019, mainly due to a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses, partly offset by the absence of land sale profits in the current year. Housing gross profits for 2020 were essentially flat year over year as the impact of a higher gross profit margin was offset by a decrease in housing revenues. The housing gross profit margin rose from the previous year primarily due to a shift in the mix of homes delivered, a favorable pricing environment and lower relative amortization of previously capitalized interest, partly offset by an increase in inventory-related charges. Inventory-related charges impacting the housing gross profit margin for 2020 and 2019 were $5.5 million and $.8 million, respectively. Land sales generated profits of $1.6 million in 2019. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues for 2020 increased from the prior year, reflecting reduced operating leverage due to lower housing revenues.
Southeast. The following table presents financial information related to our Southeast homebuilding reporting segment for the years indicated (dollars in thousands, except average selling price):
This segment’s revenues in 2020 and 2019 were generated from both housing operations and land sales. Housing revenues in 2020 decreased 28% to $428.8 million from $592.3 million in 2019 as a result of decreases in both the number of homes delivered and the average selling price of those homes. The year-over-year decrease in the average selling price in 2020 was mainly due to shifts in the product and geographic mix of homes delivered, with a lower proportion of homes delivered from higher-priced communities.
In 2020, this segment’s operating income increased by $4.4 million from 2019 due to a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses, partly offset by lower housing gross profits. The year-over-year decrease in housing gross profits reflected a decline in housing revenues, partially offset by an increase in the housing gross profit margin. The housing gross profit margin improved primarily due to a shift in the mix of homes delivered and lower relative amortization of previously capitalized interest, partly offset by reduced operating leverage due to lower housing revenues. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues for 2020 increased from the previous year, primarily due to decreased operating leverage as a result of lower housing revenues, partly offset by our overhead reduction efforts and favorable legal settlements and recoveries.
FINANCIAL SERVICES REPORTING SEGMENT
The following table presents a summary of selected financial and operational data for our financial services reporting segment (dollars in thousands):
(a)Loan originations and sales occurred within KBHS.
Revenues. Our financial services reporting segment generates revenues primarily from insurance commissions and title services. The year-over-year growth in our financial services revenues for 2020 reflected an increase in title services revenues, partly offset by a slight decrease in insurance commissions.
Pretax income. Our financial services pretax income for 2020 grew 42% from the previous year mainly due to an increase in the equity in income of unconsolidated joint ventures. In 2020, our equity in income of our unconsolidated joint venture, KBHS, increased 73% year over year as a result of a substantial increase in the principal amount of loan originations and improved margins. The higher principal amount of loan originations in 2020 primarily reflected an increase in the percentage of homebuyers using KBHS and an increase in the average selling price of homes we delivered, partly offset by a 10% decrease in the number of homes we delivered.
INCOME TAXES
Our income tax expense and effective income tax rate were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Our effective tax rate for 2020 decreased from the previous year, mainly due to a $14.4 million increase in federal energy tax credits we earned from building energy-efficient homes and a $6.7 million increase in excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation, partly offset by a $2.5 million decrease in deferred tax asset valuation allowance reversals.
The federal energy tax credits for the year ended November 30, 2020 resulted from legislation enacted in December 2019 that, among other things, extended the availability of a business tax credit for building new energy-efficient homes through December 31, 2020. The federal energy tax credits for the year ended November 30, 2019 primarily resulted from legislation enacted on February 9, 2018 that, among other things, extended the availability of a business tax credit for building new energy-efficient homes through December 31, 2017. Prior to this legislation, the tax credit expired on December 31, 2016. In December 2020, federal legislation was enacted that, among other things, extended the availability of federal energy tax credits through December 31, 2021. This extension is expected to benefit our income tax provision in future periods.
In June 2020, California enacted tax legislation that approved the suspension of California net operating loss (“NOL”) deductions for tax years 2020, 2021 and 2022. The suspension of California NOL deductions did not have an impact on our income tax expense for the year ended November 30, 2020.
Under current accounting standards, we expect volatility in our income tax expense in future periods, the magnitude of which will depend on, among other factors, the price of our common stock and the timing and volume of stock-based compensation award activity, such as employee exercises of stock options and the vesting of restricted stock awards and performance-based restricted stock units (each, a “PSU”).
For each of the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, the amount of income taxes we paid was substantially less than our income tax expense primarily due to the utilization of our deferred tax assets to reduce taxable income. We anticipate the amount of income taxes we pay will be less than our income tax expense for the next several years.
Further information regarding our income taxes is provided in Note 14 - Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview. We have funded our homebuilding and financial services activities over the last several years with:
• internally generated cash flows;
• public issuances of debt securities;
• borrowings under the Credit Facility;
• land option contracts and other similar contracts and seller notes;
• public issuances of our common stock; and
• letters of credit and performance bonds.
We manage our use of cash in the operation of our business to support the execution of our primary strategic goals. Over the past several years, we have primarily used cash for:
•land acquisitions and land development;
•home construction;
•operating expenses;
•principal and interest payments on notes payable; and
•repayments of borrowings under the Credit Facility.
Cash flows for each of our communities depend on their stage of development and can differ significantly from reported earnings. Early stages of development or expansion require significant cash outflows for land acquisition, zoning plat and other approvals, land development, and construction of model homes, roads, utilities, landscape and other items. Because these costs
are a component of our inventory and are not recognized in our income statement until a home is delivered, we incur significant cash outflows prior to the recognition of earnings. In the later stages of a community as homes are delivered, cash inflows may significantly exceed earnings reported for financial statement purposes, as the cash outflows associated with the land and home construction were previously incurred.
Though our revenues in 2020 were tempered primarily due to the negative impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, our net cash provided by operating activities increased to $310.7 million in 2020, compared to $251.0 million in the previous year. In addition, our total liquidity improved to $1.47 billion at November 30, 2020 from $1.23 billion at November 30, 2019. Based on our positive 2021 business forecast as discussed below under “Outlook,” we have no material concerns related to our liquidity. While the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic creates potential liquidity risks, as discussed further below, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, our anticipated cash flows from operations and amounts available under our Credit Facility will be sufficient to fund our anticipated operating and land-related investment needs for at least the next twelve months. We have no significant notes payable maturities until December 2021.
We limited our investments in land and land development in the second and most of the third quarter in prioritizing cash preservation and liquidity in light of lingering uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. With the sustained strong housing demand over the 2020 second half, we intensified our investments in the fourth quarter, resulting in a 63% year-over-year increase. As a result, our investments in land and land development increased to $1.69 billion in 2020, compared to $1.62 billion in 2019. Approximately 50% of our total investments in 2020 related to land acquisitions, compared to approximately 39% in 2019. While we made strategic investments in land and land development in each of our homebuilding reporting segments during 2020 and 2019, approximately 55% and 53%, respectively, of these investments for each year were made in our West Coast homebuilding reporting segment. Our investments in land and land development in the future will depend significantly on market conditions and available opportunities that meet our investment return standards to support home delivery and revenue growth in 2021 and beyond.
The following table presents the number of lots we owned or controlled under land option contracts and other similar contracts and the carrying value of inventory by homebuilding reporting segment (dollars in thousands):
The number and carrying value of lots we owned or controlled under land option contracts and other similar contracts at November 30, 2020 increased from November 30, 2019, primarily due to our investments in land and land development in 2020 and an increase in the number of homes under construction. The number of lots in inventory as of November 30, 2020 included 10,254 lots under contract where the associated deposits were refundable at our discretion, compared to 9,212 of such lots at November 30, 2019, reflecting ordinary course fluctuations in the number of such contracts. Our lots controlled under land under contracts and other similar contracts as a percentage of total lots was 40% at November 30, 2020 and 41% at November 30, 2019. Generally, this percentage fluctuates with our decisions to control (or abandon) lots under land option contracts and other similar contracts or to purchase (or sell owned) lots based on available opportunities and our investment return standards.
Liquidity. The table below summarizes our total cash and cash equivalents, and total liquidity (in thousands):
The majority of our cash equivalents at November 30, 2020 and 2019 were invested in interest-bearing bank deposit accounts.
Capital Resources. Our notes payable consisted of the following (in thousands):
Our financial leverage, as measured by the ratio of debt to capital, was 39.6% at November 30, 2020, compared to 42.3% at November 30, 2019. Our ratio of net debt to capital (a calculation that is described above under “Non-GAAP Financial Measures”) at November 30, 2020 improved to 28.6%, compared to 35.2% at November 30, 2019. Our next scheduled debt maturity is on December 15, 2021, when $450.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our 7.00% Senior Notes due 2021 become due.
LOC Facility. We had $29.7 million and $15.8 million of letters of credit outstanding under the LOC Facility at November 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Further information regarding our LOC Facility is provided in Note 15 - Notes Payable in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
Unsecured Revolving Credit Facility. We have an $800.0 million Credit Facility that will mature on October 7, 2023. The amount of the Credit Facility available for cash borrowings and the issuance of letters of credit depends on the total cash borrowings and letters of credit outstanding under the Credit Facility and the maximum available amount under the terms of the Credit Facility. As of November 30, 2020, we had no cash borrowings and $12.4 million of letters of credit outstanding under the Credit Facility. We did not borrow under the Credit Facility during 2020. The Credit Facility is further described in Note 15 - Notes Payable in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
Under the terms of the Credit Facility, we are required, among other things, to maintain compliance with various covenants, including financial covenants regarding our consolidated tangible net worth, consolidated leverage ratio (“Leverage Ratio”), and either a consolidated interest coverage ratio (“Interest Coverage Ratio”) or minimum liquidity level, each as defined therein. Our compliance with these financial covenants is measured by calculations and metrics that are specifically defined or described by the terms of the Credit Facility and can differ in certain respects from comparable GAAP or other commonly used terms. The financial covenant requirements under the Credit Facility are set forth below:
•Consolidated Tangible Net Worth - We must maintain a consolidated tangible net worth at the end of any fiscal quarter greater than or equal to the sum of (a) $1.54 billion, plus (b) an amount equal to 50% of the aggregate of the cumulative consolidated net income for each fiscal quarter commencing after May 31, 2019 and ending as of the last day of such fiscal quarter (though there is no reduction if there is a consolidated net loss in any fiscal quarter), plus (c) an amount equal to 50% of the cumulative net proceeds we receive from the issuance of our capital stock after May 31, 2019.
•Leverage Ratio - We must also maintain a Leverage Ratio of less than or equal to .65 at the end of each fiscal quarter. The Leverage Ratio is calculated as the ratio of our consolidated total indebtedness to the sum of consolidated total indebtedness and consolidated tangible net worth, all as defined under the Credit Facility.
•Interest Coverage Ratio or Liquidity - We are also required to maintain either (a) an Interest Coverage Ratio of greater than or equal to 1.50 at the end of each fiscal quarter; or (b) a minimum level of liquidity, but not both. The Interest Coverage Ratio is the ratio of our consolidated adjusted EBITDA to consolidated interest incurred, each as defined under the Credit Facility, in each case for the previous 12 months. Our minimum liquidity is required to be greater than or equal to consolidated interest incurred, as defined under the Credit Facility, for the four most recently ended fiscal quarters in the aggregate.
In addition, under the Credit Facility, our investments in joint ventures and non-guarantor subsidiaries (which are shown, respectively, in Note 9 - Investments in Unconsolidated Joint Ventures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report and under Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information below) as of the end of each fiscal quarter cannot exceed the sum of (a) $104.8 million and (b) 20% of consolidated tangible net worth. Further, the Credit Facility does not permit our borrowing base indebtedness, which is the aggregate principal amount of our outstanding indebtedness for borrowed money and non-collateralized financial letters of credit, to be greater than our borrowing base (a measure relating to our inventory and unrestricted cash assets).
The covenants and other requirements under the Credit Facility represent the most restrictive provisions that we are subject to with respect to our notes payable. The following table summarizes the financial covenants and other requirements under the Credit Facility, and our actual levels or ratios (as applicable) with respect to those covenants and other requirements, in each case as of November 30, 2020:
(a)Under the terms of the Credit Facility, we are required to maintain either a minimum Interest Coverage Ratio or a minimum level of liquidity, but not both. As of November 30, 2020, we met both the Interest Coverage Ratio and the minimum liquidity requirements.
The indenture governing our senior notes does not contain any financial covenants. Subject to specified exceptions, the indenture contains certain restrictive covenants that, among other things, limit our ability to incur secured indebtedness, or engage in sale-leaseback transactions involving property above a certain specified value. In addition, our senior notes contain certain limitations related to mergers, consolidations, and sales of assets.
As of the date of this report, we were in compliance with the applicable terms of all our covenants and other requirements under the Credit Facility, the senior notes, the indenture, and the mortgages and land contracts due to land sellers and other loans. Our ability to access the Credit Facility for cash borrowings and letters of credit and our ability to secure future debt financing depend, in part, on our ability to remain in such compliance. There are no agreements that restrict our payment of dividends other than the Credit Facility, which would restrict our payment of cash and certain other dividends, such as cash dividends on our common stock, if a default under the Credit Facility exists at the time of any such payment, or if any such payment would result in such a default (other than dividends paid within 60 days after declaration, if there was no default at the time of declaration).
Depending on available terms, we finance certain land acquisitions with purchase-money financing from land sellers or with other forms of financing from third parties. At November 30, 2020, we had outstanding mortgages and land contracts due to land sellers and other loans payable in connection with such financing of $4.7 million, secured primarily by the underlying property, which had an aggregate carrying value of $27.1 million.
Credit Ratings. Our credit ratings are periodically reviewed by rating agencies. In January 2020, Standard and Poor’s Financial Services upgraded our credit rating to BB from BB-, and changed the rating outlook to stable from positive.
Consolidated Cash Flows. The following table presents a summary of net cash provided by (used in) our operating, investing and financing activities (in thousands):
Operating Activities. Operating activities provided net cash of $310.7 million in 2020, compared to $251.0 million in 2019. Generally, our net operating cash flows fluctuate primarily based on changes in our inventories and our profitability.
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 primarily reflected net income of $296.2 million, a net decrease in receivables of $59.3 million, largely reflecting an income tax refund received, and a net increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $4.1 million, partly offset by a net increase in inventories of $183.2 million. Net cash provided by operating activities in 2019 mainly reflected net income of $268.8 million and a net decrease in receivables of $44.4 million, partially offset by a net increase in inventories of $165.3 million and a net decrease in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $40.6 million.
Investing Activities. Investing activities used net cash of $26.6 million in 2020 and $40.9 million in 2019. Our uses of cash in 2020 included $28.8 million for net purchases of property and equipment and $10.4 million for contributions to unconsolidated joint ventures. These uses of cash were partially offset by a $12.7 million return of investments in unconsolidated joint ventures. In 2019, the net cash used in investing activities included $40.5 million for net purchases of property and equipment and $11.3 million for contributions to unconsolidated joint ventures. These uses of cash were partly offset by $5.8 million of proceeds from the sale of a building and a $5.0 million return of investments in unconsolidated joint ventures.
Financing Activities. Financing activities used net cash of $56.4 million in 2020 and $330.4 million in 2019. The year-over-year change in net cash used in financing activities was mainly due to the financing transactions we completed in 2019. In 2020, net cash was used for dividend payments on our common stock of $38.1 million, payments on mortgages and land contracts due to land sellers and other loans of $24.9 million and tax payments associated with stock-based compensation awards of $9.5 million. The cash used was partially offset by cash provided by $16.1 million of issuances of common stock under employee stock plans.
In 2019, net cash was used for our total repayment of $980.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our 8.00% Senior Notes due 2020, 1.375% convertible senior notes due 2019 (“1.375% Convertible Senior Notes due 2019”) and 4.75% senior notes due 2019 (“4.75% Senior Notes due 2019”), payments on mortgages and land contracts due to land sellers and other loans of $41.1 million, dividend payments on our common stock of $20.4 million and tax payments associated with stock-based compensation awards of $7.3 million. The cash used was partly offset by cash provided by our public offering of $300.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.80% senior notes due 2029 (“4.80% Senior Notes due 2029”), concurrent public offerings of $300.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 6.875% senior notes due 2027 (“6.875% Senior Notes due 2027”) and an additional $100.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our existing series of 7.625% senior notes due 2023 (“7.625% Senior Notes due 2023”), and $30.5 million of issuances of common stock under employee stock plans.
Dividends. Our board of directors declared quarterly cash dividends of $.09 per share of common stock in the 2020 first, second and third quarters. In the 2020 fourth quarter, our board of directors approved an increase in the quarterly cash dividend on our common stock to $.15 per share and declared a quarterly cash dividend at the new higher rate. Our board of directors declared quarterly cash dividends of $.025 per share of common stock in both the 2019 first and second quarters. In the 2019 third quarter, our board of directors approved an increase in the quarterly cash dividend on our common stock to $.09 per share, and declared quarterly cash dividends at the new rate in the 2019 third and fourth quarters. Cash dividends declared and paid during the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019 totaled $.42 and $.23 per share of common stock, respectively. The declaration and payment of future cash dividends on our common stock, whether at current levels or at all, are at the discretion of our board of directors, and depend upon, among other things, our expected future earnings, cash flows, capital requirements, access to external financing, debt structure and any adjustments thereto, operational and financial investment strategy and general financial condition, as well as general business conditions.
Shelf Registration Statement. On July 9, 2020, we filed an automatically effective universal shelf registration statement (“2020 Shelf Registration”) with the SEC. The 2020 Shelf Registration registers the offering of securities that we may issue from time to time in amounts to be determined. Our ability to issue securities is subject to market conditions. The 2020 Shelf Registration replaced our previously effective universal shelf registration statement filed with the SEC on July 14, 2017. We have not made any offerings of securities under the 2020 Shelf Registration.
Share Repurchase Program. In May 2018, our board of directors authorized us to repurchase a total of up to 4,000,000 shares of our outstanding common stock. This authorization reaffirmed and incorporated the then-current balance of 1,627,000 shares that remained under a prior board-approved share repurchase program. In 2018, we repurchased 1,806,053 shares of our common stock pursuant to this authorization, at a total cost of $35.0 million. We did not repurchase any of our common stock under this authorization in 2020 or 2019. The amount and timing of shares purchased under the remaining share repurchase authorization are subject to market and business conditions and other factors, and purchases may be made from time to time and at any time through open market or privately negotiated transactions. The remaining share repurchase authorization will continue in effect until fully used or earlier terminated or suspended by our board of directors.
Unrelated to the common stock repurchase program, as further discussed in Note 19 - Stockholders’ Equity in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, our board of directors authorized in 2014 the repurchase of no more than 680,000 shares of our outstanding common stock solely as necessary for director compensation elections with respect to settling outstanding stock appreciation rights awards (“Director Plan SARs”) granted under our Non-Employee Directors Compensation Plan (“Director Plan”). As of November 30, 2020, we have not repurchased any shares pursuant to the board of directors authorization.
While the unprecedented public health and governmental efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19 have created uncertainty as to general economic conditions for 2021 and beyond, as of the date of this report, we believe we have adequate capital resources and sufficient access to external financing sources to satisfy our short-term and reasonably anticipated long-term requirements for funds to conduct our operations and meet other needs in the ordinary course of our business. In 2021, we expect to use or redeploy our cash resources or cash borrowings under the Credit Facility to support our business within the context of prevailing market conditions. During this time, we may also engage in capital markets, bank loan, project debt or other financial transactions, including the repurchase of debt or equity securities or potential new issuances of debt or equity securities to support our business needs. The amounts involved in these transactions, if any, may be material. In addition, as necessary or desirable, we may adjust or amend the terms of and/or expand the capacity of the Credit Facility or the LOC Facility, or enter into additional letter of credit facilities, or other similar facility arrangements, in each case with the same or other financial institutions, or allow any such facilities to mature or expire. However, with the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, which could materially and negatively affect our business and the housing market, our ability to engage in such transactions may be constrained by volatile or tight economic, capital, credit and/or financial market conditions, as well as moderated investor and/or lender interest or capacity and/or our liquidity, leverage and net worth, and we can provide no assurance as to successfully completing, the costs of, or the operational limitations arising from any one or series of such transactions. Further discussion of the potential impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic on our capital resources and liquidity is provided above under Item 1A - Risk Factors.
SUPPLEMENTAL GUARANTOR FINANCIAL INFORMATION
As of November 30, 2020, we had $1.75 billion in aggregate principal amount of outstanding senior notes and no borrowings outstanding under the Credit Facility. Our obligations to pay principal, premium, if any, and interest on the senior notes and borrowings, if any, under the Credit Facility are guaranteed on a joint and several basis by certain of our subsidiaries (“Guarantor Subsidiaries”), which are listed on Exhibit 22. Our other subsidiaries, including all of our subsidiaries associated with our financial services operations, do not guarantee any such indebtedness (collectively, “Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries”), although we may cause a Non-Guarantor Subsidiary to become a Guarantor Subsidiary if we believe it to be in our or the relevant subsidiary’s best interest. See Note 15 - Notes Payable in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report for additional information regarding the terms of our senior notes and the Credit Facility.
The guarantees are full and unconditional and the Guarantor Subsidiaries are 100% owned by us. The guarantees are senior unsecured obligations of each of the Guarantor Subsidiaries and rank equally in right of payment with all unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness and guarantees of such Guarantor Subsidiaries. The guarantees are effectively subordinated to any secured indebtedness of such Guarantor Subsidiaries to the extent the value of the assets securing such indebtedness, and structurally subordinated to indebtedness and other liabilities of Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries.
Pursuant to the terms of the indenture governing the senior notes and the terms of the Credit Facility, if any of the Guarantor Subsidiaries ceases to be a “significant subsidiary” as defined by Rule 1-02 of Regulation S-X using a 5% rather than a 10% threshold (provided that the assets of our non-guarantor subsidiaries do not in the aggregate exceed 10% of an adjusted
measure of our consolidated total assets), it will be automatically and unconditionally released and discharged from its guaranty of the senior notes and the Credit Facility so long as all guarantees by such Guarantor Subsidiary of any other of our or our subsidiaries’ indebtedness are terminated at or prior to the time of such release.
The following tables present summarized financial information for KB Home and the Guarantor Subsidiaries on a combined basis, excluding unconsolidated joint ventures and after the elimination of (a) intercompany transactions and balances between KB Home and the Guarantor Subsidiaries and (b) equity in earnings from and investments in the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries. See Note 9 - Investments in Unconsolidated Joint Ventures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report for additional information regarding our unconsolidated joint ventures.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Unconsolidated Joint Ventures. As discussed in Note 9 - Investments in Unconsolidated Joint Ventures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, we have investments in unconsolidated joint ventures in various markets where our homebuilding operations are located. None of our unconsolidated joint ventures had outstanding debt at November 30, 2020.
Land Option Contracts and Other Similar Contracts. As discussed in Note 8 - Variable Interest Entities in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, in the ordinary course of our business, we enter into land option contracts and other similar contracts with third parties and unconsolidated entities to acquire rights to land for the construction of homes. Our land option contracts and other similar contracts generally do not contain provisions requiring our specific performance. Our decision to exercise a particular land option contract or other similar contract depends on the results of our due diligence reviews and ongoing market and project feasibility analysis that we conduct after entering into such a contract. In some cases, our decision to exercise a land option contract or other similar contract may be conditioned on the land seller obtaining necessary entitlements, such as zoning rights and environmental and development approvals, and/or physically developing the underlying land by a pre-determined date. We typically have the ability not to exercise our rights to the underlying land for any reason and forfeit our deposits without further penalty or obligation to the sellers. If we were to acquire all of the land we had under land option contracts and other similar contracts at November 30, 2020, we estimate the remaining purchase price to be paid would be as follows: 2021 - $883.4 million; 2022 - $256.7 million; 2023 - $109.8 million; 2024 - $53.8 million; 2025 - $57.8 million; and thereafter - $2.3 million.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND COMMERCIAL COMMITMENTS
The following table presents our future cash requirements under contractual obligations as of November 30, 2020 (in millions):
(a)Represents liabilities for inventory not owned associated with financing arrangements as discussed in Note 8 - Variable Interest Entities in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, as well as liabilities for fixed or determinable amounts associated with tax increment financing entity (“TIFE”) assessments. As homes are delivered, the obligation to pay the remaining TIFE assessments associated with each underlying lot is transferred to the homebuyer. As such, these assessment obligations will be paid by us only to the extent we do not deliver homes on applicable lots before the related TIFE obligations mature.
As discussed in Note 17 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, we had $897.6 million of performance bonds and $42.1 million of letters of credit outstanding at November 30, 2020. At November 30, 2019, we had $793.9 million of performance bonds and $34.7 million of letters of credit outstanding.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The accompanying consolidated financial statements were prepared in conformity with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Actual results could differ from those estimates and assumptions. See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report for a discussion of our significant accounting policies. The following are accounting policies that we believe are critical because of the significance of the activity to which they relate or because they require the use of significant estimates, judgments and/or other assumptions in their application.
Homebuilding Revenue Recognition. We recognize homebuilding revenue in accordance with ASC 606 by applying the following steps in determining the timing and amount of revenue to recognize: (1) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, if applicable; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation.
Our home sale transactions are made pursuant to contracts under which we typically have a single performance obligation to deliver a completed home to the homebuyer when closing conditions are met. Revenues from home sales are recognized when we have satisfied the performance obligation within the sales contract, which is generally when title to and possession of the home and the risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the homebuyer on the closing date. Little to no estimation is involved in recognizing such revenues.
Land sale transactions are made pursuant to contracts under which we typically have a performance obligation(s) to deliver specified land parcels to the buyer when closing conditions are met. We evaluate each land sale contract to determine our performance obligation(s) under the contract, including whether we have a distinct promise to perform post-closing land development work that is material within the context of the contract, and use objective criteria to determine our completion of the applicable performance obligation(s), whether at a point in time or over time. Revenues from land sales are recognized when we have satisfied the performance obligation(s) within the sales contract, which is generally when title to and possession of the land and the risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the land buyer on the closing date. In instances where we have a distinct and material performance obligation(s) within the context of a land sale contract to perform land development work after the closing date, a portion of the transaction price under the contract is allocated to such performance obligation(s) and is recognized as revenue over time based upon our estimated progress toward the satisfaction of the performance obligation(s). We generally measure our progress based on our costs incurred relative to the total costs expected to satisfy the
performance obligation(s). Certain land sale contracts may require management judgment in determining the appropriate revenue recognition, but the impact of such transactions is generally immaterial.
Inventories and Cost of Sales. Housing and land inventories are stated at cost, unless the carrying value is determined not to be recoverable, in which case the affected inventories are written down to fair value or fair value less associated costs to sell. Fair value is determined based on estimated future net cash flows discounted for inherent risks associated with the real estate assets, or other valuation techniques. Due to uncertainties in the estimation process and other factors beyond our control, it is possible that actual results could differ from those estimated. Other than model homes, our inventories typically do not consist of completed unsold homes. However, as discussed above under Item 1 - Business, we may have unsold completed or partially completed homes in our inventory.
We rely on certain estimates to determine our construction and land costs and resulting housing gross profit margins associated with revenues recognized. Construction and land costs are comprised of direct and allocated costs, including estimated future costs for the limited warranty we provide on our homes, and certain amenities within a community. Land acquisition, land development and other common costs are generally allocated on a relative fair value basis to the homes or lots within the applicable community or land parcel. Land acquisition and land development costs include related interest and real estate taxes.
In determining a portion of the construction and land costs recognized for each period, we rely on project budgets that are based on a variety of assumptions, including future construction schedules and costs to be incurred. It is possible that actual results could differ from budgeted amounts for various reasons, including construction delays, construction resource shortages, increases in costs that have not yet been committed, changes in governmental requirements, unforeseen environmental hazards or other unanticipated issues encountered during construction and other factors beyond our control. While the actual results for a particular construction project are accurately reported over time, variances between the budgeted and actual costs of a project could result in the understatement or overstatement of construction and land costs and homebuilding gross profits in a particular reporting period. To reduce the potential for such distortion, we have set forth procedures that collectively comprise a critical accounting policy. These procedures, which we have applied on a consistent basis, include assessing, updating and revising project budgets on a monthly basis, obtaining commitments to the extent possible from independent subcontractors and vendors for future costs to be incurred, reviewing the adequacy of warranty accruals and historical warranty claims experience, and utilizing the most current information available to estimate construction and land costs to be charged to expense. Variances to the budgeted costs after an estimate has been charged to expense that are related to project costs are generally allocated on a relative fair value basis to the remaining homes to be delivered within the community or land parcel, while such variances related to direct construction costs are generally expensed as incurred. The variances between budgeted and actual costs have historically not been material to our consolidated financial statements. We believe that our policies provide for reasonably dependable estimates to be used in the calculation and reporting of construction and land costs.
Inventory Impairments and Land Option Contract Abandonments. Each community or land parcel in our owned inventory is assessed to determine if indicators of potential impairment exist. Impairment indicators are assessed separately for each community or land parcel on a quarterly basis and include, but are not limited to, the following: significant decreases in net orders, average selling prices, volume of homes delivered, gross profit margins on homes delivered or projected gross profit margins on homes in backlog or future deliveries; significant increases in budgeted land development and home construction costs or cancellation rates; or projected losses on expected future land sales. If indicators of potential impairment exist for a community or land parcel, the identified asset is evaluated for recoverability.
The following table presents information regarding inventory impairment and land option contract abandonment charges included in construction and land costs in our consolidated statements of operations (dollars in thousands):
(a)As impairment indicators are assessed on a quarterly basis, some of the communities or land parcels evaluated during the years ended November 30, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were evaluated in more than one quarterly period. Communities or land parcels evaluated for recoverability in more than one quarterly period are counted only once for each applicable year. In addition, we evaluated land held for future development for recoverability during 2020, 2019 and 2018. The inventory impairment charges in each of those years reflected our decisions to make changes in our operational strategies aimed at more quickly monetizing our investment in certain communities by accelerating the overall pace for selling, building and delivering homes therein, including communities on land previously held for future development.
When an indicator of potential impairment is identified for a community or land parcel, we test the asset for recoverability by comparing the carrying value of the asset to the undiscounted future net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. The undiscounted future net cash flows are impacted by then-current conditions and trends in the market in which the asset is located as well as factors known to us at the time the cash flows are calculated. These factors may include recent trends in our orders, backlog, cancellation rates and volume of homes delivered, as well as our expectations related to the following: product offerings; market supply and demand, including estimated average selling prices and related price appreciation; and land development, home construction and overhead costs to be incurred and related cost inflation.
As further described in Note 7 - Inventory Impairments and Land Option Contract Abandonments in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, given the inherent challenges and uncertainties in forecasting future results, our inventory assessments at the time they are made take into consideration whether a community or land parcel is active, meaning whether it is open for sales and/or undergoing development, or whether it is being held for future development or held for sale.
We record an inventory impairment charge on a community or land parcel that is active or held for future development when indicators of potential impairment exist and the carrying value of the real estate asset is greater than the undiscounted future net cash flows the asset is expected to generate. These real estate assets are written down to fair value, which is primarily determined based on the estimated future net cash flows discounted for inherent risk associated with each such asset, or other valuation techniques. Inputs used in our calculation of estimated discounted future net cash flows are specific to each affected real estate asset and are based on our expectations for each such asset as of the applicable measurement date, including, among others, expectations related to average selling prices and volume of homes delivered. The discount rates used in our estimated discounted cash flows ranged from 17% - 18% in 2020, 17% in 2019, and 17% - 19% during 2018. The discount rates we used were impacted by one or more of the following at the time the calculation was made: the risk-free rate of return; expected risk premium based on estimated land development, home construction and delivery timelines; market risk from potential future price erosion; cost uncertainty due to land development or home construction cost increases; and other risks specific to the asset or conditions in the market in which the asset is located.
We record an inventory impairment charge on land held for sale when the carrying value of the real estate asset is greater than its fair value. These real estate assets are written down to fair value, less associated costs to sell. The fair value of such real estate assets is generally based on bona fide letters of intent from outside parties, executed sales contracts, broker quotes or similar information.
As of November 30, 2020, the aggregate carrying value of our inventory that had been impacted by inventory impairment charges was $113.1 million, representing 16 communities and various other land parcels. As of November 30, 2019, the aggregate carrying value of our inventory that had been impacted by inventory impairment charges was $115.6 million, representing 19 communities and various other land parcels.
Our inventory controlled under land option contracts and other similar contracts is assessed to determine whether it continues to meet our investment return standards. Assessments are made separately for each optioned land parcel on a quarterly basis and are affected by the following factors relative to the market in which the asset is located, among others: current and/or anticipated net orders, average selling prices and volume of homes delivered; estimated land development and home construction costs; and projected profitability on expected future housing or land sales. When a decision is made not to exercise certain land option contracts and other similar contracts due to market conditions and/or changes in our marketing strategy, we write off the related inventory costs, including non-refundable deposits and unrecoverable pre-acquisition costs.
The estimated remaining life of each community or land parcel in our inventory depends on various factors, such as the total number of lots remaining; the expected timeline to acquire and entitle land and develop lots to build homes; the anticipated future net order and cancellation rates; and the expected timeline to build and deliver homes sold. While it is difficult to determine a precise timeframe for any particular inventory asset, based on current market conditions and expected delivery timelines, we estimate our inventory assets’ remaining operating lives to range generally from one year to in excess of 10 years and expect to realize, on an overall basis, the majority of our inventory balance as of November 30, 2020 within five years. The following table presents as of November 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively, the estimated timeframe of delivery for the last home in an applicable community or land parcel and the corresponding percentage of total inventories such categories represent within our inventory balance (dollars in millions):
The inventory balances in the 0-2 years and 3-5 years categories were located throughout all of our homebuilding reporting segments, though mostly in our West Coast and Central segments. These categories collectively represented 96% of our total inventories as of November 30, 2020, compared to 94% as of November 30, 2019. The inventory balances in the 6-10 years and greater than 10 years categories were primarily located in our West Coast, Southwest and Central segments, and together totaled $159.8 million at November 30, 2020, compared to $231.2 million at November 30, 2019. The year-over-year decrease was primarily related to our decisions to accelerate the overall timing for selling, building and delivering homes through community reactivations, and generally favorable market conditions. The inventories in the 6-10 years and greater than 10 years categories were generally comprised of land held for future development and active, multi-phase communities with large remaining land positions.
Due to the judgment and assumptions applied in our inventory impairment and land option contract abandonment assessment processes, and in our estimations of the remaining operating lives of our inventory assets and the realization of our inventory balances, particularly as to land held for future development, it is possible that actual results could differ substantially from those estimated.
Deterioration in the supply and demand factors in the overall housing market or in an individual market or submarket, or changes to our operational or selling strategy at certain communities may lead to additional inventory impairment charges, future charges associated with land sales or the abandonment of land option contracts or other similar contracts related to certain assets. Due to the nature or location of the projects, land held for future development that we activate as part of our strategic growth initiatives or to accelerate sales and/or our return on investment, or that we otherwise monetize to help improve our asset efficiency, may have a somewhat greater likelihood of being impaired than other of our active inventory.
We believe that the carrying value of our inventory balance as of November 30, 2020 is recoverable. Our considerations in making this determination include the factors and trends incorporated into our impairment analyses, and as applicable, the prevailing regulatory environment, competition from other homebuilders, inventory levels and sales activity of resale homes, and the local economic conditions where an asset is located. In addition, we consider the financial and operational status and expectations of our inventories as well as unique attributes of each community or land parcel that could be viewed as indicators for potential future impairments. However, if conditions in the overall housing market or in a specific market or submarket worsen in the future beyond our current expectations, including, among other things, from ongoing negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and related COVID-19 control responses, if future changes in our business strategy significantly affect any key assumptions used in our projections of future cash flows, or if there are material changes in any of the other items we consider in assessing recoverability, we may recognize charges in future periods for inventory impairments or land option contract abandonments, or both, related to our current inventory assets. Any such charges could be material to our consolidated financial statements.
Warranty Costs. We provide a limited warranty on all of our homes. The specific terms and conditions of our limited warranty program vary depending upon the markets in which we do business. We estimate the costs that may be incurred under each limited warranty and record a liability in the amount of such costs at the time the revenue associated with the sale of each home is recognized. In assessing our overall warranty liability at a reporting date, we evaluate the costs for warranty-related items on a combined basis for all of our previously delivered homes that are under our limited warranty program.
Our primary assumption in estimating the amounts we accrue for warranty costs is that historical claims experience is a strong indicator of future claims experience. Factors that affect our warranty liability include the number of homes delivered, historical and anticipated rates of warranty claims, and cost per claim. We periodically assess the adequacy of our accrued warranty liability, which is included in accrued expenses and other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets, and adjust the amount as necessary based on our assessment. Our assessment includes the review of our actual warranty costs incurred to identify trends and changes in our warranty claims experience, and considers our home construction quality and customer service initiatives and outside events. Based on this assessment, we may from time to time adjust our warranty accrual rates, which would be applied on a prospective basis to homes delivered. Although adjustments to the accrual rates are infrequent, they may be necessary when actual warranty expenditures have increased or decreased on a sustained basis. Our warranty liability is presented on a gross basis for all years without consideration of recoveries and amounts we have paid on behalf of and expect to recover from other parties, if any. Estimates of recoveries and amounts we have paid on behalf of and expect to recover from other parties, if any, are recorded as receivables when such recoveries are considered probable.
While we believe the warranty liability currently reflected in our consolidated balance sheets to be adequate, unanticipated changes or developments in the legal environment, local weather, land or environmental conditions, quality of materials or methods used in the construction of homes or customer service practices and/or our warranty claims experience could have a significant impact on our actual warranty costs in future periods and such amounts could differ significantly from our current estimates. A 10% change in the historical warranty rates used to estimate our warranty accrual would not result in a material change in our accrual.
Self-Insurance. We maintain, and require the majority of our independent subcontractors to maintain, general liability insurance (including construction defect and bodily injury coverage) and workers’ compensation insurance. These insurance policies protect us against a portion of our risk of loss from claims related to our homebuilding activities, subject to certain self-insured retentions, deductibles and other coverage limits. We self-insure a portion of our overall risk through the use of a captive insurance subsidiary. In Arizona, California, Colorado and Nevada, our subcontractors’ general liability insurance primarily takes the form of a wrap-up policy under a program where eligible independent subcontractors are enrolled as insureds on each community. Enrolled subcontractors contribute toward the cost of the insurance and agree to pay a contractual amount in the future if there is a claim related to their work.
We record liabilities based on the estimated costs required to cover reported claims, claims incurred but not yet reported, and claim adjustment expenses. These estimated costs are based on an actuarial analysis of our historical claims and expense data, as well as industry data. Our self-insurance liabilities are presented on a gross basis without consideration of insurance recoveries and amounts we have paid on behalf of and expect to recover from other parties, if any.
The amount of our self-insurance liability is based on an analysis performed by a third-party actuary that uses our historical claim and expense data, as well as industry data to estimate these overall costs. These estimates are subject to uncertainty due to a variety of factors, the most significant being the long period of time between the delivery of a home to a homebuyer and when a structural warranty or construction defect claim may be made, and the ultimate resolution of any such construction defect claim. Though state regulations vary, construction defect claims are reported and resolved over a long period of time, which can extend for 10 years or more. As a result, the majority of the estimated self-insurance liability based on the actuarial analysis relates to claims incurred but not yet reported. Therefore, adjustments related to individual existing claims generally do not significantly impact the overall estimated liability. Adjustments to our liabilities related to homes delivered in prior years are recorded in the period in which a change in our estimate occurs.
The projection of losses related to these liabilities requires the use of actuarial assumptions. Key assumptions used in developing these estimates include claim frequencies, severities and resolution patterns, which can occur over an extended period of time. These estimates are subject to variability due to the length of time between the delivery of a home to a homebuyer and when a construction defect claim is made, and the ultimate resolution of such claim; uncertainties regarding such claims relative to our markets and the types of product we build; and legal or regulatory actions and/or interpretations, among other factors. Due to the degree of judgment involved and the potential for variability in these underlying assumptions, our actual future costs could differ from those estimated. In addition, changes in the frequency and severity of reported claims and the estimates to resolve claims can impact the trends and assumptions used in the actuarial analysis, which could be material to our consolidated financial statements. A 10% increase in the claim frequency and the average cost per claim used to estimate the self-insurance liability would result in increases of approximately $10.4 million in our liability and approximately
$2.5 million in our receivable as of November 30, 2020, and additional expense of approximately $7.9 million for 2020. A 10% decrease in the claim frequency and the average cost per claim used to estimate the self-insurance liability would result in decreases of approximately $10.5 million in our liability and approximately $2.5 million in our receivable as of November 30, 2020, and a reduction to expense of approximately $8.0 million for 2020.
Estimates of insurance recoveries and amounts we have paid on behalf of other parties, if any, are recorded as receivables when such recoveries are considered probable. These estimated recoveries are principally based on actuarially determined amounts and depend on various factors, including, among other things, the above-described claim cost estimates, our insurance policy coverage limits for the applicable policy year(s), historical third-party recovery rates, insurance industry practices, the regulatory environment, and legal precedent, and are subject to a high degree of variability from year to year. Because of the inherent uncertainty and variability in these assumptions, our actual insurance recoveries could differ significantly from amounts currently estimated.
Legal Matters Accruals. We record contingent liabilities resulting from claims against us when a loss is assessed to be probable and the amount of the loss is reasonably estimable. Assessing the probability of losses and estimating probable losses requires analysis of multiple factors, including in some cases judgments about the potential actions of third-party claimants, regulatory agencies, mediators, arbitrators, responsible third parties and/or courts, as the case may be. Recorded contingent liabilities are based on the most recent information available and actual losses in any future period are inherently uncertain. If future adjustments to estimated probable future losses or actual losses exceed our recorded liability for such claims, we would record additional charges during the period in which the actual loss or change in estimate occurred. In addition to contingent liabilities recorded for probable losses, we disclose contingent liabilities when there is a reasonable possibility the ultimate loss will materially exceed the recorded liability. While we cannot predict the outcome of pending legal matters with certainty, we do not believe any currently identified claim or proceeding, either individually or in aggregate, will have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
Stock-Based Compensation. We measure and recognize compensation expense associated with our grants of equity-based awards at an amount equal to the fair value of such share-based payments over their applicable vesting period. We have provided compensation benefits to certain of our employees in the form of stock options, restricted stock and PSUs, and to our non-employee directors in the form of unrestricted shares of common stock, deferred common stock awards and Director Plan SARs. Determining the fair value of share-based awards requires judgment to identify the appropriate valuation model and develop the assumptions to be used in the calculation, including the expected term of the stock options or Director Plan SARs, expected stock-price volatility and dividend yield. We estimate the fair value of stock options and Director Plan SARs granted using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model with assumptions based primarily on historical data. The expected volatility factor is based on a combination of the historical volatility of our common stock and the implied volatility of publicly traded options on our common stock. We believe this blended approach balances the forward-looking nature of implied volatility with the relative stability over time of historical volatility to arrive at a reasonable estimate of expected volatility. Additionally, judgment is required in estimating the percentage of share-based awards that are expected to vest, and in the case of PSUs, the level of performance that will be achieved and the number of shares that will be earned. If actual results differ significantly from these estimates, stock-based compensation expense could be higher and have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes. As discussed in Note 14 - Income Taxes in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, we evaluate our deferred tax assets quarterly to determine if adjustments to our valuation allowance are required based on the consideration of all available positive and negative evidence using a “more likely than not” standard with respect to whether deferred tax assets will be realized. This evaluation considers, among other factors, our historical operating results, our expectation of future profitability, the duration of the applicable statutory carryforward periods, and conditions in the housing market and the broader economy. The ultimate realization of our deferred tax assets depends primarily on our ability to generate future taxable income during the periods in which the related deferred tax assets become deductible. The value of our deferred tax assets in our consolidated balance sheets depends on applicable income tax rates. We base our estimate of deferred tax assets and liabilities on current tax laws and rates. In certain cases, we also base this estimate on business plan forecasts and other expectations about future outcomes. Changes in positive and negative evidence, including differences between our future operating results and estimates, could result in the establishment of an additional valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. Accounting for deferred taxes is based upon estimates of future results. Judgment is required in determining the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements and/or tax returns. Differences between the anticipated and actual outcomes of these future results could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. Also, changes in existing federal and state tax laws and corporate income tax rates could affect future tax results and the realization of deferred tax assets over time.
We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in our consolidated financial statements as a component of the provision for income taxes. Our liability for unrecognized tax benefits, combined with accrued interest and
penalties, is reflected as a component of accrued expenses and other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. Judgment is required in evaluating uncertain tax positions. We evaluate our uncertain tax positions quarterly based on various factors, including changes in facts or circumstances, tax laws or the status of audits by tax authorities. Changes in the recognition or measurement of uncertain tax positions could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements in the period in which we make the change.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Recent accounting pronouncements are discussed in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
OUTLOOK
Given the strong demand we and the homebuilding industry experienced in the 2020 second half, we believe long-term housing market fundamentals are positive. Subsequent to the end of our 2020 fiscal year, demand remained strong, with our net orders for the first seven weeks of the 2021 first quarter up 39% from the corresponding period of 2020. However, we anticipate this year-over-year net order growth will moderate by the end of the quarter due to tougher weekly comparisons for the remainder of the quarter and an anticipated decline in our average community count for the period. We believe our highly customer-centric, personalized approach to homebuilding and operational capabilities will enable us to effectively adapt to evolving buyer preferences and needs and, together with an expected year-over-year increase in community count beginning in the second half of the year, help drive our business in 2021, subject to business conditions.
Our present 2021 outlook is as follows:
2021 First Quarter -
•We expect to generate housing revenues in the range of $1.14 billion to $1.22 billion, an increase from $1.07 billion in the corresponding period of 2020, and anticipate our average selling price to be approximately $390,000, flat as compared to the year-earlier period.
•We expect our homebuilding operating income margin to be in the range of 9.0% to 9.3%, assuming no inventory-related charges, up from 6.1% for the year-earlier quarter.
◦We expect our housing gross profit margin to be in the range of 20.0% to 20.3%, assuming no inventory-related charges, compared to 17.9% for the corresponding 2020 quarter.
◦We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues to be in the range of 10.8% to 11.2%, an improvement from the 2020 first quarter ratio of 11.8%.
•We expect the effective tax rate will be approximately 24%, including an expected favorable impact from federal energy tax credits for building energy-efficient homes. The effective tax rate for the prior year quarter was approximately 13%.
•We expect a sequential decrease in our ending community count to a low point for the year, and expect our average community count to decline by a low double-digit percentage range from the 2020 first quarter.
2021 Full Year -
•We expect our housing revenues to be in the range of $5.5 billion to $6.0 billion, an increase of 39% at the mid-point of the range, from $4.15 billion in 2020, and anticipate our average selling price to be in the range of $400,000 to $410,000, an increase of between 3% and 5% from 2020.
•We expect our homebuilding operating income margin to be in the range of 10.4% to 11.0%, assuming no inventory-related charges, compared to 8.4%, which excludes both inventory-related charges and severance charges, for 2020.
◦We expect our housing gross profit margin to be in the range of 20.5% to 21.1%, with each quarter at or above 20%, assuming no inventory-related charges, compared to 19.6% for 2020.
◦We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues to be in the range of 9.9% to 10.3%, compared to 11.2%, excluding severance charges, in the prior year.
•We expect the effective tax rate will be approximately 24%, including an expected favorable impact from federal energy tax credits. The effective tax rate for 2020 was approximately 19%.
•We expect our ending community count to be up in the mid to high single-digit percentage range from 2020.
•We expect our return on equity will be above 17%, an improvement of more than 500 basis points compared to 11.8% for 2020.
We believe we are well positioned for 2021 due to, among other things, our strong backlog, planned new home community openings, investments in land and land development and current positive economic and demographic trends, to varying degrees, in many of our served markets. However, our industry continues to experience labor and supply constraints and rising and volatile raw material prices, particularly for lumber. Demand for our products could also be substantially diminished if the public health effort to contain the virulence and spread of COVID-19 continues for a prolonged period during 2021. If these issues worsen in 2021, our business and ability to generate positive growth could be negatively impacted.
Our future performance and the strategies we implement (and adjust or refine as necessary or appropriate) will depend significantly on prevailing economic and capital, credit and financial market conditions and on a fairly stable and constructive political and regulatory environment (particularly in regards to housing and mortgage loan financing policies), among other factors.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Investors are cautioned that certain statements contained in this report, as well as some statements by us in periodic press releases and other public disclosures and some oral statements by us to securities analysts, stockholders and others during presentations, are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Act”). Statements that are predictive in nature, that depend upon or refer to future events or conditions, or that include words such as “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “estimate,” “hope,” and similar expressions constitute forward-looking statements. In addition, any statements that we may make or provide concerning future financial or operating performance (including without limitation future revenues, community count, homes delivered, net orders, selling prices, sales pace per new community, expenses, expense ratios, housing gross profits, housing gross profit margins, earnings or earnings per share, or growth or growth rates), future market conditions, future interest rates, and other economic conditions, ongoing business strategies or prospects, future dividends and changes in dividend levels, the value of our backlog (including amounts that we expect to realize upon delivery of homes included in our backlog and the timing of those deliveries), the value of our net orders, potential future asset acquisitions and the impact of completed acquisitions, future share issuances or repurchases, future debt issuances, repurchases or redemptions and other possible future actions are also forward-looking statements as defined by the Act. Forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations and projections about future events and are subject to risks, uncertainties, and assumptions about our operations, economic and market factors, and the homebuilding industry, among other things. These statements are not guarantees of future performance, and we have no specific policy or intention to update these statements. In addition, forward-looking and other statements in this report and in other public or oral disclosures that express or contain opinions, views or assumptions about market or economic conditions; the success, performance, effectiveness and/or relative positioning of our strategies, initiatives or operational activities; and other matters, may be based in whole or in part on general observations of our management, limited or anecdotal evidence and/or business or industry experience without in-depth or any particular empirical investigation, inquiry or analysis.
Actual events and results may differ materially from those expressed or forecasted in forward-looking statements due to a number of factors. The most important risk factors that could cause our actual performance and future events and actions to differ materially from such forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, the following:
•general economic, employment and business conditions;
•population growth, household formations and demographic trends;
•conditions in the capital, credit and financial markets;
•our ability to access external financing sources and raise capital through the issuance of common stock, debt or other securities, and/or project financing, on favorable terms;
•the execution of any share repurchases pursuant to our board of directors’ authorization;
•material and trade costs and availability, particularly lumber;
•changes in interest rates;
•our debt level, including our ratio of debt to capital, and our ability to adjust our debt level and maturity schedule;
•our compliance with the terms of the Credit Facility;
•volatility in the market price of our common stock;
•weak or declining consumer confidence, either generally or specifically with respect to purchasing homes;
•home selling prices, including our homes’ selling prices, increasing at a faster rate than consumer incomes;
•competition from other sellers of new and resale homes;
•weather events, significant natural disasters and other climate and environmental factors;
•any failure of lawmakers to agree on a budget or appropriation legislation to fund the federal government’s operations, or to approve additional COVID-19-related relief or stimulus measures, and financial markets’ and businesses’ reactions to any such failure;
•government actions, policies, programs and regulations directed at or affecting the housing market (including the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) relief provisions for outstanding mortgage loans and any extensions or broadening thereof, the tax benefits associated with purchasing and owning a home, and the standards, fees and size limits applicable to the purchase or insuring of mortgage loans by government-sponsored enterprises and government agencies), the homebuilding industry, or construction activities;
•changes in existing tax laws or enacted corporate income tax rates, including those resulting from regulatory guidance and interpretations issued with respect thereto;
•changes in U.S. trade policies, including the imposition of tariffs and duties on homebuilding materials and products, and related trade disputes with and retaliatory measures taken by other countries;
•the adoption of new or amended financial accounting standards and the guidance and/or interpretations with respect thereto;
•the availability and cost of land in desirable areas and our ability to timely develop acquired land parcels and open new home communities;
•our warranty claims experience with respect to homes previously delivered and actual warranty costs incurred;
•costs and/or charges arising from regulatory compliance requirements or from legal, arbitral or regulatory proceedings, investigations, claims or settlements, including unfavorable outcomes in any such matters resulting in actual or potential monetary damage awards, penalties, fines or other direct or indirect payments, or injunctions, consent decrees or other voluntary or involuntary restrictions or adjustments to our business operations or practices that are beyond our current expectations and/or accruals;
•our ability to use/realize the net deferred tax assets we have generated;
•our ability to successfully implement our current and planned strategies and initiatives related to our product, geographic and market positioning, gaining share and scale in our served markets and in entering into new markets;
•our operational and investment concentration in markets in California;
•consumer interest in our new home communities and products, particularly from first-time homebuyers and higher-income consumers;
•our ability to generate orders and convert our backlog of orders to home deliveries and revenues, particularly in key markets in California;
•our ability to successfully implement our business strategies and achieve any associated financial and operational targets and objectives, including those discussed in this report or in other public filings, presentations or disclosures;
•income tax expense volatility associated with stock-based compensation;
•the ability of our homebuyers to obtain residential mortgage loans and mortgage banking services;
•the performance of mortgage lenders to our homebuyers;
•the performance of KBHS;
•information technology failures and data security breaches;
•an epidemic or pandemic (such as the outbreak and worldwide spread of COVID-19), and the control response measures that international, federal, state and local governments, agencies, law enforcement and/or health authorities implement to address it, which may (as with COVID-19) precipitate or exacerbate one or more of the above-mentioned and/or other risks, and significantly disrupt or prevent us from operating our business in the ordinary course for an extended period;
•widespread protests and civil unrest, whether due to political events, efforts to institute law enforcement and other social and political reforms, and the impacts of implementing or failing to implement any such reforms, or otherwise; and
•other events outside of our control.