Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For discussion related to changes in financial condition and the results of operations for fiscal year 2018, refer to Chinook Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3) with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 26, 2020. This discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on discovering, developing and commercializing precision medicines for kidney diseases. Our pipeline is focused on rare, severe chronic kidney diseases with well-defined clinical pathways. Our lead clinical program is atrasentan, an endothelin A receptor antagonist that we in-licensed from AbbVie in late 2019. In March 2021 we initiated the phase 3 ALIGN trial of atrasentan for IgAN, and in April 2021 we initiated the phase 2 AFFINITY basket trial for proteinuric glomerular diseases. Our second product candidate, BION-1301, is an anti-APRIL monoclonal antibody also in development for patients with IgAN and we anticipate presenting interim results from the ongoing phase 1b trial at multiple nephrology conferences in 2021. We are also advancing our third program, CHK-336, which is currently in IND-enabling studies, towards an expected IND submission in late 2021 or early 2022 for the treatment of PH. In addition, we are conducting research programs in several other rare, severe chronic kidney diseases. We seek to build our pipeline by leveraging insights from kidney single cell RNA sequencing, human-derived organoids and new translational models, to discover and develop therapeutic candidates with mechanisms of action targeted against key kidney disease pathways. To support these efforts, we have entered into a strategic collaboration with Evotec. Based on Evotec’s proprietary comprehensive molecular datasets from thousands of patients across chronic kidney diseases of multiple underlying etiologies, we and Evotec will jointly identify, characterize and validate novel mechanisms and discover precision medicines for PKD, lupus nephritis, IgA nephropathy and other primary glomerular diseases. The collaboration will also involve further characterization of pathways and patient stratification strategies for programs currently in Chinook’s clinical and preclinical pipeline.
Our approach to precision medicines leverages recent advances in identifying targeted kidney therapies linked to mechanistic biomarkers by the application of systems biology approaches in nephrology. The application of systems biology to nephrology has advanced over the past decade through the study of multiple patient groups across a wide variety of kidney diseases and their associated multilevel data sets, including genome, transcriptome, proteome, metabolome, pathology and prospective long-term clinical characteristics and outcomes. A key objective of these investigations is to define kidney diseases in molecular terms to drive the development of targeted treatments. We believe we are well-positioned to exploit the insights provided into the key molecular drivers and classifiers of kidney diseases by the application of these systems biology tools to nephrology. Our strategy is to use these mechanistic insights to select compelling drug targets and deliver novel and differentiated product candidates for rare and severe kidney diseases with high unmet medical need.
Atrasentan
Our lead product candidate is atrasentan, a potent and selective endothelin A receptor antagonist that we are developing for the treatment of proteinuric glomerular diseases. In March 2021 we initiated a phase 3 trial of atrasentan called ALIGN for IgAN, and in April 2021 we initiated a phase 2 basket trial called AFFINITY for proteinuric glomerular diseases.
IgAN is a serious progressive autoimmune disease of the kidney with no approved therapies. Up to 45 percent of IgAN patients progress to end-stage kidney disease, or ESKD. Although IgAN is an orphan disease, we estimate that it affects approximately 140,000 people in the United States, approximately 200,000 people in Europe and several million people in Asia. Galactose-deficient immunoglobulin A1, or Gd-IgA1, is recognized as a critical autoantigen to which IgAN patients develop circulating autoantibodies, resulting in the formation and deposition of immune complexes in the glomeruli of the kidney. This process initiates an inflammatory cascade that damages the glomeruli, resulting in protein and blood leaking into the urine, called proteinuria or hematuria, respectively. Ultimately the filtration function of the kidney is impaired, reducing the ability to remove waste products from the blood. As the disease progresses, these waste products accumulate and can result in potentially life-threatening complications that often lead to the need for dialysis or kidney transplant. Sustained proteinuria is the most widely studied and the strongest predictor for the rate of progression to ESKD in IgAN.
Activation of the endothelin A receptor, or ETA receptor, has been implicated as a key driver of proteinuria, renal cell injury, including podocyte dysfunction and mesangial cell activation, along with promoting kidney inflammation and fibrosis, all resulting in the progression of IgAN. Atrasentan, by blocking ETA, has the potential to provide benefit in multiple chronic kidney diseases by reducing proteinuria and having direct anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic effects to preserve kidney function. We in-licensed atrasentan in December 2019 from AbbVie, which previously developed atrasentan for diabetic kidney disease through multiple clinical trials, including the phase 3 SONAR trial, which evaluated atrasentan in over 5,000 patients.
Based on the encouraging data from SONAR and strong mechanistic rationale, in March 2021 we initiated the phase 3 ALIGN trial of atrasentan in patients with IgAN at high risk of kidney function decline. We chose IgAN as the lead indication for evaluation of atrasentan due to the role of endothelin activation and proteinuria in disease progression, potential improved tolerability of atrasentan in this patient population, high unmet need, and the possibility of submitting an NDA seeking accelerated approval based on surrogate endpoints, including proteinuria. In April 2021, we initiated the phase 2 AFFINITY trial in other proteinuric glomerular diseases, including cohorts of patients with lower proteinuria IgAN, FSGS and Alport Syndrome, as well as diabetic kidney disease combined with SGLT2 inhibitors, such as canagliflozin or dapagliflozin, which have recently been shown to provide clinical benefit in patients with diabetic kidney disease. If our trials proceed as planned, we anticipate reporting data from initial cohorts of the AFFINITY trial during 2022, and data for the primary proteinuria endpoint in the ALIGN trial in 2023 to support accelerated approval.
BION-1301
We are also developing BION-1301, an investigational humanized IgG4 monoclonal antibody that blocks APRIL binding to both the B-cell maturation antigen, or BCMA, and transmembrane activator and CAML interactor, or TACI, receptors, as a novel disease-modifying therapy for IgAN. APRIL is a soluble factor that binds to BCMA and TACI receptors thereby inducing signaling and is believed to be implicated in IgAN and other indications.
A phase 1b clinical trial of BION-1301 in healthy volunteers and patients with IgA nephropathy is currently ongoing. Parts 1 and 2 of this trial evaluating the safety and tolerability of BION-1301 in healthy volunteers have been completed. In healthy volunteers, BION-1301 was well-tolerated, demonstrated dose-dependent increases in target engagement as measured by free APRIL levels, dose-dependently and durably reduced IgA, IgM and IgG levels (to a lesser extent) and had a half-life of approximately 33 days, suggesting the potential for an extended dosing interval. We anticipate presenting Gd-IgA1 biomarker data from Parts 1 and 2 of the study in healthy volunteers at the World Congress of Nephrology in April 2021, or WCN ’21. We are currently enrolling patients with IgAN in Part 3 of this trial, and we anticipate presenting interim results from this trial at the 58th ERA-EDTA conference in June 2021. Patients completing Part 3 may be eligible for a long-term extension study. In addition, we have completed a phase 1 intravenous (IV) to subcutaneous (SC) bioavailability study in healthy volunteers, with potential for SC administration of BION-1301 in the ongoing phase 1b trial and future studies. Results from the bioavailability study will be presented at WCN ’21.
CHK-336
Our third clinical development candidate is CHK-336, a liver-targeted oral small molecule lactate dehydrogenase, or LDHA, inhibitor, which we are developing for the treatment of primary hyperoxaluria, or PH. Hyperoxalurias, including PH, are diseases caused by excess oxalate, a potentially toxic metabolite typically filtered by the kidneys and excreted as a waste product in urine. Symptoms of PH include recurrent kidney stones, which when left untreated, can result in kidney failure requiring dialysis or dual kidney/liver transplantation. In patients with hyperoxalurias, excess oxalate combines with calcium to form calcium oxalate crystals that deposit in the kidney, resulting in the formation of painful kidney stones and driving progressive kidney damage over time. PH1, PH2 and PH3 are a group of ultra-rare diseases caused by genetic mutations that result in excess oxalate, and in their most severe forms, can lead to end-stage kidney disease at a young age. We also believe CHK-336 may have potential in the treatment of patients with secondary hyperoxaluria and idiopathic stone formation.
Research and Discovery Programs
Beyond CHK-336, we have active research and discovery efforts focused on other rare, severe kidney diseases. Our overall precision medicine research approach focuses on developing product candidates targeting the most promising molecular pathways identified as key disease drivers in collaboration with key scientific advisors. Our scientific advisors provide valuable scientific guidance on target selection, target prioritization and target validation strategies, as well as access to technology platforms that support target validation efforts, by providing deep biological insights into human disease mechanisms as well as translational cellular and animal model systems.
In March 2021, we announced a strategic collaboration with Evotec focused on the joint identification, characterization and validation of novel mechanisms as well as the discovery of precision medicines for PKD, lupus nephritis, IgA nephropathy and other primary glomerular diseases. The collaboration will leverage access to the National Unified Renal Translational Research Enterprise (NURTuRE) patient biobank for chronic kidney diseases and nephrotic syndrome as well as Evotec’s proprietary PanOmics platform, which combines enhanced throughput proteomics, high throughput transcriptomics and cell imaging with PanHunter, Evotec’s unique data analysis platform. Through our collaboration with Evotec, we intend to characterize molecular drivers, identify and validate novel targets and drive patient stratification strategies in kidney disease.
Components of Operating Results
Change in Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Tranche Liability
As a private company, we issued Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock (Series A stock). The terms of the Series A stock agreement included provisions requiring the investors to purchase, and obligating the Company to deliver, additional shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock at a specified price in the future based on the achievement of certain development-based milestones.
The Company estimated the fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability related to each milestone utilizing the income approach using unobservable inputs including (a) future per share value of Series A stock upon achievement of the milestone, (b) estimated term until date of milestone achievement, and (c) probability of milestone achievement. The future per share value of Series A stock upon achievement of the milestone and the probability of milestone achievement for each tranche were calculated on a probability-weighted basis giving equal weighting to public offering and private exit scenarios. The future cash flows were discounted to their fair values as of the valuation date using one or more discount rates, depending on the number of probability-weighted scenarios employed.
Upon issuance, the fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability was recorded as a reduction in the amounts paid by investors for the purchase of Series A stock.
Upon closing of the Merger, the outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche rights terminated pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement.
Collaboration and License Revenue
We have not generated any revenue from product sales. Prior to completion of the Merger, Aduro generated revenue from collaboration and license agreements. These collaboration agreements may have included the transfer of intellectual property rights in the form of licenses, promises to provide research and development services and promises to participate on certain development committees with the collaboration party. The terms of such agreements included payment to Aduro of one or more of the following: nonrefundable upfront fees, payment for research and development services, development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments, and royalties on net sales of licensed products.
We have evaluated the remaining performance obligations under these pre-existing agreements and concluded that the only revenue we expect to recognize in the near term is under the agreement with Lilly related to research and development services expected to be performed by us in 2020 and 2021. Potential milestone payments related to development, regulatory or commercial milestone payments may be earned in the future, but all such payments are uncertain and beyond our or our collaborators’ control and would be recorded as revenue upon receipt or over a period following receipt, such as under the CAPM model, if and when such payments are earned.
We expect that any revenue we generate from the pre-existing collaboration agreements will be nominal, as such agreements relate to non-renal development programs, all of which are outside our ongoing focus in renal disease.
Research and Development Expenses
The largest component of our total operating expenses has historically been our investment in research and development activities, including the clinical development of our product candidates. Research and development expenses represent costs incurred to conduct research, such as the discovery and development of our product candidates, as well as the development of product candidates pursuant to Aduro’s pre-existing collaboration and license agreements. Research and development costs include personnel costs; licensing costs; materials and supplies; contracted research and manufacturing; consulting arrangements; allocated costs, such as facility costs; and other expenses incurred to advance our research and development activities. We recognize all research and
development costs as they are incurred. Clinical trial costs, contract manufacturing and other development costs incurred by third parties are expensed as the contracted work is performed.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase in the future as we advance our product candidates into and through clinical trials and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. The probability of success for our product candidates and technologies may be affected by a variety of factors including: the quality of our product candidates, early clinical data, investment in our clinical programs, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include personnel costs, expenses for outside professional services, and other allocated expenses. Personnel costs consist of salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation. Outside professional services consist of legal, accounting and audit services, insurance expenses, investor relations activities, administrative services and other consulting fees. Allocated expenses consist of rent expense related to our offices and research and development facility.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income and expense, foreign currency gains and losses, and various income or expense items of a non-recurring nature.
Income Tax Benefit
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and foreign jurisdictions in which we do business. These foreign jurisdictions have statutory tax rates different from those in the United States. Accordingly, our effective tax rates will vary depending on the relative proportion of foreign to U.S. income, the availability of research and development tax credits, changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities and changes in tax laws. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from the examination of our tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service, or IRS, and other tax authorities to determine the adequacy of our income tax reserves and expense. Should actual events or results differ from our current expectations, charges or credits to our income tax expense may become necessary.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Total revenue was $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.8 million compared to zero for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to revenue recognized related to research and development services provided under our collaboration agreement with Lilly.
Research and Development
The following tables summarize our research and development expenses by program and by category incurred during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Research and development expense was $36.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $19.0 million compared to $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to external clinical and manufacturing expenses related to the atrasentan and BION-1301 clinical programs, higher personnel expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, associated with hiring staff to build out our clinical and development capabilities, and increased spending for consulting and outside services. The increase was partially offset by expenses in the prior year period for the in-license of atrasentan, and the purchase of intellectual property and know-how from a related party to support the CHK-336 program, and discovery research activities.
General and Administrative
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses incurred during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
General and administrative expense was $19.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $16.1 million compared to $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to legal, consulting and accounting costs related to the merger, an increase in personnel costs, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, due to the addition of administrative staff to buildout our public-company infrastructure, and an increase in facilities and other costs.
Change in fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability
Change in fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability decreased by $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to changes in the fair value of the Company’s Series A redeemable preferred stock underlying the tranche rights.
Income tax benefit
Income tax benefit of $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to a deferred tax liability generated in connection with the Merger that was used to realize certain deferred tax assets, which previously had a full valuation allowance
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $250.4 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will increase, and, as a result, we anticipate that we will continue to incur increasing losses in the foreseeable future. We believe that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements to the middle of 2023.
We have not generated any revenue from product sales, and we do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize any of our product candidates. At the same time, we expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing development activities, particularly as we continue the research, development and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidates. Accordingly, we anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
Until we can generate a sufficient amount of product revenue to finance our cash requirements, we expect to finance our future cash needs primarily through the issuance of additional equity, borrowings and strategic alliances with partner companies. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the issuance of additional equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of existing stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates to third parties that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $55.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $42.3 million compared to $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increased operating loss resulting from increased research and development spending on the atrasentan and BION-1301 clinical programs, including hiring additional staff, and outside spending for clinical and manufacturing activities, and an increase in general and administrative spending for merger-related costs, and the hiring of additional personnel to support our needs as a public company.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $109.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $110.4 million compared to $0.8 million cash used for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the receipt of cash and cash equivalents acquired in connection with the Merger, and proceeds from maturities of marketable securities, net of purchases of marketable securities.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $124.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $98.6 million compared to $25.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to net proceeds received from the sale of common stock and the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Business Combination
Accounting for acquisitions requires extensive use of estimates and judgment to measure the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development and liabilities assumed. Additionally, we must determine whether an acquired entity is considered a business or a set of net assets because the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired can only be recognized as goodwill in a business combination. We accounted for the Merger with Aduro as a business combination under the acquisition method of accounting. Consideration paid to acquire Aduro was measured at fair value and included the exchange of Aduro’s common stock, assumption of Aduro stock options and warrants, and assumption of contingent value rights.
We allocated the purchase price to the acquired tangible and intangible assets and assumed liabilities of Aduro based on their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. The allocation of the purchase price resulted in recognition of intangible assets related to an acquired license agreement, an in-place sublease broker commission, in-process research and development and goodwill. The fair value of the identifiable intangible assets is based on detailed valuations using information and assumptions such as the timing and estimated costs to complete the in-process projects, projecting regulatory approvals, developing an appropriate discount rate and estimating future cash flows.
Contingent Value Rights Liability
The estimated fair value of the contingent value rights liability, initially measured and recorded on the Merger date, is considered to be a Level 3 instrument. The contingent value rights liability is recorded at fair value at the end of each reporting period with changes in estimated fair values recorded in change in fair value of contingent consideration in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Intangible Assets
Our intangible assets include an acquired out-license agreement and indefinite-life in-process research and development assets (“IPR&D”) acquired in the merger with Aduro. The acquired out-license agreement represents the estimated fair value of an agreement with Merck and Co, Inc. (“Merck”) related to a product candidate currently being studied in phase 2 clinical testing. The IPR&D represents the estimated fair value as of the acquisition date of two substantive in-process projects that have not reached technological feasibility: the BION-1301 product candidate currently being tested in a phase 1 clinical trial and the non-renal assets intended to be disposed of. The primary basis for determining technological feasibility of these assets is, in the case of BION-1301 and the Merck agreement, obtaining regulatory approval. In the case of the non-renal assets, it is completing transactions for the out-license or sale of the assets. The fair value of the Merck out-license agreement and in-process BION-1301 research and development intangible assets were determined using probability-weighted discounted cash flow models, including a multi-period excess earnings method and use of a Monte Carlo simulation. Projecting discounted future cash flows requires management to make significant estimates regarding future revenue and expenses, probability of technological and regulatory success, revenue volatility and discount rates. The discount rate used is determined at the time of acquisition and includes a rate of return which accounts for the time value of money, as well as risk factors reflecting the economic risk that the projected cash flows may not be realized. The fair value of the non-renal in-process research and development intangible assets were determined using a probability-weighted discounted cash flow model, including assumptions regarding probabilities, timing and prices for the sale or out-license of these assets.
We review our intangible assets at least annually, on October 1 of each year, for possible impairment. Intangible assets are reviewed for possible impairment between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the assets below their carrying values. Our intangible assets totaled $66.9 million at December 31, 2020.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
We record accrued expenses for estimated costs of its research and development activities conducted by third-party service providers, which include the conduct of preclinical studies and clinical trials and contract manufacturing activities. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced, and we include these costs in accrued liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets and within research and development expense in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. These costs are a significant component of our research and development expense. We record accrued expenses for these costs based on the estimated amount of work completed and in accordance with agreements established with these third parties.
We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued estimates. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed, the number of patients enrolled, and the rate of patient enrollment may vary from its estimates and could result in our reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. Our accrued expenses are dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from clinical research organizations and other third-party service providers. To date, there have been no material differences from our accrued expenses to actual expenses.
Estimated Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Tranche Liability
We had a liability related to future tranche options for purchase of our Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock. Such redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche rights terminated upon the closing of the merger. The tranche options were accounted for as a liability at its estimated fair value at the inception of the obligation and was remeasured to fair value as of each balance sheet
date, with the related re-measurement adjustment recognized as a component of other income (expense) in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. The estimated fair value of the tranche options was determined using an option pricing model that considered the redeemable convertible preferred stock price, the exercise price of the option, the estimated time period the option would have been outstanding, the volatility of the underlying stock, the risk-free interest rate associated with the life of the option, and the dividend yield of the underlying Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock. The value derived from the option pricing model was adjusted for the probability of the related milestones not being met. Our management used its judgment to estimate many of these variables. We have recorded adjustments to the estimated fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability until which time the tranche options expired upon closing of the merger.
Stock-based Compensation
We recognize noncash stock-based compensation expense related to stock-based awards to employees, non-employees and directors, including stock options, based on the fair value on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The related stock-based compensation is recognized as expense on a straight line-basis over the employee’s, non-employee’s or director’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period). Noncash stock compensation expense is based on awards ultimately expected to vest. However, the Company has elected to account for forfeitures as incurred.
In determining the fair value of stock options, we use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and assumptions discussed below. Each of these inputs is subjective and generally requires significant judgment to determine.
Fair Value of Common Stock-The fair value of the shares of common stock underlying stock options has historically been determined by our board of directors. Because until recently there has been no public market for our common stock, the board of directors has exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock, including important developments in its operations, sales of redeemable convertible preferred stock, actual operating results and financial performance, the conditions in the life sciences industry and the economy in general, the stock price performance and volatility of comparable public companies, and the lack of liquidity of our common stock, among other factors.
Expected Term-Our expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method (based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term
Expected Volatility-Prior to the Merger, due to the lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, the Company based its estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded, which have characteristics similar to those of Private Chinook, including stage of product development and focus on the life science industry. For options granted after the Merger, the Company is using historical volatility of Aduro’s and the Company’s common stock, as it approximates the volatility of the formerly utilized peer group. The historical volatility is calculated based on a period of time commensurate with the expected term assumption.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
Expected Dividend-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, stock-based compensation expense was $3.6 million and $0.1 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $20.1 million of total unrecognized stock-based compensation costs, which we expect to recognize over a weighted-average period of 3.2 years.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 of this report.