Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Results of Operations for the Year Ended June 30, 2021
We generated revenue of $47,172 for the year ended June 30, 2021. Our gross profits after cost of goods and inventory reserve were $3,240 and $1,472 for the year ended June 30, 2021. Our gross profits were small for the periods discussed above as a result of the high cost of PPE products and courier pricing, as well as inventory reserve per U.S. GAAP guidance, due to our promoting products at significantly discounted prices. Pricing for masks and courier services has since improved, and we have ended our aggressive promotions. We hope that our gross revenues will increase with time but there is no assurance that we will be able to absorb our cost of goods and sell our products at price points that will create margins to keep us in business.
We incurred operating expenses of $48,883 for the year ended June 30, 2021. Our operating expenses consisted of general and administrative expenses and selling expenses.
We incurred interest expenses of $5,995 for the year ended June 30, 2021.
We expect to incur more operating expenses next year as a result of implementing our business plan and costs and fees associated with becoming a reporting company with the SEC.
We had a net loss of $51,638 for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of June 30, 2021, we had total current assets of $107,050 and total current liabilities of $111,327. We had a working capital deficit of $4,277 as of June 30, 2021.
Operating activities used $10,182 for the year ended June 30, 2021. Our positive operating cash flow is largely the result of a $36,781 increase in inventory and $5,996 change in related party accrued expenses, offset by our net loss for the period.
Financing activities provided $60,829 in cash for the year ended June 30, 2021. Our positive financing cash flow is the result of $39,977 in proceeds from the sale of common stock, $30,000 in proceeds from notes payable and $1,500 cash for stock subscriptions, offset by $10,648 in repayments to amounts due to related parties.
We were incorporated on April 16, 2020. Our operations, to date, have been devoted primarily to startup, development activities, preparing our ecommerce site, establishing vendors for our products, collecting inventory, selling products and other activities. Because of our limited operating history, it is difficult to predict our capital needs on a monthly, quarterly or annual basis. We will have no capital available to us if we are unable to raise money from this offering or find alternate forms of financing, which we do not have in place at this time.
There can be no assurance that we will be successful in raising additional funding. If we are not able to secure additional funding, the implementation of our business plan will be impaired. There can be no assurance that such additional financing will be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.
Going Concern
As of June 30, 2021, the Company has a cumulative deficit of $59,231 and a working capital deficit of $4,277. The Company had a net loss of $51,639 for the year ended June 30, 2021. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Because of these conditions, the Company will require additional working capital to develop business operations. Management’s plans are to raise additional working capital through the sale of debt and/or equity instruments as well as to generate revenues for other services. There are no assurances that the Company will be able to achieve the level of revenues adequate to generate sufficient cash flow from operations to support the Company’s working capital requirements. To the extent that funds generated are insufficient, the Company will have to raise additional working capital. No assurance can be given that additional financing will be available, or if available, will be on terms acceptable to the Company. If adequate working capital is not available, the Company may not continue its operations.
The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of asset carrying amounts or the amount and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
As of the filing date, the Coronavirus has caused significant volatility in global markets, including the market price of our inventory. The demand for our products and services has fluctuated and the ability of our customers to make payments for the products and services they purchased has been impacted.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, there were no off balance sheet arrangements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act. As a result, we are permitted to, and intend to, rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements. For so long as we are an emerging growth company, we will not be required to:
·have an auditor report on our internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
·comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (i.e., an auditor discussion and analysis);
·submit certain executive compensation matters to shareholder advisory votes, such as “say-on-pay” and “say-on-frequency;” and
·disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation.
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
We will remain an “emerging growth company” for up to five years, or until the earliest of (i) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our total annual gross revenues exceed $1 billion, (ii) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which would occur if the market value of our ordinary shares that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter or (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three year period. Even if we no longer qualify for the exemptions for an emerging growth company, we may still be, in certain circumstances, subject to scaled disclosure requirements as a smaller reporting company. For example, smaller reporting companies, like emerging growth companies, are not required to provide a compensation discussion and analysis under Item 402(b) of Regulation S-K or auditor attestation of internal controls over financial reporting.