Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management's discussion and analysis ("MD&A") of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Annual Report.
OVERVIEW
Kingsway is a Delaware holding company with operating subsidiaries located in the United States. The Company owns or controls subsidiaries primarily in the extended warranty, asset management and real estate industries. Kingsway conducts its business through the following two reportable segments: Extended Warranty and Leased Real Estate.
Extended Warranty includes the following subsidiaries of the Company: IWS Acquisition Corporation ("IWS"), Geminus Holding Company, Inc. ("Geminus"), PWI Holdings, Inc. ("PWI"), Professional Warranty Service Corporation ("PWSC") and Trinity Warranty Solutions LLC ("Trinity"). Throughout this 2020 Annual Report, the term "Extended Warranty" is used to refer to this segment.
IWS is a licensed motor vehicle service agreement company and is a provider of after-market vehicle protection services distributed by credit unions in 26 states and the District of Columbia to their members.
Geminus primarily sells vehicle service agreements to used car buyers across the United States, through its subsidiaries, The Penn Warranty Corporation ("Penn") and Prime Auto Care, Inc. ("Prime"). Penn and Prime distribute these products in 32 and 40 states, respectively, via independent used car dealerships and franchised car dealerships.
PWI markets, sells and administers vehicle service agreements to used car buyers in all fifty states via independent used car and franchise network of approved automobile and motorcycle dealer partners. PWI’s business model is supported by an internal sales and operations team and partners with American Auto Shield in three states with a white label agreement.
PWSC sells new home warranty products and provides administration services to homebuilders and homeowners across the United States. PWSC distributes its products and services through an in-house sales team and through insurance brokers and insurance carriers throughout all states except Alaska and Louisiana.
Trinity sells heating, ventilation, air conditioning ("HVAC"), standby generator, commercial LED lighting and refrigeration warranty products and provides equipment breakdown and maintenance support services to companies across the United States. As a seller of warranty products, Trinity markets and administers product warranty contracts for certain new and used products in the HVAC, standby generator, commercial LED lighting and refrigeration industries throughout the United States. Trinity acts as an agent on behalf of the third-party insurance companies that underwrite and guaranty these warranty contracts. Trinity does not guaranty the performance underlying the warranty contracts it sells. As a provider of equipment breakdown and maintenance support services, Trinity acts as a single point of contact to its clients for both certain equipment breakdowns and scheduled maintenance of equipment. Trinity will provide such repair and breakdown services by contracting with certain HVAC providers.
Leased Real Estate includes the Company's subsidiary, CMC Industries, Inc. ("CMC"). CMC owns, through an indirect wholly owned subsidiary (the "Property Owner"), a parcel of real property consisting of approximately 192 acres located in the State of Texas (the "Real Property"), which is subject to a long-term triple net lease agreement. The Real Property is also subject to a mortgage, which is recorded as note payable in the consolidated balance sheets (the "Mortgage"). Throughout this 2020 Annual Report, the term "Leased Real Estate" is used to refer to this segment.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 caused by a novel strain of the coronavirus was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization, and the outbreak has become increasingly widespread in the United States, including in the markets in which we operate. The COVID-19 outbreak has had a notable impact on general economic conditions, including but not limited to the temporary closures of many businesses; "shelter in place" and other governmental regulations; and reduced consumer spending due to both job losses and other effects attributable to COVID-19. There remain many unknowns and the Company continues to monitor the expected trends and related demand for its services and has and will continue to adjust its operations accordingly.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
The near-term impacts of COVID-19 are primarily with respect to our Extended Warranty segment. As consumer spending has been impacted, including a decline in the purchase of new and used vehicles, and many businesses through which we distribute our products either remain closed or are open but with capacity constraints, we have seen cash flows being affected by a reduction in new warranty sales for vehicle service agreements. With respect to homeowner warranties, we saw an initial reduction in new enrollments in our home warranty programs associated with the impact of COVID-19 on new home sales in the United States.
The Company could experience other potential impacts as a result of COVID-19, including, but not limited to, potential impairment charges to the carrying amounts of goodwill, indefinite-lived intangibles and long-lived assets, the loss in value of investments, as well as the potential for adverse impacts on the Company's debt covenant financial ratios. The Company is not aware of any specific event or circumstance that would require an update to its estimates or judgments or a revision of the carrying value of its assets or liabilities as of the date of issuance of this 2020 Annual Report. Actual results may differ materially from the Company’s current estimates as the scope of COVID-19 evolves or if the duration of business disruptions is longer than initially anticipated. We continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak closely. However, the extent to which the COVID-19 outbreak will impact our operations or financial results is uncertain.
NON U.S.-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURE
Throughout this 2020 Annual Report, we present our operations in the way we believe will be most meaningful, useful and transparent to anyone using this financial information to evaluate our performance. In addition to the U.S. GAAP presentation of net loss, we present segment operating income as a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure, which we believe is valuable in managing our business and drawing comparisons to our peers. Below is a definition of our non-U.S. GAAP measure and its relationship to U.S. GAAP.
Segment Operating Income (Loss)
Segment operating income (loss) represents one measure of the pretax profitability of our segments and is derived by subtracting direct segment expenses from direct segment revenues. Revenues and expenses presented in the consolidated statements of operations are not subtotaled by segment; however, this information is available in total and by segment in Note 24, "Segmented Information," to the Consolidated Financial Statements, regarding reportable segment information. The nearest comparable U.S. GAAP measure to total segment operating income is loss from continuing operations before income tax benefit that, in addition to total segment operating income, includes net investment income, net realized gains, gain on change in fair value of equity investments, gain on change in fair value of limited liability investments, at fair value, net change in unrealized loss on private company investments, other-than-temporary impairment loss, interest expense not allocated to segments, other revenue and expenses not allocated to segments, net, amortization of intangible assets, gain on change in fair value of debt, loss on extinguishment of debt, net and equity in net income of investee. A reconciliation of total segment operating income to loss from continuing operations before income tax benefit for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 is presented in Table 1 of the "Results of Continuing Operations" section of MD&A.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND CRITICAL ESTIMATES
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts and classification of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from these estimates. Estimates and their underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis. Changes in estimates are recorded in the accounting period in which they are determined.
The Company’s most critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of its financial condition and results of operations, and that require the Company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. The Company has identified the following as its most critical accounting policies and judgments. Although management believes that its estimates and assumptions are reasonable, they are based upon information available when they are made, and therefore, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
Provision for Unpaid Loss and Loss Adjustment Expenses
Overview
The Company records a provision for unpaid losses that have occurred as of a given evaluation date as well as for its estimated liability for loss adjustment expenses. The provision for unpaid losses includes a provision, commonly referred to as case reserves, for losses related to reported claims as well as a provision for losses related to claims incurred but not reported ("IBNR"). The provision for loss adjustment expenses represents the cost to investigate and settle claims.
The provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses does not represent an exact calculation of the liability but instead represents management's best estimate at a given accounting date, utilizing actuarial and statistical procedures, of the undiscounted estimates of the ultimate net cost of all unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses.
Any adjustments to the provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses are reflected in the consolidated statements of operations in the periods in which they become known, and the adjustments are accounted for as changes in estimates. Even after such adjustments, ultimate liability or recovery may exceed or be less than the revised provisions.
Process for Establishing the Provision for Unpaid Loss and Loss Adjustment Expenses
The process for establishing the provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses reflects the uncertainties and significant judgmental factors inherent in predicting future results of both reported and IBNR claims. The process of establishing the provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses relies on the judgment and opinions of a number of individuals, including the opinions of the Company's external reserving actuaries.
Our Company’s external reserving actuaries use the following generally accepted actuarial loss and loss adjustment expenses reserving methods in our analysis, for each coverage or segment that we analyze:
•Paid Loss Development - we use historical loss and loss adjustment expense payments over discrete periods of time to estimate future loss and loss adjustment expense payments. Paid development methods assume that the patterns of paid loss and loss adjustment expenses that occurred in past periods will be similar to loss and loss adjustment expense payment patterns that will occur in future periods.
•Incurred Loss Development - we use historical case incurred loss and loss adjustment expenses (the sum of cumulative loss and loss adjustment expense payments plus outstanding unpaid case losses) over discrete periods of time to estimate future loss and loss adjustment expenses. Incurred development methods assume that the case loss and loss adjustment expenses reserving practices are consistently applied over time.
In addition to the actuarial processes above, consideration is given to estimates provided by legal counsel for certain claims currently in litigation.
The methods above all calculate an estimate of total ultimate losses. Our provision for loss and loss adjustment expenses is calculated by subtracting total paid losses from our estimate of total ultimate losses. Our estimate for IBNR is calculated by subtracting case reserves from our provision for loss and loss adjustment expenses.
Our external reserving actuaries have also developed as part of their actuarial report to the Company an estimated range around the carried provision at December 31, 2020 of $1.4 million for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses for our property and casualty company. Their report indicates that a carried provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses anywhere between $1.1 million and $1.8 million for the Company at December 31, 2020 would fall within their reasonable range of estimation. This range does not present a forecast of future redundancy or deficiency since actual development of future paid losses related to the current provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses may be affected by many variables. The provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses recorded at December 31, 2020 represents our best estimate of the ultimate amounts that will be paid.
To the extent that the ultimate paid losses are higher or lower than the provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses recorded by the Company at December 31, 2020, the differences would be recorded in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in the accounting periods in which they are determined. There can be no assurance that such differences would not be material.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
Valuation of Fixed Maturities and Equity Investments
Our equity investments, including warrants, are recorded at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in net loss. Fair value for our equity investments are determined using quoted market values based on latest bid prices, where active markets exist, or models based on significant market observable inputs, where no active markets exist.
For fixed maturities, we use observable inputs such as quoted prices for similar assets in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets in markets that are inactive; or valuations based on models where the significant inputs are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data. We do not have any fixed maturities in our portfolio that require us to use unobservable inputs. The Company engages a third-party vendor who utilizes third-party pricing sources and primarily employs a market approach to determine the fair values of our fixed maturities. The market approach includes primarily obtaining prices from independent third-party pricing services as well as, to a lesser extent, quotes from broker-dealers. Our third-party vendor also monitors market indicators, as well as industry and economic events, to ensure pricing is appropriate. All classes of our fixed maturities are valued using this technique. We have obtained an understanding of our third-party vendor’s valuation methodologies and inputs. Fair values obtained from our third-party vendor are not adjusted by the Company.
Gains and losses realized on the disposition of investments are determined on the first-in first-out basis and credited or charged to the consolidated statements of operations. Premium and discount on investments are amortized using the interest method and charged or credited to net investment income.
Impairment Assessment of Investments
The establishment of an other-than-temporary impairment on an investment requires a number of judgments and estimates.
We perform a quarterly analysis of our investments classified as available-for-sale and our limited liability investments to determine if declines in market value are other-than-temporary. The analysis for available-for-sale investments includes some or all of the following procedures, as applicable:
•identifying all unrealized loss positions that have existed for at least six months;
•identifying other circumstances management believes may affect the recoverability of the unrealized loss positions;
•obtaining a valuation analysis from third-party investment managers regarding the intrinsic value of these investments based on their knowledge and experience together with market-based valuation techniques;
•reviewing the trading range of certain investments over the preceding calendar period;
•assessing if declines in market value are other-than-temporary for debt instruments based on the investment grade credit ratings from third-party rating agencies;
•assessing if declines in market value are other-than-temporary for any debt instrument with a non-investment grade credit rating based on the continuity of its debt service record;
•determining the necessary provision for declines in market value that are considered other-than-temporary based on the analyses performed; and
•assessing the Company's ability and intent to hold these investments at least until any investment impairment is recovered.
The risks and uncertainties inherent in the assessment methodology used to determine declines in market value that are other-than-temporary include, but may not be limited to, the following:
•the opinions of professional investment managers could be incorrect;
•the past trading patterns of individual investments may not reflect future valuation trends;
•the credit ratings assigned by independent credit rating agencies may be incorrect due to unforeseen or unknown facts related to a company's financial situation; and
•the debt service pattern of non-investment grade instruments may not reflect future debt service capabilities and may not reflect a company's unknown underlying financial problems.
We perform a quarterly analysis of our investments in private companies. The analysis includes some or all of the following procedures, as applicable:
•the opinions of external investment and portfolio managers;
•the financial condition and prospects of the investee;
•recent operating trends and forecasted performance of the investee;
•current market conditions in the geographic area or industry in which the investee operates;
•changes in credit ratings; and
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
•changes in the regulatory environment.
As a result of the analysis performed to determine declines in market value that are other-than-temporary, the Company recorded write downs for other-than-temporary impairment related to certain of its investments. See "Investments" section below and Note 7, "Investments," to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Valuation of Limited Liability Investments, at Fair Value
Limited liability investments, at fair value represent the underlying investments of the Company’s consolidated entities Net Lease Investment Grade Portfolio LLC ("Net Lease") and Argo Holdings Fund I, LLC ("Argo Holdings"). The Company accounts for these investments at fair value with changes in fair value reported in the consolidated statements of operations.
Net Lease owns investments in limited liability companies that hold investment properties. The fair value of Net Lease's investments is based upon the net asset values of the underlying investments companies as a practical expedient to estimate fair value.
Argo Holdings makes investments in limited liability companies and limited partnerships that hold investments in search funds and private operating companies. The fair value of Argo Holdings' limited liability investments that hold investments in search funds is based on the initial investment in the search funds. The fair value of Argo Holdings' limited liability investments that hold investments in private operating companies is valued using a market approach.
Refer to Note 25, "Fair Value of Financial Instruments," to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Valuation of Real Estate Investments
The fair value of real estate investments involves a combination of the market and income valuation techniques. Under this approach, a market-based capitalization rate is derived from comparable transactions, adjusted for any unique characteristics of each asset, and applied to the asset under consideration. The cap rates used during underwriting and subsequent valuations incorporate the consideration of risks of vacancy and collection loss, administrative costs of owning net leased assets and possible capital expenditures that could be determined a landlord expense.
Valuation of Deferred Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes is calculated based on the expected tax treatment of transactions recorded in our consolidated financial statements. In determining our provision for income taxes, we interpret tax legislation in a variety of jurisdictions and make assumptions about the expected timing of the reversal of deferred income tax assets and liabilities and the valuation of deferred income taxes.
The ultimate realization of the deferred income tax asset balance is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which the Company's temporary differences reverse and become deductible. A valuation allowance is established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred income tax asset balance will not be realized. In determining whether a valuation allowance is needed, management considers all available positive and negative evidence affecting specific deferred income tax asset balances, including the Company's past and anticipated future performance, the reversal of deferred income tax liabilities, and the availability of tax planning strategies.
Objective positive evidence is necessary to support a conclusion that a valuation allowance is not needed for all or a portion of a company's deferred income tax asset balances when significant negative evidence exists. Cumulative losses are the most compelling form of negative evidence considered by management in this determination. To the extent a valuation allowance is established in a period, an expense must be recorded within the income tax provision in the consolidated statements of operations. As of December 31, 2020, the Company maintains a valuation allowance of $173.2 million, all of which relates to its U.S. deferred income taxes. The largest component of the U.S. deferred income tax asset balance relates to tax loss carryforwards that have arisen as a result of losses generated from the Company's U.S. operations. Uncertainty over the Company's ability to utilize these losses over the short-term has led the Company to record a valuation allowance.
Future events may result in the valuation allowance being adjusted, which could materially affect our financial position and results of operations. If sufficient positive evidence were to arise in the future indicating that all or a portion of the deferred income tax assets would meet the more likely than not standard, all or a portion of the valuation allowance would be reversed in the period that such a conclusion was reached.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
Valuation of Mandatorily Redeemable Preferred Stock
Mandatorily redeemable preferred stock is recorded at the time of issuance based upon the gross proceeds of the offering less (i) proceeds of the offering allocated to additional paid-in capital based upon the relative fair values of equity-classified warrants issued as part of the offering and the preferred stock without the warrants; (ii) proceeds of the offering allocated to additional paid-in capital based upon the calculation of a beneficial conversion feature; and (iii) costs of the offering allocated to the preferred stock. The discount to the carrying value of the preferred stock created by the allocation of proceeds to the warrants and a beneficial conversion feature and the allocation of offering costs to the preferred stock is accreted over time as dividend expense. Additional information regarding our mandatorily redeemable preferred stock is included in Note 21, "Redeemable Class A Preferred Stock," to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Valuation and Impairment Assessment of Intangible Assets
Intangible assets are recorded at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Intangible assets with definite useful lives consist of database, customer relationships, in-place lease and non-compete agreement. Intangible assets with definite useful lives are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. If circumstances require that a definite-lived intangible asset be tested for possible impairment, we first compare the undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by that definite-lived intangible asset to its carrying amount. If the carrying amount of the definite-lived intangible asset is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, an impairment is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds its fair value.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of a tenant relationship and trade names. Intangible assets with indefinite lives are assessed for impairment annually as of October 31, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The Company has the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired. If facts and circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the intangible asset is impaired, then a fair value-based impairment test would be required. Management must make estimates and assumptions in determining the fair value of indefinite-lived intangible assets that may affect any resulting impairment write-down. This includes assumptions regarding future cash flows and future revenues from the related intangible assets or their reporting units. Management then compares the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets to their respective carrying amounts. If the carrying amount of an intangible asset exceeds the fair values of that intangible asset, an impairment is recorded.
No impairment charges were recorded against intangible assets in 2020 or 2019. Additional information regarding our intangible assets is included in Note 11, "Intangible Assets," to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill Recoverability
Goodwill is assessed for impairment annually as of December 31, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. In evaluating the recoverability of goodwill, the Company estimates the fair value of its reporting units, which is determined using the income approach, and compares it to the carrying value. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to such excess.
Under the income approach, fair value is determined based on the present value of estimated future cash flows, discounted at an appropriate risk-adjusted rate. We use our internal forecasts to estimate future cash flows and include an estimate of long-term future growth rates based on our most recent views of the long-term outlook for each business. We use discount rates that are commensurate with the risks and uncertainty inherent in the respective businesses and in our internally developed forecasts.
Estimating the fair value of reporting units requires the use of significant judgments that are based on a number of factors including actual operating results, internal forecasts, market observable pricing multiples of similar businesses and comparable transactions and determining the appropriate discount rate and long-term growth rate assumptions. There are inherent uncertainties related to these factors and management’s judgment in applying them to the analysis of goodwill impairment. It is reasonably possible that the judgments and estimates described above could change in future periods.
No impairment charges were recorded against goodwill in 2020 or 2019, as the estimated fair values of the reporting units exceeded their respective carrying values. Additional information regarding our goodwill is included in Note 10, "Goodwill," to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Although the Company believes its estimates of fair value are reasonable, actual financial results could differ from those estimates due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making such estimates. Changes in assumptions concerning future
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
financial results or other underlying assumptions could have a significant impact on either the fair value of the reporting units, the amount of the goodwill impairment charge, or both.
For Leased Real Estate, the Company models a hypothetical sale of the underlying asset in order to arrive at fair value, which, due to the unique nature of Leased Real Estate, the Company views as a technique consistent with the objective of measuring fair value. The Company believes that its estimates of future cash flows and discount rates are reasonable; however, the amount by which the fair value exceeds the carrying value of the reporting unit has declined significantly primarily as a result of the CMC settlement agreement discussed in Note 27, "Commitments and Contingent Liabilities," to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The estimated fair value of Leased Real Estate is highly sensitive to discount rates applied and changes in the underlying assumptions in the future could differ materially due to the inherent uncertainty in making such estimates. Additionally, estimates regarding future sales proceeds and timing of such proceeds could also have a significant impact on the fair value.
Deferred Acquisition Costs
Deferred acquisition costs represent the deferral of expenses that we incur related to successful efforts to acquire new business or renew existing business. Acquisition costs, primarily commissions and agency expenses related to issuing vehicle service agreements, are deferred and charged against income consistent with the pattern revenue is recognized. Management regularly reviews the categories of acquisition costs that are deferred and assesses the recoverability of this asset.
Fair Value Assumptions for Subordinated Debt Obligations
Our subordinated debt is measured and reported at fair value. The fair value of the subordinated debt is calculated using a model based on significant market observable inputs and inputs developed by a third-party. These inputs include credit spread assumptions developed by a third-party and market observable swap rates.
Fair Value Assumptions for Stock-Based Compensation Liabilities
The Company' subsidiary, PWSC, has made grants of restricted stock awards. Certain of the restricted stock awards granted by PWSC are classified as a liability. Liability-classified awards are measured and reported at fair value and are included in accrued expenses and other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. The fair value of the restricted stock awards granted by PWSC are estimated using an internal valuation model without relevant observable market inputs. The significant inputs used in the model include a valuation multiple applied to trailing twelve month earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization. Forfeitures are recognized in the period that restricted stock awards are forfeited.
Revenue Recognition
Refer to Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information about our revenue recognition accounting policies.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
RESULTS OF CONTINUING OPERATIONS
A reconciliation of total segment operating income to net loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 is presented in Table 1 below:
Table 1 Segment Operating Income for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
For the years ended December 31 (in thousands of dollars)
Loss from Continuing Operations, Net Loss and Diluted Loss per Share
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a loss from continuing operations of $5.4 million (loss of $0.35 per diluted share) compared to $2.8 million (loss of $0.25 per diluted share) for the year ended December 31, 2019, which is primarily attributable to the items explained in the following paragraphs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we reported net loss of $5.4 million ($0.35 per diluted share) compared to $4.3 million ($0.32 per diluted share) for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Extended Warranty
The Extended Warranty service fee and commission revenue increased 3.3% (or $1.5 million) to $47.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $46.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Service fee and commission revenue was impacted by the following in 2020:
•$2.5 million due to the inclusion of PWI in 2020 following its acquisition effective December 1, 2020;
•A $2.2 million increase at Geminus primarily due to the inclusion of only ten months of results in the 2019 period post-acquisition, which was partially offset by lower contract sales due to the COVID-19 pandemic;
•A $0.3 million increase in PWSC revenue, driven by the stronger housing market in the second half of 2020;
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
•A $2.9 million decrease at Trinity driven by reduced revenues in its equipment breakdown and maintenance support services due to the loss of a major customer and impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, which was partially offset by an increase in its extended warranty services product; and
•A $0.6 million decrease at IWS, due primarily to lower contract sales due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Extended Warranty operating income was $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in operating income is primarily due to the following:
•$0.7 million due to the inclusion of PWI in 2020 following its acquisition effective December 1, 2019;
•A $1.1 million increase at Geminus primarily due to the inclusion of Geminus for the entire twelve months of 2020 following its acquisition effective March 1, 2019, as well as cost control initiatives in place due to the COVID-19 pandemic;
•A $0.8 million increase at PWSC, primarily due to increased revenue and lower general and administrative expenses due to cost control initiatives in place due to the COVID-19 pandemic and continuing operating efficiencies;
•A $0.3 million decrease at IWS primarily due to a decrease in revenue, partially offset by cost control initiatives in place due to the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•A $0.7 million decrease at Trinity driven by reduced revenues in its equipment breakdown and maintenance support services, partially offset by a related decrease in cost of services sold, operating expenses and increased margin on the extended warranty services product, compared to 2019.
Leased Real Estate
Leased Real Estate rental revenue was $13.4 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. The rental revenue is derived from CMC's long-term triple net lease.
Leased Real Estate operating loss was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to operating income of $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to $2.6 million of management fee expense recorded pursuant to a settlement agreement related to outstanding litigation and higher litigation expenses of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Leased Real Estate operating (loss) income includes interest expense of $6.0 million and $6.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. See Note 27, "Commitments and Contingent Liabilities," to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for further discussion related to the CMC litigation settlement.
Net Investment Income
Net investment income was $2.6 million in 2020 compared to $2.9 million in 2019. The decrease in 2020 is primarily due to less investment income recorded from the Company's fixed maturities and dividends on equity investments as a result of general changes in market conditions, partially offset by more income from the Company's limited liability investments, at fair value, in 2020 compared to 2019.
Net Realized Gains
The Company recorded net realized gains of $0.6 million in 2020 compared to $0.8 million in 2019, primarily from realized gains recognized by Argo Holdings.
Gain on Change in Fair Value of Equity Investments
Gain on change in fair value of equity investments was $1.3 million in 2020 compared to $0.6 million in 2019. Significant drivers include:
•Unrealized losses of $0.2 million and unrealized gains of $0.7 million on equity investments held during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively; and
•Net realized gains of $1.5 million on equity investments sold during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net realized losses of $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The net realized gains for the year ended December 31, 2020 relate primarily to the sale of the Company's shares of Limbach Holdings, Inc. ("Limbach")
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
common stock. During the third quarter of 2020, the Company sold all of its shares of Limbach common stock for cash proceeds totaling $3.2 million.
Gain on Change in Fair Value of Limited Liability Investments, at Fair Value
Gain on change in fair value of limited liability investments, at fair value was $4.0 million in 2020 compared to $4.5 million in 2019. The gain for the year ended December 31, 2020 represents an increase in fair value of $4.9 million related to Net Lease, partially offset by a decrease in fair value of $0.8 million related to Argo Holdings. The gain for the year ended December 31, 2019 includes increases in fair value of $3.0 million related to Net Lease and $2.2 million related to 1347 Investors LLC ("1347 Investors"), partially offset by a decrease in fair value of $0.7 million related to Argo Holdings.
The Company consolidates the financial statements of Net Lease on a three-month lag. The increase in fair value at Net Lease recorded during 2020 is primarily attributable to the sale of one of the three Net Lease investment properties for $40.1 million, which closed on October 30, 2020. Given the proximity of the sale to September 30, 2020, the Company believes that the ultimate selling price is the best indication of value as of September 30, 2020.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company’s investment in 1347 Investors was dissolved. See Note 26, "Related Parties," to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for further information about the dissolution of 1347 Investors.
Net Change in Unrealized Loss on Private Company Investments
Net change in unrealized loss on private company investments was $0.7 million in 2020 compared to $0.3 million in 2019. The Company recorded decreases of zero and $0.2 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively, to adjust the fair values of certain investments in private companies for observable price changes. Also, as a result of the quarterly impairment analysis of its investments in private companies, the Company determined it should write down two of its investments for other-than-temporary impairment of $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the impacts of COVID-19 on the investments' underlying business. The Company recorded impairments related to investments in private companies of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Expense not Allocated to Segments
Interest expense not allocated to segments for 2020 was $7.7 million compared to $9.0 million in 2019. The decrease in 2020 is primarily attributable to the Company’s subordinated debt, which resulted from generally lower London interbank offered interest rates for three-month U.S. dollar deposits ("LIBOR") during 2020 compared to 2019. The Company's subordinated debt bears interest at the rate of LIBOR, plus spreads ranging from 3.85% to 4.20%. See "Debt" section below for further details.
Other Revenue and Expenses not Allocated to Segments, Net
Other revenue and expenses not allocated to segments was a net expense of $10.6 million in 2020 compared to $8.5 million in 2019.
The increase in net expense for 2020 is primarily attributable to $1.4 million of expense recorded pursuant to a settlement agreement related to outstanding litigation between the Company and Aegis Security Insurance Company ("Aegis") and higher salary expense related to restricted stock awards and audit professional services fees incurred, partially offset by a decrease in loss and loss adjustment expenses of $0.6 million for 2020 compared to 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019, Kingsway Amigo Insurance Company ("Amigo") increased loss reserves related to one of the remaining open claims as part of its continuing voluntary runoff. The unfavorable development for the year ended December 31, 2019 was partially offset by favorable development in unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses at Kingsway Reinsurance Corporation ("Kingsway Re").
See Note 27, "Commitments and Contingent Liabilities," to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for further discussion related to Aegis.
Gain on Change in Fair Value of Debt
The gain on change in fair value of debt amounted to $1.2 million in 2020 compared to $1.1 million in 2019. The gains for 2020 and 2019 reflect decreases in the fair value of the subordinated debt resulting from changes in inputs, other than the instrument-specific credit risk, to the Company’s fair value model which were primarily a result of lower overall LIBOR rates. See "Debt" section below for further information.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt, Net
During 2020, loss on extinguishment of debt, net consists of the following:
•A $0.9 million loss on the extinguishment of the 2019 KWH Loan, which includes the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs and discount of $0.6 million and early termination fees paid to the lender of $0.2 million.
•A $0.4 million gain on forgiveness of the balance on one of the Company's loans obtained through the Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP") of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security ("CARES") Act.
See Note 14, "Debt," to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for further discussion.
Equity in Net Income of Investee
Equity in net income of investee represents the Company's investment in Itasca Capital Ltd. ("ICL"). Equity in net income of investee was $0.2 million in 2019, which includes a $0.1 million gain on sale of shares during 2019 and $0.1 million of equity in net income of investee. During the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company sold its remaining investment in the common stock of ICL. See Note 8, "Investment in Investee," to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for further discussion.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit for 2020 was $1.1 million compared to $0.4 million in 2019. The 2020 and 2019 income tax benefit is primarily related to:
•a partial release of the Company’s deferred income tax valuation allowance associated with business interest expense with an indefinite life (2020 only);
•a partial release of the Company’s deferred income tax valuation allowance related to its acquisitions of CMC (2020 only) and Geminus (2019 only);
•the change in unrecognized tax benefits;
•the change in indefinite life deferred income tax liabilities; and
•state income taxes.
See Note 17, "Income Taxes," to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for additional detail of the income tax benefit recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
INVESTMENTS
Portfolio Composition
The following is an overview of how we account for our various investments:
•Investments in fixed maturities are classified as available-for-sale and are reported at fair value.
•Equity investments are reported at fair value.
•Limited liability investments are accounted for under the equity method of accounting. The most recently available financial statements of the limited liability investments are used in applying the equity method. The difference between the end of the reporting period of the limited liability investments and that of the Company is no more than three months.
•Limited liability investments, at fair value represent the underlying investments of the Company’s consolidated entities Net Lease and Argo Holdings. The difference between the end of the reporting period of the limited liability investments, at fair value and that of the Company is no more than three months.
•Investments in private companies consist of: convertible preferred stocks and notes in privately owned companies; and investments in limited liability companies in which the Company’s interests are deemed minor. These investments do not have readily determinable fair values and, therefore, are reported at cost, adjusted for observable price changes and impairments.
•Real estate investments are reported at fair value.
•Other investments include collateral loans and are reported at their unpaid principal balance.
•Short-term investments, which consist of investments with original maturities between three months and one year, are reported at cost, which approximates fair value.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
At December 31, 2020, we held cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and investments with a carrying value of $114.5 million.
Investments held by our insurance subsidiary, Amigo, must comply with domiciliary state regulations that prescribe the type, quality and concentration of investments. Our U.S. operations typically invest in U.S. dollar-denominated instruments to mitigate their exposure to currency rate fluctuations.
Table 2 below summarizes the carrying value of investments, including cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash, at the dates indicated.
TABLE 2 Carrying value of investments, including cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash
As of December 31 (in thousands of dollars, except for percentages)
Other-Than-Temporary Impairment
The Company performs a quarterly analysis of its investments to determine if declines in market value are other-than-temporary. Further information regarding our detailed analysis and factors considered in establishing an other-than-temporary impairment on an investment is discussed within the "Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Estimates" section of MD&A.
As a result of the analysis performed, the Company recorded the following write downs for other-than-temporary impairment:
•Other investments: $0.1 million and zero for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
•Limited liability investments: zero and $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
•Limited liability investments, at fair value: $0.1 million and $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, which are included in gain on change in fair value of limited liability investments, at fair value in the consolidated statements of operations.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
•Investments in private companies: $0.7 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, which are included in net change in unrealized loss on private company investments in the consolidated statements of operations.
There were no write-downs recorded for other-than-temporary impairments related to available-for sale investments for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
The length of time a fixed maturity investment may be held in an unrealized loss position may vary based on the opinion of the investment manager and their respective analyses related to valuation and to the various credit risks that may prevent us from recapturing the principal investment. In the case of a fixed maturity investment where the investment manager determines that there is little or no risk of default prior to the maturity of a holding, we would elect to hold the investment in an unrealized loss position until the price recovers or the investment matures. In situations where facts emerge that might increase the risk associated with recapture of principal, the Company may elect to sell a fixed maturity investment at a loss.
At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the gross unrealized losses for fixed maturities amounted to less than $0.1 million, and there were no unrealized losses attributable to non-investment grade fixed maturities. At each of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, all unrealized losses on individual investments were considered temporary.
Impact of COVID-19 on Investments
The Company continues to assess the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on the value of its various investments, which could result in future material decreases in the underlying investment values. Such decreases may be considered temporary or could be deemed to be other-than-temporary, and management may be required to record write-downs of the related investments in future reporting periods.
UNPAID LOSS AND LOSS ADJUSTMENT EXPENSES
Unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses represent the estimated liabilities for reported loss events, IBNR loss events and the related estimated loss adjustment expenses.
Table 3 presents distributions, by line of business, of the provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses.
TABLE 3 Provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses
As of December 31 (in thousands of dollars)
Non-Standard Automobile
At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses for our non-standard automobile business were $0.2 million and $0.5 million, respectively. The decrease is due to payments of loss adjustment expenses at Amigo.
Commercial Automobile
At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses for our commercial automobile business were $0.1 million.
Other
At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses for our other business were $1.1 million and $1.2 million, respectively. The decrease is due to payments of loss and loss adjustment expenses at Amigo.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
Information with respect to development of our provision for prior years' loss and loss adjustment expenses is presented in Table 4.
TABLE 4 Increase in prior years' provision for loss and loss adjustment expenses
For the years ended December 31 (in thousands of dollars)
The net movements in prior years' provisions for loss and loss adjustment expenses was an increase of $0.1 million and $0.7 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. The unfavorable development in 2020 and 2019 was primarily related to an increase in unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses due to the continuing voluntary run-off of Amigo. The unfavorable development in 2019 was partially offset by favorable development in unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses at Kingsway Re. Original estimates are increased or decreased as additional information becomes known regarding individual claims.
DEBT
Bank Loans
On October 12, 2017, the Company borrowed a principal amount of $5.0 million from a bank to partially finance its acquisition of PWSC (the "PWSC Loan"). The PWSC Loan has a fixed interest rate of 5.0% and is carried in the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2019 at its unpaid principal balance. The PWSC Loan was scheduled to mature on October 12, 2022; however, the principal was fully repaid on January 30, 2020.
In 2019, the Company formed KWH, whose subsidiaries include IWS, Geminus and Trinity. On March 1, 2019, KWH borrowed a principal amount of $10.0 million from a bank to finance its acquisition of Geminus (the "2019 KWH Loan"). The 2019 KWH Loan has an annual interest rate equal to LIBOR, having a floor of 2.00%, plus 9.25% and is carried in the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2019 at its amortized cost, which reflects the quarterly pay-down of principal as well as the amortization of the debt discount and issuance costs using the effective interest rate method. The 2019 KWH Loan was scheduled to mature on March 1, 2024; however, the principal was fully repaid on December 1, 2020. See Note 14, "Debt," to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
As part of the acquisition of PWI on December 1, 2020, PWI became a wholly owned subsidiary of KWH, which borrowed a principal amount of $25.7 million from a bank to finance its acquisition of PWI (the "2020 KWH Loan"). The 2020 KWH Loan has an annual interest rate equal to LIBOR, having a floor of 0.75%, plus 3.00% and is carried in the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020 at its amortized cost, which reflects the quarterly pay-down of principal as well as the amortization of the debt discount and issuance costs using the effective interest rate method. The 2020 KWH Loan matures on December 1, 2025. See Note 14, "Debt," to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
The 2020 KWH Loan contains a number of covenants, including, but not limited to, a leverage ratio, a fixed charge ratio and limits on annual capital expenditures, all of which are as defined in and calculated pursuant to the 2020 KWH Loan that, among other things, restrict KWH’s ability to incur additional indebtedness, create liens, make dividends and distributions, engage in mergers, acquisitions and consolidations, make certain payments and investments and dispose of certain assets.
Notes Payable
As part of its acquisition of CMC in July 2016, the Company assumed the Mortgage and recorded the Mortgage at its estimated fair value of $191.7 million, which included the unpaid principal amount of $180.0 million as of the date of acquisition plus a premium of $11.7 million. The Mortgage matures on May 15, 2034 and has a fixed interest rate of 4.07%. The Mortgage is carried in the consolidated balance sheets at its amortized cost, which reflects the monthly pay-down of principal as well as the amortization of the premium using the effective interest rate method.
On January 5, 2015, Flower Portfolio 001, LLC assumed a $9.2 million mortgage in conjunction with the purchase of investment real estate properties ("the Flower Note"). The Flower Note matures on December 10, 2031 and has a fixed interest rate of 4.81%. The Flower Note is carried in the consolidated balance sheets at its unpaid principal balance.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
On October 15, 2015, Net Lease Investment assumed a $9.0 million mezzanine debt in conjunction with the purchase of investment real estate properties ("the Net Lease Note"). The Net Lease Note matured on November 1, 2020 and had a fixed interest rate of 10.25%. The Net Lease Note is carried in the consolidated balance sheets at its unpaid principal balance. In conjunction with the maturity of the Net Lease Note on November 1, 2020, Net Lease explored alternatives to maximize the value of its investment portfolio. As a result of this process, Net Lease elected to sell one of its three investment real estate properties while refinancing the remaining properties. The existing financing was replaced with three year non-recourse debt maturing November 1, 2023 with a fixed interest rate of 4.35%. Each of these transactions closed on October 30, 2020, however because the Company reports Net Lease on a three-month lag, the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020 continues to report the $9.0 million mezzanine debt.
In April 2020, certain subsidiaries of the Company received loan proceeds under the PPP, totaling $2.9 million with a stated annual interest rate of 1.00%. The PPP, established as part of the CARES Act and administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the "SBA"), provides for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times of the average monthly payroll costs (as defined for purposes of the PPP) of the qualifying business. The loans and accrued interest are forgivable as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, costs, rent and utilities, during the twenty-four week period following the borrower’s receipt of the loan and maintains its payroll levels and employee headcount. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if the borrower reduces its employee headcount below its average employee headcount during a benchmark period or significantly reduces salaries for certain employees during the covered period.
The Company used the entire loan amount for qualifying expenses. The U.S. Department of the Treasury has announced that it will conduct audits for PPP loans that exceed $2.0 million. If we were to be audited and receive an adverse outcome in such an audit, we could be required to return the full amount of the PPP Loan and may potentially be subject to civil and criminal fines and penalties.
On December 21, 2020 the SBA approved the forgiveness of the full amount of one of the five PPP loans. The forgiveness included principal and interest of $0.4 million, which is included in loss on extinguishment of debt, net in the consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. In January 2021, the SBA provided the Company with notices of forgiveness of the full amount of two of the remaining four loans. The forgiveness included total principal and interest of $1.4 million. The outstanding PPP is carried in the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020 at its unpaid principal balance.
Subordinated Debt
Between December 4, 2002 and December 16, 2003, six subsidiary trusts of the Company issued $90.5 million of 30-year capital securities to third parties in separate private transactions. In each instance, a corresponding floating rate junior subordinated deferrable interest debenture was then issued by Kingsway America Inc. to the trust in exchange for the proceeds from the private sale. The floating rate debentures bear interest at the rate of LIBOR, plus spreads ranging from 3.85% to 4.20%. The Company has the right to call each of these securities at par value any time after five years from their issuance until their maturity.
During the third quarter of 2018, the Company gave notice to its Trust Preferred trustees of its intention to exercise its voluntary
right to defer interest payments for up to 20 quarters, pursuant to the contractual terms of its outstanding Trust Preferred indentures, which permit interest deferral. This action does not constitute a default under the Company's Trust Preferred indentures or any of its other debt indentures. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, deferred interest payable of $14.1 million and $8.9 million, respectively, is included in accrued expenses and other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets.
The agreements governing our subordinated debt contain a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict the Company’s ability to incur additional indebtedness, make dividends and distributions, and make certain payments in respect of the Company’s outstanding securities.
The Company's subordinated debt is measured and reported at fair value. At December 31, 2020, the carrying value of the subordinated debt is $50.9 million. The fair value of the subordinated debt is calculated using a model based on significant market observable inputs and inputs developed by a third-party. For a description of the market observable inputs and inputs developed by a third-party used in determining fair value of debt, see Note 25, "Fair Value of Financial Instruments," to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the market observable swap rates changed, and the Company experienced an increase in the credit spread assumption developed by the third-party. Changes in the market observable swap rates affect the fair value model in different ways. An increase in the LIBOR swap rates has the effect of increasing the fair value of the
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
Company's subordinated debt while an increase in the risk-free swap rates has the effect of decreasing the fair value. The increase in the credit spread assumption has the effect of decreasing the fair value of the Company's subordinated debt while a decrease in the credit spread assumption has the effect of increasing the fair value. The other primary variable affecting the fair value of debt calculation is the passage of time, which will always have the effect of increasing the fair value of debt. The changes to the credit spread and swap rate variables during 2020, along with the passage of time, contributed to the $3.7 million decrease in fair value of the Company’s subordinated debt between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020.
Of the $3.7 million decrease in fair value of the Company’s subordinated debt between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020, $2.6 million is reported as decrease in fair value of debt attributable to instrument-specific credit risk in the Company's consolidated statements of comprehensive loss and $1.2 million is reported as gain on change in fair value of debt in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
Though changes in the market observable swap rates will continue to introduce some volatility each quarter to the Company’s reported gain or loss on change in fair value of debt, changes in the credit spread assumption developed by the third party does not introduce volatility to the Company’s consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of the Company’s subordinated debt will eventually equal the principal value, totaling $90.5 million, of the subordinated debt by the time of the stated redemption date of each trust, beginning with the trust maturing on December 4, 2032 and continuing through January 8, 2034, the redemption date of the last of the Company’s outstanding trusts.
For a description of each of the Company's six subsidiary trusts, see Note 14, "Debt," to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The purpose of liquidity management is to ensure there is sufficient cash to meet all financial commitments and obligations as they fall due. The liquidity requirements of the Company and its subsidiaries have been met primarily by funds generated from operations, capital raising, disposal of discontinued operations, investment maturities and income and other returns received on investments or from the sale of investments. Cash provided from these sources is used primarily for making investments and for warranty expenses and loss and loss adjustment expense payments, debt servicing and other operating expenses. The timing and amount of payments for loss and loss adjustment expenses may differ materially from our provisions for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses, which may create increased liquidity requirements.
Cash Flows
During 2020, the Company reported $1.7 million of net cash provided by operating activities. The reconciliation between the Company's reported net loss of $5.4 million and the $1.7 million of net cash provided by operating activities can be explained primarily by the $6.7 million noncash depreciation and amortization expense, the $8.6 million change in other assets and liabilities, net, which is primarily due to the increase in deferred interest payable related to the subordinated debt of $5.2 million and accrued management fees of $2.6 million recorded pursuant to the CMC litigation settlement (see Note 27, "Commitments and Contingent Liabilities," to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for further discussion of the CMC litigation settlement), and the $0.9 million increase in service fee receivable, offset by the $4.0 million gain on change in fair value of limited liability investments, at fair value, the $2.3 million increase in deferred service fees, the $1.3 million gain on change in fair value of equity investments and the $1.2 million gain on change in fair value of debt.
During 2020, the net cash provided by investing activities was $4.0 million. This source of cash was primarily attributed to proceeds from sales and maturities of fixed maturities and equity investments in excess of purchases of fixed maturities.
During 2020, the net cash provided by financing activities was $13.6 million. This source of cash was primarily attributed to $25.3 million of net bank loan proceeds and principal proceeds from notes payable of $2.9 million (related to the PPP loans received), partially offset by principal repayments of $10.1 million on bank loans and $4.2 million on notes payable.
Receipt of dividends from the Company's insurance subsidiaries has not generally been considered a source of liquidity for the holding company. The insurance subsidiaries have required regulatory approval for the return of capital and, in certain circumstances, prior to the payment of dividends. At December 31, 2020, Amigo was restricted from making any dividend payments to the holding company without regulatory approval pursuant to domiciliary state insurance regulations.
The Company's Extended Warranty subsidiaries fund their obligations primarily through service fee and commission revenue. The Company's Leased Real Estate subsidiary funds its obligations through rental revenue. The Company's insurance subsidiaries fund their obligations primarily through available cash and cash equivalents.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
The liquidity of the holding company is managed separately from its subsidiaries. The obligations of the holding company primarily consist of holding company operating expenses; transaction-related expenses; investments; and any other extraordinary demands on the holding company.
Actions available to the holding company to increase liquidity in order to meet its obligations include the sale of passive investments; sale of subsidiaries; issuance of debt or equity securities; distributions from the Company’s Extended Warranty subsidiaries, as further described below; and giving notice to its Trust Preferred trustees of its intention to exercise its voluntary right to defer interest payments for up to 20 quarters on the six subsidiary trusts of the Company’s subordinated debt, which right the Company exercised during the third quarter of 2018.
On December 1, 2020, the Company closed on the acquisition of PWI, a full-service provider of vehicle service agreements. Related to the PWI acquisition, the Company secured the 2020 KWH Loan with IWS, Trinity, Geminus and PWI as borrowers under the 2020 KWH Loan. Pursuant to satisfying the covenants under the 2020 KWH Loan, IWS, Trinity, Geminus and PWI are permitted to make distributions to the holding company in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1.5 million in any 12-month period (which is the same amount as under the predecessor loan).
Separately, pursuant to covenants under the PWSC Loan secured to partially finance the acquisition of PWSC on October 12, 2017, PWSC was not permitted to make distributions to the holding company without the consent of the lender. The PWSC Loan was scheduled to mature on October 12, 2022; however, the remaining principal totaling $0.3 million was fully repaid on January 30, 2020 and, as such, PWSC is no longer subject to such restrictions.
Historically, dividends from the Leased Real Estate segment were not generally considered a source of liquidity for the holding company. However, as more fully described in Note 27, "Commitments and Contingent Liabilities," to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the holding company is now expected to receive 20% of the proceeds from the increased rental payments resulting from an earlier amendment to the lease (or any borrowings against such increased rental payments), as well as a one-time priority payment of $1.5 million.
On July 16, 2018, the Company announced it had entered into a definitive agreement to sell its non-standard automobile insurance companies Mendota Insurance Company, Mendakota Insurance Company and Mendakota Casualty Company (collectively "Mendota"). On October 18, 2018, the Company completed the previously announced sale of Mendota. As part of the transaction, the Company will indemnify the buyer for any loss and loss adjustment expenses with respect to open claims and certain specified claims in excess of Mendota's carried unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses at June 30, 2018. The maximum obligation to the Company with respect to the open claims is $2.5 million. A security interest on the Company’s equity interest in its consolidated subsidiary, Net Lease, as well as any distributions to the Company from Net Lease, is collateral for the Company’s payment of obligations with respect to the open claims. There is no maximum obligation to the Company with respect to the specified claims.
The holding company’s liquidity, defined as the amount of cash in the bank accounts of Kingsway Financial Services Inc. and Kingsway America Inc., was $1.1 million (approximately two to three months of operating cash outflows) and $2.3 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The amount as of December 31, 2020 excludes: a $1.3 million distribution received from the Extended Warranty segment in January 2021; the cash expected to be received from the Leased Real Estate segment; and future actions available to the holding company that could be taken to increase liquidity. The holding company cash amounts are reflected in the cash and cash equivalents of $14.4 million and $13.5 million reported at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. The cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash other than the holding company’s liquidity represent restricted and unrestricted cash held by Amigo, Kingsway Re and the Company's Extended Warranty and Leased Real Estate segments.
As of the filing date of the Company’s 2020 Annual Report, the holding company’s liquidity of $1.3 million represented approximately three months of regularly recurring operating expenses before any transaction-related expenses, any new holding company investments or any other extraordinary demands on the holding company and excludes any proceeds from the Leased Real Estate segment which the Company believes will be received shortly after the filing date.
The holding company’s liquidity at December 31, 2020 and as of the filing date of the Company’s 2020 Annual Report, represents only actual cash on hand and does not include cash that would be made available to the holding company from the sale of investments owned by the holding company. In addition, the holding company has access to some of the operating cash generated by the Extended Warranty subsidiaries as described above. While these sources do not represent cash of the holding company as of the filing date of this 2020 Annual Report, they do represent future sources of liquidity.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
As of December 31, 2020, there are 182,876 shares of the Company’s Class A Preferred Stock (the "Preferred Shares"), issued and outstanding. Any outstanding Preferred Shares would be required to be redeemed by the Company on April 1, 2021 ("Redemption Date") at a redemption value of $6.7 million (assuming all current outstanding Preferred Shares would be redeemed), if the Company has sufficient liquidity and legally available funds to do so. Additionally, the Company has exercised its right to defer payment of interest on its outstanding subordinated debt ("trust preferred securities") and, because of the deferral which totaled $14.1 million at December 31, 2020, the Company is prohibited from redeeming any shares of its capital stock while payment of interest on the trust preferred securities is being deferred. If, as of April 1, 2021, the Company was required to pay both the deferred interest on the trust preferred securities and redeem all the Preferred Shares currently outstanding, then the Company currently projects that it would not have sufficient legally available funds to do so. However, the Company would be prohibited from doing so under Delaware law and, as such, (a) the interest estimated to be $14.9 million on March 31, 2021 on the trust preferred securities would remain on deferral as permitted under the indentures and (b) in accordance with Delaware law the Preferred Shares would not be redeemed on the Redemption Date (with a redemption value of $6.7 million) and would instead remain outstanding and continue to accrue dividends until such time as the Company has sufficient legally available funds to redeem the Preferred Shares and is not otherwise prohibited from doing so. In such a situation, the Company would continue to operate in the ordinary course.
The Company notes there are several variables to consider in such a situation, and management is currently exploring the following opportunities: negotiating with the holders of the Preferred Shares with respect to the Redemption Date and/or other key provisions, raising additional funds through capital market transactions, as well as the Company’s continued strategy of working to monetize its non-core investments while attempting to maximize the tradeoff between liquidity and value received.
Based on the Company’s current business plan and revenue prospects, existing cash, cash equivalents, investment balances and anticipated cash flows from operations are expected to be sufficient to meet the Company’s working capital and operating expenditure requirements, excluding the cash that may be required to redeem the Preferred Shares and deferred interest on its trust preferred securities, for the next twelve months. However, the Company’s assessment could also be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Regulatory Capital
In the United States, a risk-based capital ("RBC") formula is used by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners ("NAIC") to identify property and casualty insurance companies that may not be adequately capitalized. In general, insurers reporting surplus as regards policyholders below 200% of the authorized control level, as defined by the NAIC, at December 31 are subject to varying levels of regulatory action, including discontinuation of operations. As of December 31, 2020, surplus as regards policyholders reported by Amigo exceeded the 200% threshold.
During the fourth quarter of 2012, the Company began taking steps to place all of Amigo into voluntary run-off. As of December 31, 2012, Amigo’s RBC was 157%. In April 2013, Kingsway filed a comprehensive run-off plan with the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation, which outlines plans for Amigo's run-off. Amigo remains in compliance with that plan. As of December 31, 2020, Amigo's RBC was 1,045%.
Kingsway Re, our reinsurance subsidiary domiciled in Barbados, is required by the regulator in Barbados to maintain minimum statutory capital of $125,000. Kingsway Re is currently operating with statutory capital near the regulatory minimum, requiring us to periodically contribute capital to fund operating expenses. Kingsway Re incurs operating expenses of approximately $0.1 million per year. As of December 31, 2020, the capital maintained by Kingsway Re was in excess of the regulatory capital requirements in Barbados.
New York Stock Exchange Listing Standards
On April 17, 2020, the Company received notification from the New York Stock Exchange ("NYSE") of the Company's noncompliance with certain NYSE standards for continued listing of its common shares. Specifically, Kingsway was below the NYSE's continued listing criteria because its average total market capitalization over a 30 consecutive trading day period was less than $50.0 million at the same time that reported shareholders' equity was below $50.0 million. Under the NYSE's continued listing criteria, a NYSE-listed company must maintain average market capitalization of not less than $50.0 million over a 30 consecutive trading day period or reported shareholders' equity of not less than $50.0 million.
The Company submitted a business plan to the NYSE on June 1, 2020, intended to demonstrate its ability to achieve compliance with the listing standards within 18 months of receiving the notice. On July 9, 2020, the NYSE notified the Company that the plan was accepted.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
On January 18, 2021, the Company received notification from the NYSE that the Company is now back in compliance with NYSE's continued listing standards. This is primarily the result of the achievement of compliance with NYSE's minimum market capitalization requirements. The Company is subject to a twelve-month follow-up review period during which the Company's continued compliance with NYSE's continued listing standards will be monitored, as well as NYSE's normal continued listing monitoring.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
Table 5 summarizes cash disbursements related to the Company's contractual obligations projected by period, including debt maturities, interest payments on outstanding debt, the provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses and future minimum payments under operating leases. Interest payments on outstanding debt in Table 5 related to the subordinated debt and 2020 KWH Loan assume LIBOR remains constant throughout the projection period. Also, interest payments on outstanding debt reflect the interest deferral described in the "Subordinated Debt" section above.
Our provision for unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses does not have contractual payment dates. In Table 5 below, we have included a projection of when we expect our unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses to be paid, based on historical payment patterns. The exact timing of the payment of unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses cannot be predicted with certainty. We maintain a substantial amount in short-term investments to provide adequate cash flows for the projected payments in Table 5.
TABLE 5 Cash payments related to contractual obligations projected by period
As of December 31, 2020 (in thousands of dollars)
Table 5 above does not reflect amounts that may be paid for the redemption of the 182,876 shares of Class A preferred stock ("Preferred Shares") outstanding at December 31, 2020. Each Preferred Share is convertible into 6.25 common shares at a conversion price of $4.00 per common share any time at the option of the holder prior to April 1, 2021 (the "Redemption Date"). On and after February 3, 2016, the Company may redeem all or any part of the then outstanding Preferred Shares for the price of $28.75 per Preferred Share, plus accrued but unpaid dividends thereon, whether or not declared, up to and including the Redemption Date. The total redemption amount of the Preferred Shares as of the Redemption Date if the Preferred Shares are not converted is expected to be $6.7 million. The timing and amount of cash, if any, to be paid by the Redemption Date will be based upon the extent, if at all, that the Company exercises its right to redeem any Preferred Shares prior to the Redemption Date or the holders of the Preferred Shares exercise their option to convert any of the Preferred Shares to common shares.
Refer to Note 21, "Redeemable Class A Preferred Stock," to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding the Preferred Shares.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The Company has off-balance sheet arrangements related to guarantees, which are further described in Note 27, "Commitments and Contingent Liabilities," to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
KINGSWAY FINANCIAL SERVICES INC.