ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
KONA GOLD BEVERAGE, INC.
The following discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes and the other financial information that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations, and intentions. Forward-looking statements are statements not based on historical information and which relate to future operations, strategies, financial results, or other developments. Forward-looking statements are based upon estimates, forecasts, and assumptions that are inherently subject to significant business, economic, and competitive uncertainties and contingencies, many of which are beyond our control and many of which, with respect to future business decisions, are subject to change. These uncertainties and contingencies can affect actual results and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements made by us, or on our behalf. We disclaim any obligation to update forward-looking statements. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under the “Risk Factors,” “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” and “Description of Business” sections in this Annual Report. We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. We and our representatives may from time to time make written or oral statements that are “forward-looking,” including statements contained in this Annual Report and other filings with the SEC, reports to our stockholders, and news releases. All statements that express expectations, estimates, forecasts, or projections are forward-looking statements. In addition, other written or oral statements which constitute forward-looking statements may be made by us or on our behalf. Words such as “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “seek,” “estimate,” “project,” “forecast,” “may,” “should,” variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions, which are difficult to predict. Therefore, actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed or forecasted in or suggested by such forward-looking statements.
We undertake no obligation to update or revise any of the forward-looking statements after the date of this Annual Reports to confirm forward-looking statements to actual results. Important factors on which such statements are based are assumptions concerning uncertainties, including, but not limited to, uncertainties associated with the following:
● Inadequate capital and barriers to raising the additional capital or to obtaining the financing needed to implement our business plans;
● Our failure to earn revenues or profits;
● Volatility or decline of our stock price;
● Potential fluctuation in our financial results;
● Rapid and significant changes in markets;
● Litigation with or legal claims and allegations by outside parties;
● Impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic; and
● Insufficient revenues to cover operating costs.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto which are included in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ substantially from those anticipated in any forward-looking statements included in this discussion as a result of various factors.
Results of Operations
Overview
Our business has grown rapidly since inception, and we anticipate that our business will continue to grow; however, in the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company saw unforeseen delays in signing more favorable agreements with larger, reputable tier 1 and mid-size distributors and grocery chains and we were additionally impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic during the fiscal year. The COVID-19 pandemic delayed our launch of a variety of new products during most of the 2020 fiscal year - drinks and non-drink line broadening items. Our Beverages Segment has three main revenue streams: product sales from online consumers, product sales through resellers, and product sales from distributors. Product sales include sales of our energy drinks, HighDrate CBD-infused energy waters, and apparel such as t-shirts and hats. In early 2019, we expanded our operations with the creation of a distribution center, which now functions as our Distribution Segment. Our Distribution Segment has one main revenue stream: product sales to convenience stores, grocery stores, or smoke and gift shops, which complement our current product offering. Product sales include sales of our beverages, as well as beverages and snacks purchased for resale from several other beverage producers.
We have experienced and expect to continue to experience substantial growth in our operations as we seek to expand through additional products and acquisitions that complement our current product offerings. We expect that revenue will increase in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, as distribution by our current distributors, who were, and whose clients were, affected by COVID-19 has resumed and we expect to see fewer COVID-19 pandemic-related distribution impacts for the balance of fiscal year 2021. Based on those expectations, we now anticipate signing more favorable agreements with larger, reputable tier 1 and mid-size distributors that we had anticipated in our Beverage Segment for fiscal 2020. The following is a more detailed discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the period presented.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year ended December 31, 2019
Overview
As reflected in the accompanying financial statements, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a net loss of approximately $3.1 million and used cash in operations of approximately $1.4 million, compared to a net loss of approximately $1.8 million and use of cash in operations of approximately $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had a stockholders’ deficit of approximately $4.2 million.
The following is a more detailed discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the period presented, along with prior periods.
Revenue
The following table presents our net revenues, by revenue source, and the period-over-period percentage change, for the period presented:
The following table presents our net revenues, by revenue source, as a percentage of total net revenues for the periods presented:
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we reported net revenues of approximately $910,200, which is a decrease of approximately $721,500, or approximately 44%, compared to net revenues of approximately $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. A decrease of approximately $917,200 was attributed to our Beverages Segment, while our Distribution Segment reported an increase in net revenue of approximately $249,300. We attribute a portion of the decrease in sales to the discontinuation of smaller distributor agreements in an effort to sign more favorable agreements with larger, reputable tier 1 and mid-size distributors and grocery chains. These contracts saw unforeseen delays and were additionally impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic during the fiscal year. The COVID-19 pandemic delayed the Company’s launch of a variety of new products during most of the 2020 fiscal year - drinks and non-drink line broadening items. We expect that revenue will increase in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, as distribution by our current distributors, who were, and whose clients were, affected by COVID-19 has resumed and we expect to see fewer COVID-19 pandemic-related distribution impacts for the balance of fiscal year 2021. Based on those expectations, we now anticipate signing more favorable agreements with larger, reputable tier 1 and mid-size distributors that we had anticipated in our Beverage Segment for fiscal 2020.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues consists primarily of expenses associated with products sold to distributors and resellers, including product and shipping costs. Costs also include credit card fees, fees incurred for sales that occur on Amazon.com, and other transaction fees related to the processing of consumer transactions. Typically, we expect that the cost of revenues will increase as a direct correlation to increases in sales. Thus, our cost of revenues increases on an absolute basis versus on a percentage of sales basis. At the same time, when sales increase, thereby increasing our orders with our co-packers, our cost of products decreases because of the volume discounts we receive from our co-packers.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we reported cost of revenues of approximately $654,200, which is a decrease of approximately $659,900, or approximately 50%, compared to approximately $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is attributed to a reduction in sales primarily in our Beverages Segment in 2020, compared to the prior year period. In addition, the cost of products decreased slightly because we increased our purchase quantities based on our sales expectations from the prior fiscal year. Our increased sales expectations were before the unforeseen impacts from COVID-19. As a result, as of December 31, 2020, we had significant inventory on-hand.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses consist primarily of professional fees, salaries and wages, advertising, rent, travel expenses, sponsorships, and general office and administrative expenses related to maintaining our facilities.
SG&A expenses were approximately $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $3.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $1 million, or approximately 27%. The decrease in SG&A expenses was primarily due to a decrease in bad debt expense of 99% attributed to our Beverages Segment; a decrease in professional fees of 87% attributed to our corporate-related activities; a decrease in advertising and promotion of 71% attributed to our Beverage Segment; a 56% decrease in sponsorship fees attributed to our Beverages Segment; and a 58% decrease in travel expenses attributed to our Beverages Segment. This decrease was offset by a significant increase in salaries and wages of 97% attributed to both our Beverages Segment and our Distribution Segment; a significant increase in legal and accounting fees of 2,476% attributed to our corporate-related expenses; an increase in vehicle expense of 410% attributed to our Distribution Segment; an increase of 100% in rent expense attributed to both our Beverages Segment and our Distribution Segment; and a 127% increase in fees to the OTCM attributed to corporate-related expenses.
Bad debt expense was approximately $41,700 in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of approximately $1.47 million, which was attributed to our Beverages Segment. This decrease was the result of an allowance for doubtful account that was allocated to a $1.5 million note receivable. Professional fees were approximately $105,600 in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $811,500 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of approximately $705,900, which was attributed to our corporate-related activities. This decrease was the result of payments made in the prior year to a member of our Board pursuant to his agreement. Advertising and promotional fees were approximately $36,900 in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $125,300 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of approximately $88,300, which was attributed to our Beverages Segment. This decrease was the result of decreased sales during the COVID-19 pandemic. Travel expenses were approximately $26,200 in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $61,900 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of approximately $35,700, which was attributed to our Beverages Segment. This decrease was the result of a reduction in travel due to restrictions from the COVID-19 pandemic. Salaries and wages were approximately $1.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $688,500 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately $669,800, of which approximately $616,000 was attributed to our Beverage Segment and an increase of approximately $53,700 was attributed to our Distribution Segment. This increase was the result of hiring additional personnel, who are essential and integral to our success. Legal and accounting fees were approximately $558,800 in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $21,700 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately $537,100, which was attributed to our Common Stock becoming quoted on the OTCQB, rather than as historically quoted on the OTC Pink, and the filing of our Registration Statement with the SEC. Vehicle expenses were approximately $62,500 in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $12,300 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately $50,200, which was attributed to our Distribution Segment, as the result of maintenance and fuel that were integral to our Distribution Segment as sales increased over the prior year. Rent expenses were approximately $199,300 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $101,600 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately $97,700. This increase was attributed to both our Beverages Segment and our Distribution Segment and the result of our moving to a larger warehouse facility that was necessary due to our anticipated growth. OTCM fees attributed to corporate-related expenses were approximately $63,800 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $28,100 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately $35,700. This increase was the result of fees paid to the OTCM for our Common Stock becoming quoted on the OTCQB, rather than as historically quoted on the OTC Pink.
We expect that as we expand our business operations and incur additional corporate-related expenses associated with our Common Stock being quoted on the OTCM and our becoming a fully registered issuer with the SEC under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, SG&A expenses will increase for both our Beverages Segment and Distribution Segment.
Net Loss
We incurred a net loss of approximately $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of approximately $1.3 million compared to the previous year ending December 31, 2019, in which we incurred a net loss of approximately $1.8 million. This net loss is primarily due to the SG&A expenses related to our Beverages Segment and corporate-related expenses that are necessary for our growth, and other corporate-related expenses, which include interest expense related to the 2020 Warrant that we issued in May 2020 in connection with three Debentures and non-cash expense on our derivative liability. The fair value of the Debentures will be re-measured each reporting period until the Debentures are either converted or expire. In each reporting period during the term of the Debentures, the change in the fair value will either be recognized as a non-cash expense or non-cash income. The change in the fair value of the Debentures is not impacted by our actual operations but instead is strongly tied to the change in the market value of our Common Stock.
Segments - Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had two reportable segments: (i) Beverages Segment and (ii) Distribution Segment. Amounts that are not allocated to either of these reportable segments is reported in “Corporate and Eliminations.” We evaluate performance and allocate resources based on net revenue, cost of revenues, and gross profit. Information regarding the operations of these reportable segments is as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Going Concern
We have incurred operating losses since inception and have negative cash flow from operations since inception. As of December 31, 2020, we had a stockholders’ deficit of approximately $4.2 million and we incurred a net loss of approximately $3.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. We also utilized cash in operations of approximately $1.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result, our continuation as a going concern is dependent on our ability to obtain additional financing until we can generate sufficient cash flow from operations to meet our obligations. We intend to continue to seek additional debt or equity financing to continue our operations.
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies we may not continue to meet our obligations and continue our operations for the next fiscal year. The continuation of our Company as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to obtain necessary debt or equity financing to continue operations until we begin generating positive cash flow.
There is no assurance that we will ever be profitable or that debt or equity financing will be available to us in the amounts, on terms, and at times deemed acceptable to us, if at all. The issuance of additional equity securities by us would result in a significant dilution in the equity interests of our current stockholders. Obtaining commercial loans, assuming those loans would be available, would increase our liabilities and future cash commitments. If we are unable to obtain financing in the amounts and on terms deemed acceptable to us, we may be unable to continue our business, as planned, and as a result may be required to scale back or cease operations for our business, the result of which would be that our stockholders would lose some or all of their investment. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Lines of Credit
Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through internally generated funds, private sales of stock, accruals of compensation, and the use of our lines of credit. In summary, our lines of credit are as follows:
a This line of credit was provided by Matthew Nicoletti, an otherwise unaffiliated third party to whom we previously sold and issued certain shares of our Series B Preferred Stock (as then constituted) and Series C Preferred Stock (as then constituted), all of which have been converted into shares of our Common Stock and sold into the public market. Mr. Nicoletti is no longer the record or beneficial owner of any of our equity. There was no connection between our prior equity transactions with Mr. Nicoletti and our entry into this line of credit.
Notes Payable - Related Party
We had the following outstanding notes payable from a related party during the nine months ended September 30, 2020:
(1) Each of the notes payable was issued by us in favor of Robert Clark, our President, Chief Executive Officer, Secretary, and Chairman of our Board.
Note Receivable - Branded Legacy
On May 26, 2016, Robert Clark formed Elev8 Hemp, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Elev8 Hemp”), on behalf of Ryan Medico, our then-Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Medico was the sole owner of and served as President of Elev8 Hemp.
In June 2016, we entered into a letter of intent with Elev8 Hemp to acquire it, such that it would become our wholly-owned subsidiary. Pursuant to the letter of intent, on June 7, 2016, we entered into an Acquisition Agreement with Elev8 Hemp (the “Elev8 Hemp Acquisition Agreement”), whereby we agreed to acquire 100% of the ownership of Elev8 Hemp and, in exchange, we agreed to issue to Mr. Medico five million restricted shares of our Common Stock, which had a fair market value of $50,000. The Elev8 Hemp Acquisition Agreement provided that, if we failed to adequately capitalize the development of Elev8 Hemp to complete its objectives set forth in its business plan, Mr. Medico would have the option until March 31, 2018 to repurchase Elev8 Hemp from us for a purchase price of $50,000, which could be paid in shares of our Common Stock.
On October 10, 2016, we entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement (the “Membership Interest Purchase Agreement”) with Branded Legacy, to sell 100% of the issued and outstanding membership interests of Elev8 Hemp to Branded Legacy in consideration of Branded Legacy’s issuance to us of 200,000,000 shares of its common stock, par value $0.00001. In connection with this transaction, Mr. Medico became the Chief Executive Officer and sole director of Branded Legacy. The parties desired to enter into the Membership Interest Purchase Agreement because we did not have adequate capital to fund the development of Elev8 Hemp’s business, as well as our own. Until July 2018, Mr. Medico also continued to serve as our Chief Financial Officer.
On April 14, 2017, our Board declared a dividend to our stockholders of an aggregate of 53,196,608 shares of common stock of Branded Legacy. Our stockholders received one share of common stock of Branded Legacy for every 10 shares of our Common Stock held on the record date. On the record date, we had approximately 104 stockholders, all of whom received this dividend. After the payment of the dividend, we held 146,803,392 shares of common stock of Branded Legacy.
On March 6, 2018, we entered into a Securities Exchange and Settlement Agreement (the “First Exchange Agreement”) with Branded Legacy. Pursuant to the First Exchange Agreement, we exchanged with Branded Legacy the remaining 146,803,392 shares of its common stock held by us for 2,746,723 shares of Branded Legacy’s Series D preferred stock. The shares of Series D preferred stock were initially convertible into 164,803,380 shares of Branded Legacy’s common stock.
On November 26, 2019, we entered into a second Securities and Exchange Agreement with Branded Legacy, whereby we exchanged the 2,746,723 shares of Branded Legacy’s Series D preferred stock for its 10-year Promissory Note in our favor in the original principal amount of $1,500,000 (the “Branded Legacy Note”). The Branded Legacy Note is unsecured, non-convertible, and all principal and accrued and unpaid interest thereon is due and payable on November 27, 2029.
In more recent discussions with our independent registered public accounting firm, we determined that the Branded Legacy Note should be classified as a note receivable on our balance sheets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, with a full reservation due to current doubts about collectability due to the dollar amount and duration of the term of the Branded Legacy Note, rather than disclosing the note receivable as an “investment” but not recording it on the balance sheets. Because of this re-classification, the Banded Legacy Note is no longer an off-balance sheet arrangement.
Paycheck Protection Promissory Note and Economic Injury Disaster Loan
On May 4, 2020, we entered into a Paycheck Protection Promissory Note in the original principal amount of $95,161 (the “PPP Loan”) with Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. The PPP Loan was made under, and is subject to, the terms and conditions of the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”), which was established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. The PPP provides for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times of the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The current term of the PPP Loan is two years, with a maturity date of May 6, 2022 and it contains a favorable fixed annual interest rate of 1.00%. Payments of principal and interest on the PPP Loan are deferred for the first six months of the term of the PPP Loan, or November 2020. Thereafter, principal and interest are payable monthly and may be prepaid by us at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties.
Under the terms of the CARES Act, recipients can apply for and receive forgiveness for all, or a portion of the loan granted under the PPP. Such forgiveness will be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of loan proceeds for certain permissible purposes as set forth in the PPP, including, but not limited to, payroll costs, mortgage interest, rent or utility costs (collectively, “Qualifying Expenses”), and on the maintenance of employee and compensation levels during a certain time period following the funding of the PPP Loan. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if the borrower terminates employees or reduces salaries during the eight-week period. We have used the proceeds of the PPP Loan for salaries and wages, building lease expense, and utilities. However, no assurance is provided that we will be able to obtain forgiveness of the PPP Loan in whole or in part.
In May 2020, we also received an advance in the amount of $7,000 as part of the Economic Injury Disaster Loan program offered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. This advance was received after we filed our application with regarding to the PPP. The advance was not included in any of the documentation related to the PPP Loan. We are in the process of determining how this advance will be included as part of the PPP Loan forgiveness.
2020 Securities Purchase Agreement
In May 2020, the Company completed the 2020 Private Placement of the 2020 Debentures and the 2020 Warrant pursuant to the 2020 SPA. The Company sold and issued the First 2020 Debenture and granted the 2020 Warrant promptly after entering in the 2020 SPA. The Company sold and issued the Second 2020 Debenture promptly after filing the 2020 Registration Statement initially with the SEC. The Company sold and issued the Third 2020 Debenture promptly after the SEC declared the Registration Statement effective. The 2020 Debentures are due 12 months from their respective issuance dates and are secured by all of the Company’s assets and the assets of each of its subsidiaries pursuant to that certain Security Agreement by and among the Selling Stockholder, the Company’s subsidiaries, and the Company. Initially, the 2020 Debentures are convertible at the lower of (i) the fixed conversion price, which is $0.05 per share, subject to adjustment (the “2020 Fixed Conversion Price”), or (ii) 80% of the lowest daily volume weighted average price (“VWAP”) of our Common Stock during the 15 trading days immediately preceding the conversion date, subject to adjustment (the “2020 Market Conversion Price”). The 2020 Debentures contain an adjustment provision that, subject to certain exceptions, reduces the conversion price if the Company issues shares of its Common Stock or common stock equivalents at a price lower than the then-current conversion price of the 2020 Debentures. Any stock splits, reverse stock splits, recapitalizations, mergers, combinations and asset sales, stock dividends, and similar events will also result in an adjustment of the conversion price of the 2020 Debentures. The 2020 Debentures are subject to a “conversion blocker” such that the Selling Stockholder cannot convert any portion of the 2020 Debentures that would result in the Selling Stockholder and its affiliates holding more than 4.99% of the then-issued and outstanding shares of the Common Stock following such conversion (excluding, for purposes of such determination, shares of the Common Stock issuable upon conversion of the 2020 Debentures or exercise of the 2020 Warrant that had not then been converted or exercised, respectively). The Selling Stockholder can increase that 4.99% “conversion blocker” to 9.99% upon at least 65 days’ prior written notice to the Company. The 2020 Debentures accrue interest at an annual rate equal to 8% and are due and payable on their respective maturity dates (or sooner if the Selling Stockholder converts the 2020 Debentures or otherwise accelerates the maturity date, as provided for in the 2020 Debentures). Interest is payable either in cash or, if certain Equity Conditions (as defined in the 2020 Debentures) are then satisfied, in shares of the Common Stock at the 2020 Market Conversion Price on the trading day immediately prior to the date paid.
At the Company’s option, it has the right to redeem, in part or in whole, the outstanding principal and interest under the 2020 Debentures prior to their respective maturity dates; provided, that, as of the date of the holder’s receipt of the redemption notice, (i) the VWAP of the Common Stock is less than the 2020 Fixed Conversion Price, initially $0.05 per share, and (ii) there is no Equity Conditions failure. The Company must pay an amount equal to the principal amount being redeemed plus outstanding and accrued interest thereon, as well as a redemption premium equal to 15% of the outstanding principal amount being redeemed (the “Redemption Premium”). The Company must provide the holder 15 business days’ advance notice of its intent to make a redemption, setting forth the amount of principal and interest we desire then to redeem plus the applicable Redemption Premium.
The 2020 Debentures contain an adjustment provision that, subject to certain exceptions, reduces the conversion price if the Company issues shares of the Common Stock or common stock equivalents at a price lower than the then-current conversion price of the 2020 Debentures. Any stock splits, reverse stock splits, recapitalizations, mergers, combinations and asset sales, stock dividends, and similar events will also result in an adjustment of the conversion price of the 2020 Debentures.
Pursuant to the terms of the Registration Rights Agreement, the Company agreed to file the Registration Statement with the SEC registering for resale the Conversion Shares and the Warrant Shares within 45 calendar days following the closing of the 2020 Private Placement. The Company also agreed, among other things, to indemnify the Selling Stockholder from certain liabilities and to pay all fees and expenses incurred by the Company in connection with the registration of the Conversion Shares and the Warrant Shares held by the Selling Stockholder.
Pursuant to the 2020 SPA, the purchase price for the First 2020 Debenture was $250,000, less $15,000 for origination fees, which consisted of the “original issue discount” of $10,000 and $5,000 as a structuring fee. On December 23, 2020, the Company converted $100,000 of the principal of, and $12,274 of accrued interest on, the First 2020 Debenture into 8,255,438 shares of the Company’s common stock, see Note 11, equity transactions. At December 31, 2020, the principal balance of the First 2020 Debenture is $150,000.
Pursuant to the 2020 SPA, the purchase price for the Second 2020 Debenture was $250,000, less $10,000 for origination fees, which consisted of the “original issue discount” of $10,000 fee. At December 31, 2020, the principal balance of the Second 2020 Debenture is $250,000.
Pursuant to the 2020 SPA, the purchase price for the Third 2020 Debenture was $500,000, less $20,000 for origination fees, which consisted of the “original issue discount” of $20,000 fee. At December 31, 2020, the principal balance of the Third 2020 Debenture is $500,000.
Derivative Liability
The 2020 Debentures have been accounted for utilizing ASC 815. The Company has incurred a liability for the estimated fair value of the First 2020 Debenture. The estimated fair value of the 2020 Debentures has been calculated using the Black-Scholes fair value option-pricing model with key input variables provided by management, as of the date of issuance, with the valuation offset against additional paid in capital, and at each reporting date, with changes in fair value recorded as gains or losses on revaluation in other income (expense). The Company identified embedded features in the 2020 Debentures, which caused the 2020 Debentures to be classified as a liability. These embedded features included the right for the holder to request for the Company to settle the amounts owed pursuant to the 2020 Debentures to the holder by paying an amount of cash equal to the Black-Scholes value of the remaining unexercised portion of the 2020 Debentures on the date of the consummation of a fundamental transaction. The accounting treatment of derivative financial instruments requires that the Company treat the whole instrument as liability and record the fair value of the instrument as a derivative as of the inception date of the instrument and to adjust the fair value of the instrument as of each subsequent balance sheet date.
The derivative liabilities were valued using Black-Scholes pricing model with the following average assumptions:
The following table summarizes the changes in the Company’s assets and liabilities measured at fair value as of December 31, 2020:
The following table sets forth a summary of change in fair value of the Company’s derivative liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020:
Warrant
The Company also granted the 2020 Warrant to purchase up to an aggregate of 20 million shares of the Common Stock. The 2020 Warrant has a three-year term and is immediately exercisable at an exercise price of $0.05 per share, subject to adjustment. If the Company fails to maintain an effective registration statement with the SEC covering the resale of the 2020 Warrant Shares, or if an Event of Default (as defined below) has occurred and is continuing, then the holder may exercise the 2020 Warrant on a “cashless” basis. “Event of Default” means an event of default under the 2020 SPA or the 2020 Debentures.
The 2020 Warrant contains an adjustment provision that, subject to certain exceptions, reduces the exercise price if the Company issues shares of our Common Stock or common stock equivalents at a price lower than the then-current exercise price of the 2020 Warrant. Any stock splits, reverse stock splits, recapitalizations, mergers, combinations and asset sales, stock dividends, and similar events will also result in an adjustment of the exercise price of the 2020 Warrant.
The 2020 Warrant is subject to an “exercise blocker” such that the Selling Stockholder cannot exercise any portion of the 2020 Warrant that would result in the Selling Stockholder and its affiliates holding more than 4.99% of the then-issued and outstanding shares of the Common Stock following such exercise (excluding, for purposes of such determination, shares of the Common Stock issuable upon exercise of the 2020 Warrant or conversion of the 2020 Debentures that had not then been exercised or converted, respectively). The Selling Stockholder can increase that 4.99% “exercise blocker” to 9.99% upon at least 65 days’ prior written notice to the Company.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company granted the 2020 Warrant that was immediately exercisable for up to 20,000,000 shares of Common Stock. The 2020 Warrant was fully expensed as an interest expense related to the 2020 Warrant issued in connection with the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the 2020 SPA, and no liability was recorded as of December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows
In summary, our use of cash has been as follows:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by or used in operating activities primarily consists of net income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, interest expense related to the Warrant issued in the Private Placement, and the effect of changes in working capital and other activities. Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $1.4 million and consisted of a net loss of approximately $3.1 million, adjustments for non-cash items, including adjustments related to the issuance of shares of our Common Stock for a sponsorship as well as compensation, interest expense related to the Warrant, and depreciation of approximately $800,400, and approximately $955,100 provided by working capital and other activities.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $51,400 and was attributable to capital expenditures.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $1.4 million and was due to proceeds from lines of credit of approximately $403,000, proceeds from convertible debt of approximately $1.0 million, proceeds from the PPP Loan of approximately $95,000, and $12,000 was used to pay principal on a note payable.
Non-Cash Investing and Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, there were no non-cash investing and financing activities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis, including those related to provisions for uncollectible accounts receivable, inventories, valuation of intangible assets, and contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The accounting policies that we follow are set forth in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020. These accounting policies conform to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, and have been consistently applied in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Leases
On January 1, 2019, we adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASC Topic 842”), which requires an entity to recognize a liability and corresponding asset for leases that meet certain criteria. We applied ASC Topic 842 using the modified retrospective approach. Under this approach, we applied the new standards to all new leases, and leases which have remaining obligations for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018. We elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance, which allowed us to carryforward historical lease classification, and not reassess (i) whether a contract was or contained a lease, and (ii) initial direct costs for any leases that existed prior to January 1, 2019. Under this method, we did not restate comparative periods in our financial statements. We present right-of-use assets resulting from leases separately from other assets as noncurrent, and amortized accordingly. The corresponding lease liabilities are presented separately from other liabilities on the accompanying balance sheets.
We recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability at the lease commencement date. The right-of-use asset is initially measured at cost, which comprises the initial amount of the lease liability adjusted for any lease payments made at or before the commencement date, plus any initial direct costs incurred. The amortization period for the right-of-use asset is from the lease commencement date to the earlier of the end of the lease term or the end of the useful life of the asset.
The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments that are not paid at the commencement date, discounted using the interest rate implicit in the lease or, if that rate cannot be readily determined, the incremental borrowing rate or the risk-free rate with the election of the practical expedient. We have elected to use the risk-free rate.
Please refer to Note 15, Lease Liabilities, to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 for additional information related to our right-of-use assets and lease liabilities.
Revenue Recognition and Deferred Revenue
We sell our products, which includes our hemp energy drink, CBD energy water, CBD water, and logo apparel, to online customers or through resellers and distributors. In evaluating the timing of the transfer of control of products to customers, we consider several indicators, including significant risks and rewards of products, our right to payment, and the legal title of the products. We recognize revenue from product sales to customers, distributors, and resellers when products that do not require further services by us are shipped, when there are no uncertainties surrounding customer acceptance, and when collectability is reasonably assured. Sales are made to customers under terms allowing certain limited rights of return. Amounts billed to customers in sales transactions related to shipping and handling, represent revenues earned for the goods provided and are included in net sales. Costs of shipping and handling are included in cost of products sold.
We also sell our products, and beverages purchased for resale from several other beverage manufacturers, to convenience stores, grocery stores, and smoke and gift shops. In evaluating the timing of the transfer of control of products to customers, we consider several indicators, including significant risks and rewards of products, our right to payment, and the legal title of the products. We recognize revenue from product sales to resellers when products that do not require further services by us are shipped or delivered, when there are no uncertainties surrounding customer acceptance and when collectability is reasonably assured. Cash received by us prior to shipment is recorded as deferred revenue. Sales are made to customers under terms allowing certain limited rights of return. Amounts billed to customers in sales transactions related to shipping and handling, represent revenues earned for the goods provided and are included in net sales. Costs of shipping and handling are included in cost of products sold.
On January 1, 2019, we adopted ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASC Topic 606”). The underlying principle of ASC Topic 606 is to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to a customer at the amount expected to be collected. The implementation of Topic ASC 606 had no impact on the prior period financial statements and no cumulative effect adjustment was recognized.
To apply these principles, ASC Topic 606 outlines a five-step model that requires entities to exercise judgment when considering the terms of contract(s), which includes:
1. Identifying the contract(s) or agreement(s) with a customer;
2. Identifying the separate performance obligations in the contract or agreement;
3. Determining the transaction price;
4. Allocating the transaction price to the separate performance obligations in the contract or agreement; and
5. Recognizing revenue as each performance obligation is satisfied.
Pursuant to ASC Topic 606, we recognize revenue when performance obligations under the terms of a contract are satisfied, which occurs typically upon the transfer of control, including the risks and rewards of ownership. With respect to us, performance is deemed to occur upon shipment or delivery of products to our customers based on the written contract terms, which is also when control is transferred.
We evaluated the guidance in ASC 606-10-50-5 and the related implementation guidance to determine disaggregation of revenues that would be meaningful. The majority of our revenue earned from our Beverages Segment and our Distribution Segment is recognized when we satisfy a single performance obligation by transferring control of our products to a customer. We do not have significant financing components or payment terms, and we do not have any material unsatisfied performance obligations. Our revenues are obtained in similar geographical locations within the United States. Furthermore, the operations in each of our reporting segments are expected to have essentially the same future prospects, similar gross margins, sales trends, and the nature of our products and customers are essentially the same. The sales from our beverage product types are organized as one reportable segment, which we refer to as the Beverages Segment, and the sales of our products and products that are purchased from resellers that are distributed by Gold Leaf is organized as our second reportable segment, which we refer to as the Distribution Segment. We have also determined that disaggregated revenue by net sales by revenue source would be meaningful and allow investors to understand our business activities, historical performance, or future prospects. Disaggregated sales by revenue source, which includes sales to distributors, online sales, sales through Amazon, and Gold Leaf distribution sales. This is the same information used by our Chief Operating Decision Maker for evaluating the financial performance of our operations and making resource decisions. We also sell merchandise and apparel that comprises approximately 1% of our gross annual sales, and solely exists to promote our beverages. Therefore, our merchandise and apparel products are not a reportable segment. Merchandise and apparel sales are included with the gross sales for our Beverages Segment.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Account Receivable
Accounts receivable are recorded at net realizable value. We determine provisions for uncollectible accounts, sales returns, and claims based upon factors including the credit risk and activity of specific distributors and resellers, historical trends, and other information. If we become aware of a specific distributor’s or reseller’s inability to meet its financial obligations, bad debt charges are recorded based on an overall assessment of past due accounts receivable outstanding. In the opinion of management, a provision was deemed necessary for uncollectible accounts.
Inventory
The cost of inventory using the standard cost method, which approximates actual cost based on a first-in, first-out method. Our inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Our inventory consists almost entirely of finished and unfinished goods, and freight, which include CBD energy waters, CBD waters, hemp energy drinks, cans for production, and merchandise and apparel. We periodically evaluate and adjust inventories for obsolescence. In the opinion of management, no provision for obsolescence is deemed necessary. The shelf life of all beverage inventory is two years, and as of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $660,500 of product in inventory, which was a decrease of approximately $26,400, compared to approximately $686,900 at December 31, 2019. We expect the balance of inventory to increase in direct relation to the increase in sales that we expect. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Subsection F, Inventories, of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, for an additional description of our inventory that had a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill arises from business combinations and is generally determined as the excess of the fair value of the consideration transferred, plus the fair value of any noncontrolling interests in the acquiree, over the fair value of the net assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date. Goodwill acquired in a purchase business combination and determined to have an indefinite useful life are not amortized, but tested for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events and circumstances exists that indicate that a goodwill impairment test should be performed. We have selected December 31 as the date to perform the annual impairment test.
Intangible assets represent both indefinite lived and definite lived assets. Trademarks are deemed to have definite useful lives of ten years, are amortized, and are tested annually for impairment. Intangible assets are reported on the balance sheet at cost less accumulated amortization. We have selected December 31 as the date to perform the annual impairment test. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Subsection H, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, for an additional description of intangible assets that had a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
FASB’s ASC Topic 718, Stock Compensation (formerly, FASB Statement 123R), prescribes accounting and reporting standards for all stock-based payment transactions in which employee and non-employee services are acquired. We measure the cost of employee and non-employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award. Fair value for restricted stock awards is valued using the closing price of our Common Stock on the date of grant. For our 2020 and 2019 fiscal years, we recognized stock-based compensation expense of approximately $1.1 million, and $1.1 million, respectively. For the first nine months of our 2020 and 2019 fiscal years, we recognized stock-based compensation expense of approximately $478,600 and $1.1 million, respectively. We had a balance in accrued stock-based compensation at December 31, 2020 and 2019 of approximately $1.4 million, respectively. See Note 6, Stock-Based Compensation, of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2019 for an additional description of our stock-based compensation that had a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Related Party Transactions
See Note 8, Related Party Transactions, to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 for an additional description of related party transactions that had a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act, was enacted. The JOBS Act provides that, among other things, an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of some accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. As an emerging growth company, we have irrevocably elected to take “opt out” of taking advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards and, as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth public companies on a case-by-case basis.
We intend to rely on certain of the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. As an emerging growth company, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b), and (ii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis).
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier to occur of (1) the last day of our fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of this offering, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion, or (c) in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC, which means the market value of our common shares that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last day of our second quarter, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period.
We are also a “smaller reporting company” meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates plus the proposed aggregate amount of gross proceeds to us as a result of this offering is less than $700 million and our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company after this offering if either (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million or (ii) our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million. If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, similar to emerging growth companies, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Subsection S, Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements, to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
S AND S BEVERAGE INC.
The following discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition for the year ended December 31, 2020 and should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes and the other financial information that are included elsewhere herein. This discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations, and intentions. Forward-looking statements are statements not based on historical information and which relate to future operations, strategies, financial results, or other developments. Forward-looking statements are based upon estimates, forecasts, and assumptions that are inherently subject to significant business, economic, and competitive uncertainties and contingencies, many of which are beyond our control and many of which, with respect to future business decisions, are subject to change. These uncertainties and contingencies can affect actual results and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements made by us, or on our behalf. We disclaim any obligation to update forward-looking statements. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under the “Risk Factors,” “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” and “Description of Business” sections herein. We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. We and our representatives may from time to time make written or oral statements that are “forward-looking,” including statements contained herein. All statements that express expectations, estimates, forecasts, or projections are forward-looking statements. In addition, other written or oral statements which constitute forward-looking statements may be made by us or on our behalf. Words such as “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “seek,” “estimate,” “project,” “forecast,” “may,” “should,” variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions, which are difficult to predict. Therefore, actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed or forecasted in or suggested by such forward-looking statements.
We undertake no obligation to update or revise any of the forward-looking statements to confirm forward-looking statements to actual results. Important factors on which such statements are based are assumptions concerning uncertainties, including, but not limited to, uncertainties associated with the following:
● Inadequate capital and barriers to raising the additional capital or to obtaining the financing needed to implement our business plans;
● Our failure to earn revenues or profits;
● Potential fluctuation in our financial results;
● Rapid and significant changes in markets;
● Litigation with or legal claims and allegations by outside parties;
● Impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic; and
● Insufficient revenues to cover operating costs.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto which are included herein. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ substantially from those anticipated in any forward-looking statements included in this discussion as a result of various factors.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019
Overview
We sell our Lemin Superior Lemonade, now named OOH LA Lemin. Our business was formed in 2018 and net revenues increased from $278,000 in our initial year of operations to approximately $865,000 in fiscal year 2019, our first full year of operations. The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in reduced net revenues for our 2020 fiscal year. We anticipate that growth in our business will restart in 2021 as the effects of the pandemic begin to recede and by virtue of our acquisition by Kona Gold. For fiscal year 2020, we had net revenues of approximately $343,000, a decrease of approximately $522,000 from fiscal year 2019.
Our decrease in revenue is primarily due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The following is a more detailed discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the period presented.
Revenue
The decrease in our net revenues from our 2020 fiscal year to our 2019 fiscal year resulted primarily from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consist primarily of expenses associated with the products sold to distributors and resellers and consumers, including product and shipping costs. Typically, we expect that the cost of revenue will increase overall as a direct correlation to increases in sales. However, due to the decrease in sales, we had a correlating decrease in the cost of revenue.
Cost of revenue for our 2020 fiscal year was approximately $340,000 (or 99% of net revenues), which was a decrease of approximately $279,000, or 55%, compared to our 2019 fiscal year, in which cost of revenue was approximately $619,000 (or 72% of net revenues). This decrease is directly related to the $522,000 decrease in net revenues.
We expect cost of revenue as a percentage of net revenues to rebound to 2019 levels, if not to improve by virtue of the expected receding effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and our acquisition by Kona Gold.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses consist primarily of professional fees, salaries and wages, advertising, travel expenses, and general office and administrative expenses related to maintaining our operations.
SG&A expenses decreased by approximately $403,000 to approximately $607,000 in our 2020 fiscal year, from approximately $1.01 million in our 2019 fiscal year. The decrease in SG&A expenses was primarily due to our attempts to reduce our expenses in response to the reduction in net revenues in fiscal year 2020.
Net Loss
We incurred a net loss of approximately $628,000 in our 2020 fiscal year, a decrease of $147,000, as compared to a net loss of approximately $775,000 in our 2019 fiscal year. This year-over-year decrease in net loss is primarily due to the $403,000 decrease in SG&A expenses more than offsetting the $243,000 decrease in gross profit. We expect that both gross profit and SG&A expenses will increase on a going forward basis by virtue of the expected receding effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and our acquisition by Kona Gold.
Going Concern
We have incurred operating losses since inception and have negative cash flow from operations since inception. As of December 31, 2020, we had a stockholders’ deficit of approximately $656,000 and we incurred a net loss of approximately $628,000 during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. We also utilized cash in operations of approximately $584,000 during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. As a result, our continuation as a going concern is dependent on our ability to obtain additional financing until we can generate sufficient cash flow from operations to meet our obligations. We believe that our acquisition by Kona Gold will provide sufficient financing to continue our operations.
Our financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies we may not continue to meet our obligations and continue our operations for the next fiscal year.
There is no assurance that we will ever be profitable or that our acquisition by Kona Gold will provide sufficient financing to sustain and increase our operations in accordance with our business plan. The financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Notes Payable - Related Party
We had the following outstanding notes payable from a related party during the year ended December 31, 2020:
· Initial principal balance of $200,000 and 8% interest per annum (incurred in 2018 fiscal year). At December 31, 2020, the principal balance was $113,761.
· Initial principal balance of $612,700 and 8% interest per annum (incurred in 2019 fiscal year). At December 31, 2019, the principal balance was $200,000.
· Initial principal balance of $300,000 and 2% interest per annum (incurred in 2020 fiscal year). At December 31, 2020, the principal balance was $300,000.
· Initial principal balance of $200,000 and 0% interest per annum (incurred in 2020 fiscal year). At December 31, 2020, the principal balance was $198,000.
· Initial principal balance of $25,000 and 8% interest per annum (incurred in 2020 fiscal year). On November 30, 2020, this debt was forgiven.
The future maturities of the related parties’ notes payable are as follows:
In connection with the acquisition of the Company by Kona Gold, all outstanding notes payable are being repaid in accordance with the schedule set forth in the acquisition agreement.
Cash Flows
In summary, our use of cash has been as follows:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by or used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $585,000, which consisted of the net amounts of cash provided by or used in accounts receivable, inventory, accounts payable, interest payable, and customer payments.
Investing Activities
We did not have any cash provided by or used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $548,000, all of which was due to notes payable from related parties.
Non-Cash Investing and Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, there were no non-cash investing and financing activities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis, including those related to provisions for uncollectible accounts receivable, inventories, valuation of intangible assets, and contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The accounting policies that we follow are set forth in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, as included in our financial statements. These accounting policies conform to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, and have been consistently applied in the preparation of the financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We sell our Lemin Superior Lemonade through resellers and distributors. In evaluating the timing of the transfer of control of products to our distributors and resellers, we consider several indicators, including significant risks and rewards of products, our right to payment, and the legal title of the products. We recognize revenue from product sales to distributors and resellers when products that do not require further services by us are shipped, when there are no uncertainties surrounding product acceptance, and when collectability is reasonably assured.
On January 1, 2019, we adopted ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASC Topic 606”). The underlying principle of ASC Topic 606 is to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to a customer at the amount expected to be collected. The implementation of Topic ASC 606 had no impact on the prior period financial statements and no cumulative effect adjustment was recognized.
To apply these principles, ASC Topic 606 outlines a five-step model that requires entities to exercise judgment when considering the terms of contract(s), which includes:
1. Identifying the contract(s) or agreement(s) with a customer;
2. Identifying the separate performance obligations in the contract or agreement;
3. Determining the transaction price;
4. Allocating the transaction price to the separate performance obligations in the contract or agreement; and
5. Recognizing revenue as each performance obligation is satisfied.
Pursuant to ASC Topic 606, we recognize revenue when performance obligations under the terms of a contract are satisfied, which occurs typically upon the transfer of control, including the risks and rewards of ownership. With respect to us, performance is deemed to occur upon shipment or delivery of products to our customers based on the written contract terms, which is also when control is transferred.
We evaluated the guidance in ASC 606-10-50-5 and the related implementation guidance to determine disaggregation of revenues that would be meaningful. The majority of our revenue earned from our Beverages Segment and our Distribution Segment is recognized when we satisfy a single performance obligation by transferring control of our products to a customer. We do not have significant financing components or payment terms, and we do not have any material unsatisfied performance obligations. Our revenues are obtained in similar geographical locations within the United States. Furthermore, the operations in each of our reporting segments are expected to have essentially the same future prospects, similar gross margins, sales trends, and the nature of our products and customers are essentially the same. The sales from our beverage product types are organized as one reportable segment, which we refer to as the Beverages Segment, and the sales of our products and products that are purchased from resellers that are distributed by Gold Leaf is organized as our second reportable segment, which we refer to as the Distribution Segment. We have also determined that disaggregated revenue by net sales by revenue source would be meaningful and allow investors to understand our business activities, historical performance, or future prospects. Disaggregated sales by revenue source, which includes sales to distributors, online sales, sales through Amazon, and Gold Leaf distribution sales. This is the same information used by our Chief Operating Decision Maker for evaluating the financial performance of our operations and making resource decisions.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Account Receivable
Accounts receivable are recorded at net realizable value. We determine provisions for uncollectible accounts, sales returns, and claims based upon factors including the credit risk and activity of specific distributors and resellers, historical trends, and other information. If we become aware of a specific distributor’s or reseller’s inability to meet its financial obligations, bad debt charges are recorded based on an overall assessment of past due accounts receivable outstanding. In the opinion of management, a provision was deemed necessary for uncollectible accounts. Approximately $24,000 and -0- were recorded for bad debt in the accompanying statements of income years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Management will review annually to determine provisions and record an allowance as deemed necessary. In the opinion of management, no provision is deemed necessary for sales returns and, but for the fiscal year 2020 allowance for bad debt, all accounts were deemed collectible at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The balance of allowance for Uncollectible Accounts as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 is $24,280 and $0, respectively.
Inventory
Our inventory is valued at the lower cost or net realizable value. At the end of fiscal year 2020, our inventory consisted almost entirely of finished goods (approximately $235,000), an increase of $90,000 from finished goods inventory at the end of the prior year (approximately $144,000). Ram materials inventory decreased by $81,000 between the years. The increase in finished goods inventory and the decrease in in raw materials inventory is primarily due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic (decreased net revenues and related decrease in purchases of raw materials). We periodically evaluate and adjust inventories for obsolescence. In the opinion of management, no provision for obsolescence is deemed necessary. As of the balance sheet dated December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, all inventory is current.
Related Party Transactions
See Note 4, Related Party Transactions, to our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 for an additional description of related party transactions that had a material effect on our financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Subsection P, Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements, to our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in our financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.