Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Rule 175 of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Rule 3b-6 of the Securities Act of 1934, as amended, that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. These forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates and projections about our industry, our beliefs and our assumptions. Words such as “anticipate,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks” and “estimates” and variations of these words and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors, some of which are beyond our control and difficult to predict and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or forecasted in the forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this Form 10-K. Investors should carefully consider all of such risks before making an investment decision with respect to the Company’s stock. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and summary of selected financial data for Kange Corp. Such discussion represents only the best present assessment from our Management.
DESCRIPTION OF COMPANY
The Company is a start-up company that was incorporated in Nevada on August 16, 2013.
We have had limited operations and have been issued a “going concern” opinion by our auditor, based upon our reliance on the sale of our common stock as the sole source of funds for our operations for the near future.
The following Management Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and accompanying notes included in this Form 10-K.
COMPARISON OF THE YEAR ENDED NOVEMBER 30, 2020 TO THE YEAR ENDED NOVEMBER 30, 2019
Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto for the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, and related management discussion herein.
Our financial statements are stated in U.S. Dollars and are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles of the United States (“GAAP”).
Going Concern Qualification
Several conditions and events cast substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company has incurred cumulative net losses of $1,312,256 since its inception and requires capital for its contemplated operational and marketing activities to take place. The Company’s ability to raise additional capital through debt or future issuances of capital stock is unknown. The obtainment of additional financing, the successful development of the Company’s contemplated plan of operations, and its transition, ultimately, to the attainment of profitable operations are necessary for the Company to continue operations. The ability to successfully resolve these factors raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Our operating results for the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, and the changes between those periods for the respective items, are summarized as follows:
Revenues
We did not earn any revenues during the year ended November 30, 2020 or 2019.
Operating Loss
Our loss from operations reduced to $1,100 during the year ended November 30, 2020, from an operating loss of $1,200 in the comparative year ended November 30, 2019. The following table presents operating expenses for the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019:
Other Income (Expense)
During the year ended November 30, 2020, the Company did not recognize any other income or expense. During the year ended November 30, 2019, the Company recognized an unrealized gain on marketable securities of $10,298 due to revaluation of marketable securities.
Net Loss
The Company incurred a $1,100 net loss during the year ended November 30, 2020, compared to net income of $9,098 in the prior fiscal year. This is primarily due to an unrealized gain on marketable securities recognized during the year ended November 30, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Based upon our current financial condition, we do not have sufficient cash to operate our business at the current level for the next twelve months. We intend to fund operations through debt and/or equity financing arrangements, which may be insufficient to fund expenditures or other cash requirements. We plan to seek additional financing in a private equity offering to secure funding for operations. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in raising additional funding. If we are not able to secure additional funding, the implementation of our business plan will be impaired. There can be no assurance that such additional financing will be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.
Working Capital
The following table presents our working capital position as of November 30, 2020 and 2019:
The change in working capital during the year ended November 30, 2020, was primarily due to a decrease in current assets of $16,547. Current assets decreased due to recission of investment in marketable securities.
Cash Flow
We fund our operations with cash received from advances from officers and related parties and issuances of equity.
The following tables presents our cash flow for the year ended November 30, 2020 and 2019:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
We did not generate positive cash flows from operating activities for the year ended November 30, 2020 or 2019.
For the year ended November 30, 2020, net cash flows used in operating activities consisted of a net loss of $1,100, and increased by a net decrease in change of accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $1,400.
For the year ended November 30, 2019, net cash flows from operating activities consisted of a net income of $9,098, reduced by an unrealized gain on marketable securities of $10,298 and increased by $1,200 for increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, no cashflows were provided by or used in investing activities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, we received $2,500 and $0, respectively, in advances from related parties, which were used to fund operations and business activities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.