Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. A number of the matters and subject areas discussed in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”, “Business” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K are not limited to historical or current facts and deal with potential future circumstances and developments and are accordingly “forward-looking statements.” You are cautioned that such forward-looking statements, which may be identified by words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “expect,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan” and similar expressions, are only predictions and that actual events or results may differ materially.
Our fiscal year is comprised of the 52 or 53-week period ending on the Saturday closest to January 31. Accordingly, fiscal 2020 represented the 52 weeks ended on January 30, 2021. Fiscal 2019 represented the 52 weeks ended on February 1, 2020. Fiscal 2018 represented the 52 weeks ended on February 2, 2019.
Introduction
We are a specialty retailer of home décor in the United States, operating 373 stores in 35 states as of January 30, 2021, as well as an e-commerce website, www.kirklands.com. Our stores present a curated selection of distinctive merchandise, including holiday décor, furniture, textiles, wall décor, decorative accessories, art, mirrors, fragrances and other home decorating items. Our stores offer an extensive assortment of holiday merchandise during seasonal periods. We provide our customers with an engaging shopping experience characterized by affordable home décor and inspirational design ideas. This combination of quality and stylish merchandise, value pricing and a stimulating online and store experience allow our customer to furnish their entire home on a budget.
Overview of Key Financial Measures
Net sales and gross profit are the most significant drivers of our operating performance. Net sales consists of all merchandise sales to customers, net of returns, shipping revenue associated with e-commerce sales, gift card breakage revenue and excludes sales taxes. Our net sales for fiscal 2020 decreased by 10.0% to $543.5 million from $603.9 million in fiscal 2019. The net sales decrease in fiscal 2020 resulted primarily from 59 permanent store closures in fiscal 2020 along with a comparable sales decrease due to the temporary closure of our stores in the first half of the fiscal year due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which was partially offset by increased e-commerce sales. Comparable sales, which includes the increase in e-commerce sales, decreased 3.8% for fiscal 2020.
We use comparable sales to measure sales increases and decreases from stores that have been open for at least 13 full fiscal months including our online sales. In fiscal 2020, we changed our comparable sales calculation to remove closed stores from the calculation the day after the store closes. Prior to this change, stores closed during the year were included in the comparable store sales calculation only for the full fiscal months of the year the stores were open. In fiscal 2021, relocated stores will remain in our comparable sales calculation. Previously, relocated stores were removed from the comparable store base when the existing store closed, and the new replacement store was added into the comparable store sales calculation after 13 full fiscal months of activity. E-commerce sales, including shipping revenue, are included in comparable sales. Increases in comparable sales are an important factor in maintaining or increasing our profitability.
Gross profit is the difference between net sales and cost of sales. Cost of sales has various distinct components, including: product cost of sales (including inbound freight, damages and inventory shrinkage), store occupancy costs (including rent and depreciation of leasehold improvements and other property and equipment), outbound freight costs to stores, e-commerce shipping expenses and central distribution costs (including operational costs and depreciation of leasehold improvements and other property and equipment). Product and outbound freight costs are variable, while occupancy and central distribution costs are largely fixed. Accordingly, gross profit expressed as a percentage of net sales can be influenced by many factors including overall sales performance. For fiscal 2020, gross profit increased 4.5% to $172.8 million from $165.4 million for fiscal 2019. Gross profit as a percentage of net sales increased to 31.8% for fiscal 2020 from 27.4% in fiscal 2019, primarily driven by an increase in merchandise margin due to lower promotional activity and increased direct sourcing.
Operating expenses, including the costs of operating our stores and corporate headquarters, are also an important component of our operating performance. Compensation and benefits comprise the majority of our operating expenses. Operating expenses contain fixed and variable costs, and managing the operating expense ratio (operating expenses expressed as a percentage of net sales) is an important focus of management as we seek to increase our overall profitability. Operating expenses include cash costs as well as non-cash costs, such as depreciation and amortization associated with omni-channel software and corporate property and equipment and impairment of long-lived assets. Because many operating expenses are fixed costs, and because operating costs tend to rise over time, increases in comparable sales typically are necessary to prevent meaningful increases in the operating expense ratio. Operating expenses can also include certain costs that are of a one-time or non-recurring nature. While these costs must be considered to fully understand our operating performance, we typically identify such costs separately where significant in the consolidated statements of operations so that we can evaluate comparable expense data across different periods.
Strategic Priorities and Financial Goals
Our key strategic initiatives include:
•
Accelerating product development to reinforce quality and relevancy as we continue the transformation of the Kirkland’s brand into a specialty retailer where customers are able to furnish their entire home on a budget;
•
Improving omni-channel via website enhancements, more focused marketing spending, an expanded online assortment and an in-store experience that is aligned with our omni-channel capabilities;
•
Improving the customer experience with our re-launched loyalty program, extended credit options and broadened delivery options; and
•
Utilizing our leaner infrastructure to be nimbler in our response to changes in consumer preferences and buying behaviors.
Our financial goals include:
•
Improving comparable store sales performance, driven by e-commerce growth, merchandising, brick-and-mortar store productivity and closure of underperforming stores;
•
Stabilizing gross margin by continuing with our current discipline of limited promotional offers, expanding direct sourcing, improving supply chain efficiency and reducing occupancy costs with a goal to improve our annual gross profit margin to a mid-30% range over the next two to three years;
•
Improving profitability by leveraging the leaner infrastructure with comparable sales growth to achieve our goal of annual EBITDA as a percent of sales in the high-single to low-double digit range and annual operating income in the mid to high-single-digit range within two to three years; and
•
Maintaining adequate liquidity and generating free cash flow while continuing to invest in key strategic initiatives of the business and returning excess cash to our shareholders.
Store Optimization
As part of our store optimization strategy, which includes exiting unprofitable stores and continuing to reduce the store base over the next several years, we permanently closed 59 store locations in fiscal 2020. We are prioritizing sustained improvement in overall profitability and developing a future state plan for infrastructure that complements our omni-channel concept and improves the customer experience. We anticipate additional store closures and limited store openings as we execute our store optimization strategy over the next several years. We believe our ideal store count should be in the range of 300 to 350 stores and expect to achieve that range in the next two to three years.
The following table summarizes store information for the periods indicated:
The following table summarizes store information as of January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020:
Cash Flow
Our cash and cash equivalents balance increased from $30.1 million at February 1, 2020 to $100.3 million at January 30, 2021 reflecting our operating performance and changes in working capital. Our objective is to finance all of our operating and investing activities for fiscal 2021 with cash provided by operations and borrowings available under our revolving credit facility, if needed.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
Results of operations. The table below sets forth selected results of our operations both in dollars (in thousands) and as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated:
Net sales. Net sales decreased 10.0% to $543.5 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $603.9 million in fiscal 2019. The net sales decrease of $60.4 million in fiscal 2020 resulted primarily from the permanent closure of 59 stores during fiscal 2020 along with a comparable sales decrease partially due to the temporary closure of our stores in the first half of the fiscal year due to the COVID-19 pandemic along with a decline in brick-and-mortar traffic, which was partially offset by an e-commerce sales increase of $46.3 million. Comparable store sales, including e-commerce sales, decreased 3.8% for fiscal 2020 compared to a decrease of 7.1% for fiscal 2019. In fiscal 2020, e-commerce sales increased 46.9% compared to the prior year period and were 26.7% of our net sales. The increase in e-commerce sales was driven by an increase in website traffic and an increase in average ticket.
Gross profit. Gross profit as a percentage of net sales increased approximately 440 basis points from 27.4% in fiscal 2019 to 31.8% in fiscal 2020. The increase in gross profit margin was due to favorable merchandise margin, store occupancy costs and outbound store freight costs partially offset by unfavorable e-commerce shipping expenses and higher distribution center costs. Merchandise margin increased approximately 530 basis points from 51.6% in fiscal 2019 to 56.9% in fiscal 2020. The increase in merchandise margin was driven by lower promotional activity and increased direct sourcing. Store occupancy and depreciation costs decreased approximately 90 basis points as a percentage of net sales due to store closures and negotiated rent reductions. Outbound store freight costs decreased approximately 80 basis points as a percentage of net sales, which was driven by reduced routes from the distribution centers to the stores due to lower inventory levels and shipping rate decreases. E-commerce shipping expenses increased approximately 210 basis points as a percentage of net sales due to the higher mix of ship-to-home e-commerce sales. Central distribution costs increased approximately 50 basis points as a percentage of net sales compared to the prior year mainly due to the lower warehouse expense capitalization adjustment driven by lower inventory levels.
Compensation and benefits. Compensation and benefits as a percentage of net sales decreased approximately 370 basis points from 19.4% in fiscal 2019 to 15.7% in fiscal 2020 primarily due to lower store wages due to a revised store labor model, which has less employees in the store during non-peak hours and lower performing stores operating with less employees, a shift towards e-commerce sales and lower corporate salaries and wages due to reduced headcount, partially offset by higher bonus expense.
Other operating expenses. Other operating expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased approximately 80 basis points from 12.5% in fiscal 2019 to 11.7% in fiscal 2020. The decrease as a percentage of net sales was primarily due to numerous cost saving initiatives and lower professional fees and travel costs.
Asset impairment. During fiscal 2020, we recorded an impairment charge of approximately $9.4 million including $6.2 million for right-of-use asset impairment at 24 stores, $3.1 million for property and equipment impairment charges at 24 stores and excess store fixture impairment of $0.1 million compared to an impairment charge of approximately $19.2 million in the prior year period including approximately $2.9 million for right-of-use asset impairment at nine stores, $9.9 million for property and equipment impairment charges at 38 stores, $0.9 million in excess store fixture impairment, $4.7 million in impaired software projects and $0.8 million related to e-commerce distribution center impairment.
Income tax (benefit) expense. We recorded income tax benefit of $8.5 million, or 105.6% of pre-tax income, during fiscal 2020 compared to income tax expense of $0.7 million, or 1.3% of the loss before income taxes, during the prior year period. The change in the tax rate for fiscal 2020 compared to the prior year period was primarily due to a $12.3 million income tax benefit related to the carryback of the 2019 net operating loss to prior periods pursuant to the CARES Act, partially offset by $1.3 million due to the change in the valuation allowance against deferred tax assets compared to recording a $12.0 million valuation allowance against deferred tax assets in the prior year period. See Note 3 - Income taxes in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this form 10-K for further discussion.
Net income (loss). As a result of the foregoing, we reported net income of $16.6 million, or $1.12 per diluted share, for fiscal 2020 compared to a net loss of $53.3 million, or $3.79 per diluted share, for fiscal 2019.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted earnings (loss) per share. To supplement our audited consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we provide certain non-GAAP financial measures, including adjusted income (loss) and adjusted diluted earnings (loss) per share. These measures are not in accordance with, and are not intended as alternatives to, GAAP. We use these non-GAAP financial measures internally in analyzing our financial results, and we believe that they provide useful information to analysts and investors, as a supplement to GAAP measures, in evaluating our operational performance.
We define adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted diluted earnings (loss) per share by adjusting the applicable GAAP measure for non-GAAP adjustments.
Non-GAAP measures are intended to provide additional information only and do not have any standard meanings prescribed by GAAP. Use of these terms may differ from similar measures reported by other companies. Each non-GAAP measure has its limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of the Company’s results as reported under GAAP.
The following table shows a reconciliation net income (loss) and diluted earnings (loss) per share to adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted diluted earnings (loss) per share for the 52 weeks ended January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020:
(1)
Costs associated with closed stores and lease termination costs, including gains on lease terminations, amounts paid to third-parties for rent reduction negotiations and lease termination fees paid to landlords for store closings.
(2)
Asset impairment charges include both right-of-use asset and property and equipment impairment charges.
(3)
Stock-based compensation expense includes amounts expensed related to equity incentive plans.
(4)
Severance charges include expenses related to severance agreements. This also includes permanent store closure compensation costs.
(5)
Other costs include executive transition costs, corporate lease negotiation fees associated with rent reduction in fiscal 2020 and write-offs of excess and obsolete supplies in fiscal 2019.
(6)
To remove the impact of the change in our valuation allowance against deferred tax assets.
(7)
To remove the impact of the income tax benefit recorded in fiscal 2020 related to the carry back of fiscal 2019 federal net operating losses to prior periods as permitted under the CARES Act.
Fiscal 2019 Compared to Fiscal 2018
Results of operations. The table below sets forth selected results of our operations both in dollars (in thousands) and as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated:
Net sales. Net sales decreased 6.7% to $603.9 million in fiscal 2019 compared to $647.1 million in fiscal 2018. The net sales decrease of $43.2 million in fiscal 2019 resulted primarily from the store comparable sales decrease of $64.6 million, partially offset by the e-commerce comparable sales increase of $19.9 million and new store growth of approximately $1.5 million. Comparable store sales, including e-commerce sales, decreased 7.1% for fiscal 2019 compared to a decrease of 1.3% for fiscal 2018. In fiscal 2019, e-commerce sales increased 25.3% compared to the prior year period. The decrease in brick-and-mortar comparable stores sales was primarily due to a decline in traffic. The increase in e-commerce sales was driven by a gain in transactions partially offset by a drop in average ticket. Merchandise categories that contributed heavily to the comparable sales decrease in fiscal 2019 were ornamental wall décor, lamps, gift, art and decorative accessories, which were partially offset by positive contributions from textiles, furniture and holiday.
Gross profit. Gross profit as a percentage of net sales decreased approximately 400 basis points from 31.4% in fiscal 2018 to 27.4% in fiscal 2019. The overall decrease in gross profit margin was due primarily to a decrease in merchandise margin, the deleverage of store occupancy costs and supply chain cost pressures. Merchandise margin decreased approximately 260 basis points from 54.2% in fiscal 2018 to 51.6% in fiscal 2019. The decrease in merchandise margin was driven by a decrease in product margin from both incremental discounting and product mix. Store occupancy costs were flat to the prior year in dollars, but increased approximately 80 basis points as a percentage of net sales primarily due to deleverage from negative brick-and-mortar comparable sales. Central distribution costs increased approximately 60 basis points as a percentage of net sales compared to the prior year mainly due to a change in the methodology for capitalizing distribution costs.
Compensation and benefits. Compensation and benefits as a percentage of net sales increased approximately 140 basis points from 18.0% in fiscal 2018 to 19.4% in fiscal 2019 primarily as a result of an increase in corporate severance to reduce corporate overhead, additional stock compensation expense related to canceling previously granted stock options and the deleverage of store payroll expenses.
Other operating expenses. Other operating expenses as a percentage of net sales increased approximately 90 basis points from 11.6% in fiscal 2018 to 12.5% in fiscal 2019. The increase as a percentage of net sales was primarily due to incremental advertising expenses to drive sales and increased supplies expense as we wrote off excess and obsolete supplies.
Asset impairment. During fiscal 2019, the Company recorded an impairment charge of approximately $19.2 million including $2.9 million for right-of-use asset impairment at nine stores, $9.9 million for property and equipment impairment charges at 38 stores, $0.9 million in excess fixture impairment, $4.7 million in impaired software projects and $0.8 million related to e-commerce distribution center impairment compared to no impairment charge in fiscal 2018.
Income tax expense. We recorded income tax expense of $0.7 million, or 1.3% of the loss before income taxes, during fiscal 2019 compared to income tax expense of $2.0 million, or 35.0% of pre-tax income, during the prior year period. The change in the tax rate for fiscal 2019 compared to the prior year period was primarily due to establishing a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets which was $12.0 million as of February 1, 2020, as we had a three-year cumulative pre-tax loss, and by the realization of discrete shortfall tax expense related to stock forfeitures, stock cancellations and the vesting of restricted stock units. See Note 3 - Income taxes in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this form 10-K for further discussion.
Net (loss) income. As a result of the foregoing, we reported net losses of $53.3 million, or $3.79 per diluted share, for fiscal 2019 compared to net income of $3.8 million, or $0.24 per diluted share, for fiscal 2018.
The following table shows a reconciliation net (loss) income and diluted (loss) earnings per share to adjusted net (loss) income and adjusted diluted (loss) earnings per share for the 52 weeks ended February 1, 2020 and February 2, 2019:
(1)
Costs associated with closed stores and lease termination costs, including gains on lease terminations, amounts paid to third-parties for rent reduction negotiations and lease termination fees paid to landlords for store closings.
(2)
Asset impairment charges include both right-of-use asset and property and equipment impairment charges.
(3)
Stock-based compensation expense includes amounts expensed related to equity incentive plans.
(4)
Severance charges include expenses related to severance agreements. This also includes permanent store closure compensation costs.
(5)
Other costs include write-offs of excess and obsolete supplies in fiscal 2019 and CEO transition costs is fiscal 2018.
(6)
To remove the impact of the change in our valuation allowance against deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal capital requirements are for working capital and capital expenditures. Working capital consists mainly of merchandise inventories offset by accounts payable, which typically reach their peak in the early portion of the fourth quarter of each fiscal year. Capital expenditures primarily relate to technology and omni-channel projects, distribution center and supply chain enhancements, new stores and existing store remodels. Historically, we have
funded our working capital and capital expenditure requirements with internally generated cash and borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
Cash flows from operating activities. Net cash provided by operating activities was $78.6 million is fiscal 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $8.3 million in fiscal 2019, and net cash provided by operating activities was $22.3 million for fiscal 2018. Cash flows from operating activities depends heavily on operating performance, changes in working capital and the timing and amount of payments for income taxes. The increase in the amount of cash flows from operations in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily due to the increase in operating performance and a decrease in inventories due to inventory purchase order cancellations in response to the COVID-19 pandemic followed by supply chain delays after resuming merchandise orders. We expect to be closer to planned inventory levels by the end of the second quarter of fiscal 2021. The decrease in the amount of cash flows from operations in fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 was primarily due to the decline in operating performance.
Cash flows from investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $8.5 million, $15.7 million and $28.8 million for fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The table below sets forth capital expenditures by category (in thousands) for the periods indicated:
The capital expenditures in fiscal 2020 related primarily to distribution center and supply chain enhancements, technology and omni-channel projects and existing store maintenance. The capital expenditures in fiscal 2019 related primarily to distribution center and supply chain enhancements, technology and omni-channel projects, existing store refreshes, remodels and maintenance and five new store openings. Capital expenditures in fiscal 2018 related primarily to the opening of 25 new stores during the period, information technology and omni-channel projects, investments in our existing stores and corporate hardware lease buyouts.
Cash flows from financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $0.1 million in fiscal 2020. Net cash used in financing activities was $3.9 million and $15.8 million for fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018, respectively. During fiscal 2020, we borrowed $40 million on our revolving credit facility to fund operations due to temporary store closures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequently repaid the full $40 million. During fiscal 2019, we borrowed $25 million on our revolving credit facility to support our inventory purchases ahead of our fourth quarter selling season and repaid the full $25 million before fiscal year end. We had no borrowings or repayments under our revolving credit facility in fiscal 2018. During fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018, we repurchased and retired approximately $0.2 million, $3.7 million and $15.7 million of common stock, respectively.
Senior credit facility. On December 6, 2019, we entered into a Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “2019 Credit Agreement”) with Bank of America, N.A. as administrative agent and collateral agent, and lender. The 2019 Credit Agreement replaced the Company’s Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of August 19, 2011, as amended by that Joinder and First Amendment to Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of February 26, 2016 (the “2016 Credit Agreement”) and, together with the 2019 Credit Agreement, (the “Credit Agreements”). Like the 2016 Credit Agreement, the 2019 Credit Agreement contains a $75 million senior secured revolving credit facility, a swingline availability of $10 million and a $25 million incremental accordion feature. The 2019 Credit Agreement contains substantially similar terms and conditions as the 2016 Credit Agreement, and extended its maturity date to December 2024. The 2016 Credit Agreement was scheduled to expire in February 2021. Advances under the Credit Agreements bear interest at an annual rate equal to LIBOR plus a margin ranging from 125 to 175 basis points with no LIBOR floor, and the fee paid to the lender on the unused portion of the credit facility is 25 basis points per annum.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreements are subject to certain conditions and contain customary events of default, including, without limitation, failure to make payments, a cross-default to certain other debt, breaches of covenants, breaches of representations and warranties, a change in control, certain monetary judgments and bankruptcy and ERISA events. Upon any such event of default, the principal amount of any unpaid loans and all other obligations under the Credit Agreements may be declared immediately due and payable. The maximum availability under the Credit Agreements is limited by a borrowing base formula, which consists of a percentage of eligible inventory and eligible credit card receivables, less reserves.
We are subject to a Second Amended and Restated Security Agreement (“Security Agreement”) with our lender. Pursuant to the Security Agreement, we pledged and granted to the administrative agent, for the benefit of itself and the secured parties specified therein, a lien on and security interest in all of the rights, title and interest in substantially all of our assets to secure the payment and performance of the obligations under the Credit Agreements.
As of January 30, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants in the 2019 Credit Agreement. As of January 30, 2021, there were $1.75 million in letters of credit outstanding, and there were no outstanding borrowings under the credit facility with approximately $39.5 million available for borrowing.
As of January 30, 2021, our balance of cash and cash equivalents was approximately $100.3 million. We believe that the combination of our cash balances, cash flow from operations and availability under our 2019 Credit Agreement will be sufficient to fund our planned capital expenditures and working capital requirements for at least the next twelve months.
Company Response to COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic has created significant public health concerns as well as economic disruption, uncertainty, and volatility which has affected our business operations in fiscal 2020. If the pandemic persists throughout fiscal 2021 or worsens, it would continue to impact our business operations. We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all facets of our business, which includes the impact on our employees, customers, suppliers, vendors, business partners and supply chain networks.
In the first quarter of fiscal 2020, as a proactive and cautionary measure, we elected to borrow $40.0 million from our revolving credit facility, which was later repaid during the second quarter of fiscal 2020. We also temporarily closed all of our stores in the first quarter of fiscal 2020 and reopened stores during the second quarter of fiscal 2020. In an effort to further strengthen our financial flexibility and efficiently manage through the pandemic during the first half of the year, we permanently reduced store and corporate payroll, furloughed store employees, cancelled inventory purchases, reduced capital expenditures and cut advertising, outbound freight and other expenses. We also implemented a new curbside pickup option for customers at our stores.
The CARES Act was signed into law during our first fiscal quarter. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferral of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. The CARES Act allowed our net operating losses incurred in 2019 to be carried back to preceding taxable years to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes of approximately $12.3 million. We have a $1.4 million employer tax credit receivable from the IRS, and we have deferred $3.3 million in employer payroll taxes that we plan to repay in October 2021.
All of our stores and distribution centers are currently open with enhanced safety measures. The health and safety of our employees and customers are the primary concerns of our management team. We have taken and continue to take numerous actions to promote health and safety, including, providing personal protective equipment to our employees, establishing mask protocols in our facilities, rolling out additional functionality to support contactless shopping experiences, implementing additional cleaning and sanitation procedures and promoting social distancing.
Share repurchase plan. On August 22, 2017, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase plan providing for the purchase in the aggregate of up to $10 million of our outstanding common stock. This share repurchase plan was completed during the third quarter of fiscal 2018. On September 24, 2018, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase plan providing for the purchase in the aggregate of up to $10 million of our outstanding common stock. This share repurchase plan was completed during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020. On December 3, 2020, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized a new share
repurchase plan providing for the purchase in the aggregate of up to $20 million of our outstanding common stock. Repurchases of shares are made in accordance with applicable securities laws and may be made from time to time in the open market or by negotiated transactions. The amount and timing of repurchases are based on a variety of factors, including stock price, regulatory limitations and other market and economic factors. The share repurchase program does not require us to repurchase any specific number of shares, and we may terminate the repurchase program at any time. As of January 30, 2021, we had approximately $19.8 million remaining under the current share repurchase plan.
The table below sets forth selected stock repurchase plan information (in thousands, except share amounts) for the periods indicated:
Contractual Obligations
Not applicable to smaller reporting companies.
Related Party Transactions
We had an agreement with a related party vendor to purchase merchandise inventory. The vendor was considered a related party for financial reporting purposes because its principal owner is the spouse of our former Vice President of Product Development and Trend. As of June 14, 2019, the vendor is no longer a related party. The table below sets forth selected results related to this vendor, for the time period that the vendor was a related party, in dollars (thousands) and percentages for the periods indicated:
Seasonality and Quarterly Results
We have historically experienced, and expect to continue to experience, substantial seasonal fluctuations in our net sales and operating results. We believe this is the general pattern typical of our segment of the retail industry and expect that this pattern will continue in the future. Our quarterly results of operations may also fluctuate significantly as a result of a variety of other factors, including the timing of store closings and openings, customer traffic changes, shifts in the timing of certain holidays and competition. Consequently, comparisons between quarters are not necessarily meaningful, and the results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of future results.
Our strongest sales period is the fourth quarter of our fiscal year when we generally realize a disproportionate amount of our net sales and a substantial majority of our operating and net income. In anticipation of the increased sales activity during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year, we purchase large amounts of inventory and hire temporary staffing help for our stores. Our operating performance could suffer if net sales were below seasonal norms during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year.
We have elected to early-adopt, as permitted under the applicable SEC rules, certain amendments to Management’s Discussion and Analysis and the elimination of Selected Financial Data and Supplementary Financial Information adopted by the SEC on November 19, 2020. The final rule became effective on February 10, 2021 and must be applied in a registrant’s first fiscal year ending on or after August 9, 2021; however, early adoption is permitted following the effective date on an item-by-item basis so long as the issuer fully complies with the amended
requirements. Based on the final rule, we have excluded “Quarterly Financial Information” from this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Inflation
We do not believe that our operating results have been materially affected by inflation during the preceding three fiscal years. There can be no assurance, however, that our operating results will not be adversely affected by inflation in the future.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and the results of our operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts contained in the financial statements and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Our critical accounting policies are discussed in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Certain judgments and estimates utilized in implementing these accounting policies are likewise discussed in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. The following discussion aggregates the various critical accounting policies addressed throughout the financial statements, the judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of these policies and the likelihood that materially different amounts would be reported under varying conditions and assumptions.
Inventory valuation - Our inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, net of reserves and allowances, with cost determined using the average cost method, with average cost approximating current cost. The carrying value of our inventory is affected by reserves for shrinkage, damages and obsolescence.
We estimate as a percentage of sales the amount of shrinkage that has occurred between the most recently completed store physical count and the end of the financial reporting period based upon historical physical inventory count results. Management adjusts these estimates based on changes, if any, in the trends yielded by our physical inventory counts, which occur throughout the fiscal year. Historically the variation between our recorded estimates and observed results has been insignificant, and although possible, significant future variation is not expected. If our estimated shrinkage reserve varied by 10% from the amount recorded, the carrying value of inventory would have changed approximately $168,000 as of January 30, 2021.
We also evaluate the cost of our inventory by category and class of merchandise in relation to the estimated sales price. This evaluation is performed to ensure that we do not carry inventory at a value in excess of the amount we expect to realize upon the sale of the merchandise. Our reserves for excess and obsolete inventory reduce merchandise inventory to the lower of cost or net realizable value based upon our historical experience of selling goods below cost. Historically, the variation between our estimates to account for excess and obsolete inventory and actual results has been insignificant. As of January 30, 2021, our reserve for excess and obsolete inventory was approximately $263,000.
Impairments - We evaluate the recoverability of the carrying amounts of long-lived assets, including lease right-of-use assets, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying values may not be recoverable. This review includes the evaluation of individual under-performing retail stores and assessing the recoverability of the carrying value of the assets related to the stores. Future cash flows are projected for the remaining lease life. If the estimated future cash flows are less than the carrying value of the assets, we record an impairment charge equal to the difference between the assets’ fair value and carrying value. The fair value is estimated using a discounted cash flow approach considering such factors as future sales levels, gross margins, changes in rent and other expenses as well as the overall operating environment specific to that store. The amount of the impairment charge is allocated proportionately to all assets in the asset group with no asset written down below its individual fair value.
In fiscal 2019, we shifted to estimating the fair value of long-lived fixed assets based on orderly liquidation value, as we believe this method better reflects the fair value of the assets. We previously used the age-life method for calculating the fair value of long-lived fixed assets. Under the age-life method, the replacement cost of an asset is
estimated and reduced by depreciation based on the effective age of the asset and its expected useful life. The age-life method takes into consideration the fact that we will continue to use these assets based on a presumed investment decision where the expected cash flows from operating the store are greater than the expected cash flows that result from not operating the store. This is a material change to our impairment loss assessment methodology. Our asset impairment charges were $9.4 million and $19.2 million for fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively, while we had no impairment charges in fiscal 2018. If our estimates and assumptions used in estimating future cash flows and asset fair values change or our operating results deteriorate, we may be exposed to additional losses that could be material.
Insurance reserves - Workers’ compensation and general liability insurance programs are predominately self-insured. It is our policy to record a self-insurance liability using estimates of claims incurred but not yet reported or paid, based on historical claims experience and actuarial methods. The assumptions made by management in estimating our self-insurance reserves include consideration of historical cost experience and judgments about the present and expected levels of cost per claim. As we obtain additional information and refine our methods regarding the assumptions and estimates we use to recognize liabilities incurred, we will adjust our reserves accordingly. As of January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020, our net self-insurance reserve estimates related to workers’ compensation and general liability insurance programs were $5.3 million and $5.9 million, respectively.
Actuarial methods are used to develop estimates of the future ultimate claim costs based on the claims incurred as of the balance sheet dates. Management believes that the various assumptions developed and actuarial methods used to determine our self-insurance reserves are reasonable and provide meaningful data and information that management uses to make its best estimate of our exposure to these risks. Arriving at these estimates, however, requires a significant amount of subjective judgment by management; and, as a result, these estimates are uncertain and our actual exposure may be different from our estimates. For example, changes in our assumptions about health care costs, the severity of accidents, the average size of claims and other factors could cause actual claim costs to vary materially from our assumptions and estimates, causing our reserves to be understated or overstated. For instance, a 10% change in our self-insurance liabilities would have affected pre-tax income by approximately $531,000 for fiscal 2020.
Income taxes - Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on the differences between the financial statement and the tax law treatment of certain items. Realization of certain components of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the occurrence of future events. We record valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount we believe is more likely than not to be realized. These valuation allowances can be impacted by changes in tax laws, changes to statutory tax rates, and future taxable income levels and are based on our judgment, estimates and assumptions regarding those future events. In the event we were to determine that we would not be able to realize all or a portion of the net deferred tax assets in the future, we would increase the valuation allowance through a charge to income tax expense in the period that such determination is made. Conversely, if we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future, in excess of the net carrying amounts, then we would decrease the recorded valuation allowance through a decrease to income tax expense in the period that such determination is made. Due to changes in facts and circumstances and the estimates and judgments that are involved in determining the proper valuation allowance, differences between actual events and prior estimates and judgments could result in adjustments to this valuation allowance. We established a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets in fiscal 2019, as we have a three-year cumulative pre-tax loss. As of January 30, 2021, we had a $6.0 million deferred tax valuation allowance.
We normally use an estimate of our annual effective tax rate at each interim period based on the facts and circumstances available at that time, while the actual effective tax rate is calculated at year-end. In fiscal 2020, we used the actual tax rate for the period for the first and third fiscal quarters and used the estimated annual rate for the second fiscal quarter.
Our income tax returns are subject to audit by local, state and federal tax authorities, which include questions regarding our tax filing positions including the timing and amount of deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. In evaluating the tax exposures associated with our filing positions, we record reserves for probable exposures. We adjust our tax contingencies reserve and income tax provision in the period in which actual results of a settlement with tax authorities differs from our established reserve, the statute of limitations expires for the relevant tax authority to examine the tax position or when more information becomes available. Our tax contingencies reserve contains uncertainties because management is required to make assumptions and to apply
judgment to estimate the exposures associated with our various filing positions and whether or not the minimum requirements for recognition of tax benefits have been met. We do not believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the reserves established for tax benefits not recognized. Although we believe our judgments and estimates are reasonable, actual results could differ, and we may be exposed to losses or gains that could be material. We have no unrecognized tax benefit reserve as of January 30, 2021.