ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to those discussed in Item 1A “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (see “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements”). Discussions and analysis of fiscal year 2020 as compared against fiscal year 2019 have been omitted and can be found in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, filed with the SEC.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
We are a leading supplier of process control and yield management solutions and services for the semiconductor and related electronics industries. Our broad portfolio of inspection and metrology products, and related service, software and other offerings, support R&D and manufacturing of ICs, wafers and reticles. Our products, services and expertise are used by our customers to measure, detect, analyze and resolve critical and nanometric level product defects, helping them to manage manufacturing process challenges and to obtain higher finish product yields at lower cost. We also offer advanced technology solutions to address various manufacturing needs of PCBs, FPDs, Specialty Semiconductor Devices and other electronic components, including advanced packaging, LED, power devices, compound semiconductor, and data storage industries, as well as general materials research.
Our semiconductor customers generally operate in one or both of the major semiconductor device manufacturing markets: Memory and Foundry/Logic. The pervasive and increasing needs for semiconductors in many consumer and industrial products, the rapid proliferation of new applications for more advanced semiconductor devices, and the increasing complexity associated with leading edge semiconductor manufacturing drives demand for our process control and yield management solutions. Other demand trends include the growth of end-market drivers such as AI, the deployment of 5G telecommunications technology and associated high-end mobile devices, the electrification and digitalization of the automotive industry, the revival of personal computer demand and associated innovations to support remote work, virtual collaboration, remote learning and entertainment, and the growth of the Internet of Things (“IoT”). The favorable end market dynamics are driving our customers to make increased investments in our process control and yield management solutions as part of their overall capital investment plans. These trends also drive demand for our other products such as those used in the PCB, FPD and Specialty Semiconductor manufacturing, where the increase in technology complexity is expected to continue and further accelerate as more devices become interconnected and dependent on other electronic devices. As a result of these factors, we saw a general strengthening of demand for our products throughout fiscal 2021. Our customer base, particularly in the semiconductor industry, has become increasingly concentrated, so large orders from a relatively limited number of customers account for a substantial portion of our sales, which potentially exposes us to more earnings volatility.
We are organized into four reportable segments:
•Semiconductor Process Control: A comprehensive portfolio of inspection, metrology and data analytics products as well as related service offerings that help IC manufacturers achieve target yields throughout the semiconductor fabrication process, from R&D to final volume production.
•Specialty Semiconductor Process: Advanced vacuum deposition and etching process tools used by a broad range of specialty semiconductor customers.
•PCB, Display and Component Inspection: a range of inspection, testing and measurement, and DI for patterning products used by manufacturers of PCBs, FPDs, advanced packaging, MEMS, and other electronic components.
•Other: products that do not fall into the three segments above.
A majority of our revenues are derived from outside the United States, and include geographic regions such as Taiwan, China, Korea, Japan, Europe and Israel, and Rest of Asia. China is emerging as a major region for manufacturing of logic and memory chips, adding to its role as the world’s largest consumer of ICs. Additionally, a significant portion of global FPD and PCB manufacturing has migrated to China. Government initiatives are propelling China to expand its domestic manufacturing capacity and attracting investment from semiconductor manufacturers from Taiwan, Korea, Japan and the United States. Although China is currently seen as an important long-term growth region for the semiconductor and electronics capital equipment sector, Commerce has added certain China-based entities to the U.S. Entity List, restricting our ability to provide products and services to such entities without a license. In addition, Commerce has imposed new export licensing requirements
on China-based customers engaged in military end uses, as well as requiring our customers to obtain an export license when they use certain semiconductor capital equipment based on U.S. technology to manufacture products connected to Huawei or its affiliates. While these new rules have not significantly impacted our operations to date, such actions by the U.S. government or another country could impact our ability to provide our products and services to existing and potential customers and adversely affect our business.
The following table sets forth some of our key consolidated financial information for each of our last three fiscal years(1):
__________________
(1)On February 20, 2019, we completed the Orbotech Acquisition for total consideration of approximately $3 billion. The operating results of Orbotech have been included in our Consolidated Financial Statements from the Acquisition Date. For additional details, refer to Note 6 “Business Combinations” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2)Our net income attributable to KLA for the year ended June 30, 2020 includes a pre-tax goodwill impairment charge of $256.6 million and a pre-tax charge of $22.5 million as a result of the extinguishment of debt. For additional details, refer to Note 7 “Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets” and Note 8 “Debt” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Impact of COVID-19
Events surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic had resulted in a reduction in economic activity across the globe in calendar year 2020. Vaccinations and pandemic containment measures have now created an environment that is driving economic growth, even as pace of economic recovery remains uneven in various geographies. The resumption of growth has caused us to experience new constraints in our supply chain. Supply lead times are extended and shortages have sometimes required us to increase our purchase commitments to secure critical components on a timely basis.
While all of our global sites are currently operational, any local pandemic outbreaks could require us to temporarily curtail production levels or temporarily cease operations based on government mandates. We remain committed to the health and safety of our employees, contractors, suppliers, customers, and communities, and are following government policies and recommendations designed to slow the spread of COVID-19.
Our efforts to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic have included health screenings, social distancing, employee separation protocols at our facilities, suspension of non-essential business travel and work from home to the extent possible. We are working with government authorities in the jurisdictions where we operate, and continuing to monitor our operations in an effort to ensure we follow government requirements, relevant regulations, industry standards, and best practices to help safeguard our team members, while safely continuing operations to the extent possible at our sites across the globe.
We believe these actions are appropriate and prudent to safeguard our employees, contractors, suppliers, customers, and communities, while allowing us to safely continue operations. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions altering our business operations that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners, suppliers, and stakeholders, or as required by federal, state, or local authorities.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND POLICIES
The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions in applying our accounting policies that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base these estimates and assumptions on historical experience and evaluate them on an ongoing basis to ensure that they remain reasonable under current conditions. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We discuss the development and selection of the critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors on a quarterly basis, and the Audit Committee has reviewed our related disclosure in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The accounting policies that reflect our more significant estimates, judgments and assumptions and which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results include the following:
Revenue Recognition. We primarily derive revenue from the sale of process control and yield management solutions for the semiconductor and related nanoelectronics industries, maintenance and support of all these products, installation and training services, and the sale of spare parts. Our portfolio also includes yield enhancement and production solutions used by manufacturers of PCBs, FPDs, advanced packaging, MEMS and other electronic components. Our solutions are generally not sold with a right of return, nor have we experienced significant returns from or refunds to our customers.
We account for a contract with a customer when there is approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable. Our revenues are measured based on consideration stipulated in the arrangement with each customer, net of any sales incentives and amounts collected on behalf of third parties, such as sales taxes. The revenues are recognized as separate performance obligations that are satisfied by transferring control of the product or service to the customer. Our arrangements with our customers include various combinations of products and services, which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. A product or service is considered distinct if it is separately identifiable from other deliverables in the arrangement and if a customer can benefit from it on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer. The transaction consideration, including any sales incentives, is allocated between separate performance obligations of an arrangement based on the stand-alone selling prices (“SSP”) for each distinct product or service. Management considers a variety of factors to determine the SSP, such as historical stand-alone sales of products and services, discounting strategies and other observable data. From time to time, our contracts are modified to account for additional, or to change existing, performance obligations. Our contract modifications are generally accounted for prospectively.
Product Revenue
We recognize revenue from product sales at a point in time when we have satisfied our performance obligation by transferring control of the product to the customer. We use judgment to evaluate whether control has transferred by considering several indicators, including whether:
•we have a present right to payment;
•the customer has legal title;
•the customer has physical possession;
•the customer has significant risk and rewards of ownership; and
•the customer has accepted the product, or whether customer acceptance is considered a formality based on history of acceptance of similar products (for example, when the customer has previously accepted the same tool, with the same specifications, and when we can objectively demonstrate that the tool meets all of the required acceptance criteria, and when the installation of the system is deemed perfunctory).
Not all of the indicators need to be met for us to conclude that control has transferred to the customer. In circumstances in which revenue is recognized prior to the product acceptance, the portion of revenue associated with our performance obligations to install product is deferred and recognized upon acceptance.
We enter into volume purchase agreements with some of our customers. We adjust the transaction consideration for estimated credits earned by our customers for such incentives. These credits are estimated based upon the forecasted and actual product sales for any given period and agreed-upon incentive rate. The estimate is updated at each reporting period.
We offer perpetual and term licenses for software products. The primary difference between perpetual and term licenses is the duration over which the customer can benefit from the use of the software, while the functionality and the features of the software are the same. Software is generally bundled with post-contract customer support (“PCS”), which includes unspecified software updates that are made available throughout the entire term of the arrangement. Revenue from software licenses is recognized at a point in time, when the software is made available to the customer. Revenue from PCS is deferred at contract inception and recognized ratably over the service period, or as services are performed.
Services and Spare Parts Revenue
The majority of product sales include a standard six to 12-month warranty that is not separately paid for by the customers. The customers may also purchase extended warranties for periods beyond the initial year as part of the initial product sale. We have concluded that the standard 12-month warranty as well as any extended warranty periods included in the initial product sales are separate performance obligations for most of our products. The estimated fair value of warranty services is deferred and recognized ratably as revenue over the warranty period, as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of warranty services provided by us.
Additionally, we offer product maintenance and support services, which the customer may purchase separately from the standard and extended warranty offered as part of the initial product sale. Revenue from separately negotiated maintenance and support service contracts is also recognized over time based on the terms of the applicable service period. Revenue from services performed in the absence of a maintenance contract, including training revenue, is recognized when the related services are performed. We also sell spare parts, revenue from which is recognized when control over the spare parts is transferred to the customer.
Installation services include connecting and validating configuration of the product. In addition, several testing protocols are completed to confirm the equipment is performing to customer specifications. Revenues from product installation are deferred and recognized at a point in time, once installation is complete.
Significant Judgments
Our contracts with our customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services. Each product and service is generally capable of being distinct within the context of the contract and represents a separate performance obligation. Determining the SSP for each distinct performance obligation and allocation of consideration from an arrangement to the individual performance obligations and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are significant judgments with respect to these arrangements. We typically estimate the SSP of products and services based on observable transactions when the products and services are sold on a stand-alone basis and those prices fall within a reasonable range. We typically have more than one SSP for individual products and services due to the stratification of these products by customers and circumstances. In these instances, we use information such as the size of the customer, geographic region, as well as customization of the products in determining the SSP. In instances where the SSP is not directly observable, we determine the SSP using information that includes market conditions, entity-specific factors, including discounting strategies, information about the customer or class of customer that is reasonably available and other observable inputs. While changes in the allocation of SSP between performance obligations will not affect the amount of total revenue recognized for a particular contract, any material changes could impact the timing of revenue recognition, which could have a material effect on our financial position and results of operations.
Although the products are generally not sold with a right of return, we may provide other credits or sales incentives, which are accounted for either as variable consideration or material right, depending on the specific terms and conditions of the arrangement. These credits and incentives are estimated at contract inception and updated at the end of each reporting period if and when additional information becomes available.
As outlined above, we use judgments to evaluate whether or not the customer has obtained control of the product and consider several indicators in evaluating whether or not control has transferred to the customer. Not all of the indicators need to be met for us to conclude that control has transferred to the customer.
Contract Assets/Liabilities
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections may result in accounts receivable, contract assets, and contract liabilities (deferred revenue) on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. A receivable is recorded in the period we deliver products or provide services when we have an unconditional right to payment. Contract assets primarily relate to the value of products and services transferred to the customer for which the right to payment is not just dependent on the passage of time. Contract assets are transferred to accounts receivable when rights to payment become unconditional.
A contract liability is recognized when we receive payment or have an unconditional right to payment in advance of the satisfaction of performance. The contract liabilities represent (1) deferred product revenue related to the value of products that have been shipped and billed to customers and for which control has not been transferred to the customers, and (2) deferred service revenue, which is recorded when we receive consideration, or such consideration is unconditionally due, from a customer prior to transferring services to the customer under the terms of a contract. Deferred service revenue typically results from warranty services, and maintenance and other service contracts.
Contract assets and liabilities related to rights and obligations in a contract are recorded net in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Business Combinations. Accounting for business combinations requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions to determine the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based, in part, on historical experience and information obtained from management of the acquired companies, and are inherently uncertain. Critical estimates in valuing certain acquired intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows including revenue growth rate assumptions from product sales, customer contracts and acquired technologies, expected costs to develop IPR&D into commercially viable products, estimated cash flows from the projects when completed, including
assumptions associated with the technology migration curve, estimated royalty rates used in valuing technology related intangible assets, and discount rates. The discount rates used to discount expected future cash flows to present value are typically derived from a weighted-average cost of capital analysis and adjusted to reflect inherent risks. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that could affect either the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
We allocate the fair value of the purchase price of our acquisitions to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired, including IPR&D, based on their estimated fair values at acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of the purchase price over the fair values of these net tangible and intangible assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but our estimates and assumptions are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which will not exceed one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of the purchase price of our acquisitions, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
The fair value of IPR&D is initially capitalized as an intangible asset with an indefinite life and assessed for impairment thereafter whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the IPR&D assets may not be recoverable. Impairment of IPR&D is recorded to R&D expenses. When an IPR&D project is completed, the IPR&D is reclassified as an amortizable purchased intangible asset and amortized to costs of revenues over the asset’s estimated useful life.
Acquisition-related expenses are recognized separately from the business combination and are expensed as incurred.
Inventories. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (on a first-in, first-out basis) or net realizable value. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal and transportation. Demonstration units are stated at their manufacturing cost and written down to their net realizable value. We review and set standard costs semi-annually at current manufacturing costs in order to approximate actual costs. Our manufacturing overhead standards for product costs are calculated assuming full absorption of forecasted spending over projected volumes, adjusted for excess capacity. Abnormal inventory costs such as costs of idle facilities, excess freight and handling costs, and spoilage are recognized as current period charges. We write down product inventory based on forecasted demand and technological obsolescence and service spare parts inventory based on forecasted usage. These factors are impacted by market and economic conditions, technology changes, new product introductions and changes in strategic direction and require estimates that may include uncertain elements. Actual demand may differ from forecasted demand, and such differences may have a material effect on recorded inventory values.
Allowance for Credit Losses. A majority of our accounts receivable are derived from sales to large multinational semiconductor and electronics manufacturers throughout the world. We maintain an allowance for credit losses for expected uncollectible accounts receivable and assess collectability by reviewing accounts receivable on a collective basis where similar risk characteristics exist and on an individual basis when we identify specific customers with known disputes or collectability issues. The estimate of expected credit losses considers historical credit loss information that is adjusted for current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The allowance for credit losses is reviewed on a quarterly basis to assess the adequacy of the allowance. However, volatility in market conditions and evolving credit trends are difficult to predict and may cause variability that may have a material impact on our allowance for credit losses in future periods.
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation Plans. Compensation expense for restricted stock units (“RSUs”) with performance metrics is calculated based upon expected achievement of the metrics specified in the grant, or when a grant contains a market condition, the grant date fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation. The Monte Carlo simulation fair value model requires the use of highly subjective and complex assumptions, including the award’s expected life, the price volatility of the underlying stock, as well as the potential outcomes of the market condition on the grant date of each award.
Contingencies and Litigation. We are subject to the possibility of losses from various contingencies. Considerable judgment is necessary to estimate the probability and amount of any loss from such contingencies. An accrual is made when it is probable that a liability has been incurred or an asset has been impaired and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. We accrue a liability and recognize as expense the estimated costs incurred to defend or settle asserted and unasserted claims existing as of the balance sheet date. See Note 16 “Commitments and Contingencies” and Note 15 “Litigation and Other Legal Matters” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets - Impairment Assessments. We review goodwill for impairment annually during our third fiscal quarter as well as whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be fully recoverable. Pursuant to the authoritative guidance, we make certain judgments and assumptions to determine our reporting units and allocate shared assets and liabilities to those reporting units, which determines the carrying values for each reporting unit. When assessing goodwill for impairment, an initial assessment of qualitative factors determines whether the
existence of events and circumstances indicates it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Judgments related to qualitative factors include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, relevant entity-specific events, a sustained decrease in share price and other events affecting the reporting units. If we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a quantitative test is then performed by estimating the fair value of the reporting unit and comparing it to its carrying value including goodwill. If the former is lower, goodwill is written down by the excess amount, limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. See Note 7 “Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
We determine the fair value of a reporting unit using the market approach when deemed appropriate and the necessary information is available, or the income approach which uses discounted cash flow (“DCF”) analysis, or a combination of both. If multiple valuation methodologies are used, the results are weighted. Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgment, including judgments about appropriate discount rates, revenue growth rates and the amount and timing of expected future cash flows. Discount rates are based on a weighted-average cost of capital (“WACC”), which represents the average rate a business must pay its providers of debt and equity, plus a risk premium. The WACC used to test goodwill is derived from a group of comparable companies. The cash flows employed in the DCF analysis are derived from internal forecasts and external market forecasts. The market approach estimates the fair value of the reporting unit by utilizing the market comparable method which is based on revenue and earnings multiples from comparable companies.
We review purchased finite-lived intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable or that the useful lives of the assets are shorter than initially expected. We determine whether finite-lived intangible assets are recoverable based on the forecasted undiscounted future cash flows that are expected to be generated by the lowest-level associated asset grouping. Assumptions and estimates about future values and remaining useful lives of our intangible assets are complex and subjective. If the undiscounted cash flows used in the recoverability test are less than the long-lived assets’ carrying value, we recognize an impairment loss for the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair value.
We review indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be fully recoverable. The authoritative accounting guidance allows a qualitative approach for testing indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment, similar to the impairment testing guidance for goodwill. It allows the option to first assess qualitative factors (events and circumstances) that could have affected the significant inputs used in determining the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset. The qualitative factors assist in determining whether it is more-likely-than-not that the indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired. An organization may choose to bypass the qualitative assessment for any indefinite-lived intangible asset in any period and proceed directly to calculating its fair value. Our indefinite-lived intangible assets are IPR&D intangible assets.
Any impairment charges could have a material adverse effect on our operating results and net asset value in the quarter in which we recognize the impairment charge. See Note 7 “Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Income Taxes. We account for income taxes in accordance with the authoritative guidance, which requires income tax effects for changes in tax laws to be recognized in the period in which the law is enacted.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized using enacted tax rates for the effect of temporary differences between the book and tax bases of recorded assets and liabilities. The guidance also requires that deferred tax assets be reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that a portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We have determined that a valuation allowance is necessary against a portion of the deferred tax assets, but we anticipate that our future taxable income will be sufficient to recover the remainder of our deferred tax assets. However, should there be a change in our ability to recover our deferred tax assets that are not subject to a valuation allowance, we could be required to record an additional valuation allowance against such deferred tax assets. This would result in an increase to our tax provision in the period in which we determine that the recovery is not probable.
On a quarterly basis, we provide for income taxes based upon an estimated annual effective income tax rate. The effective tax rate is highly dependent upon the geographic composition of worldwide earnings, tax regulations governing each region, availability of tax credits and the effectiveness of our tax planning strategies. We carefully monitor the changes in many factors and adjust our effective income tax rate on a timely basis. If actual results differ from these estimates, this could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations. In accordance with the authoritative guidance on accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, we recognize liabilities for uncertain tax positions based on the two-step process. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the
weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained in audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We reevaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, effectively settled issues under audit and new audit activities. Any change in these factors could result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the tax provision.
We record income taxes on the undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries unless the subsidiaries’ earnings are considered indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. Our effective tax rate would be adversely affected if we change our intent or if such undistributed earnings are needed for U.S. operations because we would be required to provide or pay income taxes on some or all of these undistributed earnings.
Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income. The Tax Act includes provisions for Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (“GILTI”) wherein taxes on foreign income are imposed in excess of a deemed return on tangible assets of foreign corporations. This income will effectively be taxed at a 10.5% tax rate in general. As a result, our deferred tax assets and liabilities were evaluated to determine if the deferred tax assets and liabilities should be recognized for the basis differences expected to reverse as a result of GILTI provisions that are effective for us after the fiscal year ending June 30, 2018, or if the tax on GILTI provisions should be recognized as period costs in each year incurred. We elected to account for GILTI as a component of current period tax expense starting from the first quarter of the fiscal year ending June 30, 2019.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including those recently adopted and the expected dates of adoption as well as estimated effects, if any, on our Consolidated Financial Statements of those not yet adopted, see Note 1 “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenues and Gross Margin
Product revenues
Our business is affected by the concentration of our customer base and our customers’ capital equipment procurement schedules as a result of their investment plans. Our product revenues in any particular period are significantly impacted by the amount of new orders that we receive during that period and, depending upon the duration of manufacturing and installation cycles, in the preceding period.
The increase in product revenues by 21% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the prior year is primarily attributable to strong demand for many of our products, especially our inspection and metrology portfolios, due to the continued growth in the 5G market and increased demand for high-performance computing and advanced packaging. These increases were partially offset by softer demand and oversupply in the display markets.
Service revenues
Service revenues are generated from product maintenance and support services, as well as billable time and material service calls made to our customers. The amount of our service revenues is typically a function of the number of systems installed at our customers’ sites and the utilization of those systems, but it is also impacted by other factors, such as our rate of service contract renewals, the types of systems being serviced and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
The increase in service revenues by 14% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the prior year is primarily attributable to an increase in the number of systems installed at our customers’ sites.
Revenues by segment(1)
__________
(1)Segment revenues exclude corporate allocations and the effects of foreign currency exchange rates. For additional details, refer to Note 19 “Segment Reporting and Geographic Information” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2)Orbotech was acquired on February 20, 2019.
Revenue from our Semiconductor Process Control segment increased by 21% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to a strong demand for many of our products, especially from our inspection and metrology portfolios. The increase in revenues from our Specialty Semiconductor Process and PCB, Display and Component Inspection segments is primarily driven by continued growth in advanced packaging, high-performance computing technologies and 5G infrastructure, partially offset by softer demand and oversupply in the FPD market.
Revenues - Top Customers
The following customers each accounted for more than 10% of our total revenues primarily in our Semiconductor Process Control segment for the indicated periods:
Revenues by region
We have revised the fiscal 2020 revenue by geographic regions as presented below as well as in Note 19 “Segment Reporting and Geographic Information.” The revisions were to correct the amount of revenue allocated to each geographic region. These revisions had no impact on the previously issued Consolidated Balance Sheet, Statements of Operations, Statements of Cash Flows, Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) or Statements of Stockholders’ Equity as of and for the year-ended June 30, 2020 and we determined that the impact of the revisions was not material to our previously issued Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenues by region for the periods indicated were as follows:
A significant portion of our revenues continues to be generated in Asia, where a substantial portion of the world’s semiconductor manufacturing capacity is located, and we expect that trend to continue.
Gross margin
Our gross margin fluctuates with revenue levels and product mix and is affected by variations in costs related to manufacturing and servicing our products, including our ability to scale our operations efficiently and effectively in response to prevailing business conditions.
The following table summarizes the major factors that contributed to the changes in gross margin percentage:
Changes in gross margin percentage, which are driven by the revenue volume of products and services, reflect our ability to leverage existing infrastructure to generate higher revenues. Revenue is impacted by average customer pricing, customer revenue deferrals associated with volume purchase agreements and the effect of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Changes in gross margin percentage from the mix of products and services sold reflect the impact of changes within the composition of product and service offerings, and amortization of inventory fair value adjustments from business combinations. Changes in gross margin percentage from manufacturing labor, overhead and efficiencies reflect our ability to manage costs and drive productivity as we scale our manufacturing activity to respond to customer requirements, and amortization of intangible assets. Changes in gross margin percentage from other service and manufacturing costs include the impact of customer support
costs, including the efficiencies with which we deliver services to our customers, and the effectiveness with which we manage our production plans and inventory risk.
The increase in our gross margin from 57.9% to 59.9% during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 is primarily attributable to a higher revenue volume of products and services sold and a more profitable mix of products and services sold, partially offset by an increase in service and manufacturing costs.
Segment gross margin(1)
_________________
(1) Segment gross margin is calculated as segment revenues less segment cost of revenues and excludes corporate allocations and the effects of foreign currency exchange rates, amortization of intangible assets, inventory fair value adjustments, and acquisition-related costs. For additional details, refer to Note 19 “Segment Reporting and Geographic Information” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2) Orbotech was acquired on February 20, 2019.
The primary factors impacting the performance of our segment gross margins for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 are summarized as follows:
•Semiconductor Process Control segment gross margin increased due to a more profitable mix of products and services sold, partially offset by an increase in service and manufacturing costs.
•The changes in the segment gross margins of the Specialty Semiconductor Process, PCB, Display and Component Inspection and Other segments increased primarily due to a more favorable mix of products and services sold as well as a higher revenue volume of products and services sold.
Research and Development (“R&D”)
R&D expenses may fluctuate with product development phases and project timing as well as our R&D efforts. As technological innovation is essential to our success, we may incur significant costs associated with R&D projects, including compensation for engineering talent, engineering material costs and other expenses.
R&D expenses during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 increased compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, primarily due to an increase in employee-related expenses of $54.5 million as a result of additional engineering headcount, higher employee benefit costs, and higher variable compensation and an increase in engineering project materials expenses of $22.6 million. This is partially offset by a decrease in travel-related expense of $11.3 million.
Our future operating results will depend significantly on our ability to produce products and provide services that have a competitive advantage in our marketplace. To do this, we believe that we must continue to make substantial and focused investments in our R&D. We remain committed to product development in new and emerging technologies.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”)
SG&A expenses during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 decreased compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, primarily due to a decrease in travel-related expenses of $25.4 million and a decrease in depreciation and intangible amortization expense of $19.3 million. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in employee-related expenses of $19.5 million as the result of additional headcount, higher employee benefit costs and variable compensation, an increase in facility and office expense of $9.7 million, and higher consulting costs of $6.6 million.
Goodwill Impairment
We performed our annual impairment assessment of goodwill as of February 28, 2021 and concluded that goodwill was not impaired.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, as a result of our annual goodwill impairment testing for all reporting units, we recorded $144.2 million and $112.5 million in impairment charges in the Specialty Semiconductor Process and PCB and Display reporting units, respectively, in the three months ended March 31, 2020.
Restructuring Charges
In September 2019, management approved a plan to streamline our organization and business processes that included the reduction of workforce, primarily in our PCB, Display and Component Inspection segment.
Restructuring charges were $12.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 and included $3.9 million of non-cash charges for accelerated depreciation related to certain right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and fixed assets to be abandoned. Restructuring charges were $7.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020.
For additional information refer to Note 20 “Restructuring Charges” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest Expense and Other Expense (Income), Net
The decrease in interest expense during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 was primarily due to lower interest expense on our Revolving Credit Facility, which is described further in the "Liquidity and Capital Resources" section below.
Other expense (income), net is comprised primarily of fair value adjustments and realized gains or losses on sales of marketable and non-marketable securities, gains or losses from revaluations of certain foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities as well as foreign currency contracts, interest-related accruals (such as interest and penalty accruals related to our tax obligations) and interest income earned on our invested cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities.
The decrease in other expense (income), net during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 was primarily due to an initial fair value adjustment of $26.7 million from an equity security becoming marketable.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
We had no loss on extinguishment of debt in the year ended June 30, 2021.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, loss on extinguishment of debt reflected a pre-tax net loss of $22.5 million associated with the redemption of our $500.0 million of Senior Notes due 2021, including associated redemption premiums, accrued interest and other fees and expenses.
Provision for Income Taxes
The following table provides details of income taxes:
Tax expense was higher as a percentage of income before taxes during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 primarily due to the impact of the following items:
•Tax expense increased by $107.2 million relating to the impact of a decrease in the proportion of KLA's earnings generated in jurisdictions with tax rates lower than the U.S. statutory rate during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021;
•Tax expense increased by $41.1 million during the fiscal year ending June 30, 2021 relating to an increase in our deferred tax liability on purchased intangibles due to an increase in the United Kingdom statutory income tax rate effective April 2023; and
•Tax expense decreased by $34.3 million relating to the impact of an internal restructuring during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020; partially offset by
•Tax expense decreased by $44.3 million relating to a decrease in our unrecognized tax benefit during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021; and
•Tax expense increased by $53.9 million relating to a $256.6 million goodwill impairment charge, which is non-deductible for income tax, during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020.
Our effective tax rate during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 was impacted by the Tax Act, which was enacted into law on December 22, 2017. The following items are the tax impacts as a result of the Tax Act:
•Tax expense decreased by $49.9 million relating to the reduction of the U.S. federal corporate tax rate from 28.1% to 21.0% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019; and
•Tax expense decreased by $19.3 million relating to the transition tax liability during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019.
Our future effective income tax rate depends on various factors, such as tax legislation, the geographic composition of our pre-tax income, the amount of our pre-tax income as business activities fluctuate, non-deductible expenses incurred in connection with acquisitions, R&D credits as a percentage of aggregate pre-tax income, non-taxable or non-deductible increases or decreases in the assets held within our Executive Deferred Savings Plan, the tax effects of employee stock activity and the effectiveness of our tax planning strategies.
In the normal course of business, we are subject to examination by tax authorities throughout the world. We are subject to federal income tax examinations for all years beginning from the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018 and are under U.S. income tax examination for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018. We are subject to U.S. state income tax examinations for all years beginning from the fiscal year ended June 30, 2017. We are also subject to examinations in other major foreign jurisdictions, including Singapore and Israel, for all years beginning from the calendar year ended December 31, 2012. We are under audit in Germany related to Orbotech for the calendar years ended December 31, 2013 to December 31, 2015. We have concluded our audit in Israel related to KLA for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2017 to June 30, 2020. Although we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, the final determination of tax audits and any related litigation could be materially different from our historical income tax provisions and accruals. The results of an audit or litigation could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or cash flows in the period or periods for which that determination is made.
In May 2017, Orbotech received an assessment from the ITA with respect to its fiscal years 2012 through 2014 (the “Assessment” and the “Audit Period,” respectively), for an aggregate amount of tax, after offsetting all net operating losses (“NOL”) available through the end of 2014, of approximately NIS 229 million (equivalent to approximately $66 million which includes related interest and linkage differentials to the Israeli consumer price index as of date of the issuance of the Tax Decrees).
On August 31, 2018, Orbotech filed an objection in respect of the tax assessment (the “Objection”). The ITA completed the second stage of the audit, in which the claims Orbotech raised in the Objection were examined by different personnel at the ITA. In addition, the ITA examined additional items during this second stage of the audit. As Orbotech and the ITA did not reach an agreement during the second stage, the ITA issued Tax Decrees to Orbotech on August 28, 2019 (“Tax Decrees”) for an aggregate amount of tax, after offsetting all NOLs available through the end of 2014, of approximately NIS 257 million (equivalent to approximately $73 million which includes related interest and linkage differentials to the Israeli consumer price index as of the date of the issuance of the Tax Decrees). These Tax Decrees replaced the Assessment. We believe that our recorded unrecognized tax benefits are sufficient to cover the resolution of these Tax Decrees.
Orbotech filed a notice of appeal with respect to the above Tax Decrees with the District Court of Tel Aviv on September 26, 2019. On February 27, 2020 the ITA filed its arguments in support of the Tax Decrees. Orbotech filed the grounds of appeal with respect to the above Tax Decrees on July 30, 2020. We are currently in the pre-trial hearing stage of the process. The ITA and Orbotech are continuing discussions in an effort to resolve this matter in a mutually agreeable manner.
In connection with the above, there is an ongoing criminal investigation in Israel against Orbotech, certain of its employees and its tax consultant. On April 11, 2018, Orbotech received a “suspect notification letter” (dated March 28, 2018) from the Tel Aviv District Attorney’s Office (Fiscal and Financial). In the letter, it was noted that the investigation file was transferred from the Assessment Investigation Officer to the District Attorney’s Office. The letter further states that the District Attorney’s Office has not yet made a decision regarding submission of an indictment against Orbotech; and that if after studying the case, a decision is made to consider prosecuting Orbotech, Orbotech will receive an additional letter, and within 30 days, Orbotech may present its arguments to the District Attorney’s Office as to why it should not be indicted. On October 27, 2019, we received a request for additional information from the District Attorney's Office. We will continue to monitor the progress of the District Attorney’s Office investigation; however, we cannot anticipate when the review of the case will be completed and what will be the results thereof. We intend to cooperate with the District Attorney’s Office to enable them to conclude their investigation.
In December 2020, Orbotech received an assessment from the ITA with respect to its fiscal years 2015 through 2018 (the “Second Assessment”), for an aggregate amount of tax, after offsetting all NOLs available through the end of 2018, of approximately NIS 227 million (equivalent to approximately $68 million which includes related interest and linkage differentials to the Israeli consumer price index as of date of the issuance of the Second Assessment). We filed an objection to the Second Assessment with the ITA in March 2021. The objection moved the 2015-2018 audit to the second stage, in which the ITA will review the objections. We believe that our recorded unrecognized tax benefits are sufficient to cover the resolution of the Second Assessment.
On March 27, 2020, The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES Act”), which includes several tax relief provisions, was signed into law. As a result of the CARES Act, we have deferred payment of certain payroll taxes to the U.S. federal government through December 31, 2022 and accelerated the tax deduction of qualified improvement property. The provisions of the CARES Act do not have a material impact to our liquidity and we are not expecting a material tax refund.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Equivalents and Marketable Securities:
As of June 30, 2021, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled $2.49 billion, which represents an increase of $514.1 million from June 30, 2020. The increase is mainly due to net cash provided by operating activities of $2.19 billion, partially offset by stock repurchases of $938.6 million, cash used for payments of dividends and dividend equivalents of $559.4 million, net cash usage of $288.1 million related to the purchases, sales and maturities of available-for-sale and trading securities and capital expenditures of $231.6 million.
As of June 30, 2021, $0.96 billion of our $2.49 billion of cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities were held by our foreign subsidiaries and branch offices. We currently intend to indefinitely reinvest $0.60 billion of the cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities held by our foreign subsidiaries for which we assert that earnings are permanently reinvested. If, however, a portion of these funds were to be repatriated to the United States, we would be required to accrue and pay state and foreign taxes of approximately 1%-22% of the funds repatriated. The amount of taxes due will depend on the amount and manner of the repatriation, as well as the location from which the funds are repatriated. We have accrued state and foreign tax on the remaining cash of $0.36 billion of the $0.96 billion held by our foreign subsidiaries and branch offices. As such, these funds can be returned to the U.S. without accruing any additional U.S. tax expense.
Cash Dividends and Special Cash Dividend:
The total amounts of regular quarterly cash dividends and dividends equivalents paid during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were $559.4 million, $522.4 million and $469.4 million, respectively. The increase in the amount of regular quarterly cash dividends and dividends equivalents paid during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 reflected the increase in the level of our regular quarterly cash dividend from $0.85 to $0.90 per share that was instituted during the three months ended September 30, 2020. The amounts of accrued dividend equivalents payable for regular quarterly cash dividends on unvested RSUs with dividend equivalent rights were $10.3 million and $8.3 million as of June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These amounts will be paid upon vesting of the underlying unvested RSUs as described in Note 10 “Equity, Long-term Incentive Compensation Plans and Non-Controlling Interest” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
On August 5, 2021, we announced that our Board of Directors had declared a quarterly cash dividend of $1.05 per share. Refer to Note 21 “Subsequent Events” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the declaration of our quarterly cash dividend announced subsequent to June 30, 2021.
On November 19, 2014, our Board of Directors declared a special cash dividend of $16.50 per share on our outstanding common stock. The total amount of the special cash dividend accrued by us at the declaration date was substantially paid out during the three months ended December 31, 2014, and the final payment was made during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019. Other than the special cash dividend declared during the three months ended December 31, 2014, we historically have not declared any special cash dividends.
Stock Repurchases:
The shares repurchased under our stock repurchase program have reduced our basic and diluted weighted-average shares outstanding for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. The stock repurchase program is intended, in part, to offset the dilution from our equity incentive plans, shares issued in connection with the purchases under our ESPP and the issuance of shares in the Orbotech Acquisition, as well as to return excess cash to our stockholders.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities:
We have historically financed our liquidity requirements through cash generated from operations. Net cash provided by operating activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $0.41 billion compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, from $1.78 billion to $2.19 billion, primarily as a result of the following factors:
•An increase in collections of approximately $1 billion mainly driven by higher shipments during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020; partially offset by the following:
•A decrease in interest income of approximately $14 million mainly due to lower interest rates during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020;
•An increase in accounts payable payments of approximately $445 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020;
•An increase in employee-related payments of approximately $119 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020;
•An increase of long-term incentive payments of approximately $12 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020;
•An increase in income tax payments of $131.4 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020
Net cash used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was $500.4 million compared to net cash used in investing activities of $258.9 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. This increase in cash used was mainly due to an increase in net purchases of available for sale and trading securities of $270.9 million and an increase in cash paid to purchase fixed assets of $79.0 million, partially offset by a decrease in cash paid for a business acquisition of $90.1 million and an increase in cash received from sale of a business of $16.8 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities:
Net cash used in financing activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 increased compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, from $1.30 billion to $1.50 billion. This increase was mainly due to an increase in cash used for stock repurchases of $109.5 million, an increase in net debt repayments of $50.5 million and cash paid for dividends and dividend equivalents of $36.9 million.
Senior Notes:
In February 2020, March 2019 and November 2014, we issued $750.0 million, $1.20 billion and $2.50 billion, respectively (the “2020 Senior Notes,” “2019 Senior Notes” and “2014 Senior Notes,” respectively, and collectively the “Senior Notes”), aggregate principal amount of senior, unsecured long-term notes. In February 2020 and October 2019, we repaid $500.0 million and $250.0 million of Senior Notes, respectively.
In February 2020, S&P upgraded its credit rating of the Company to “BBB+” and revised its outlook to stable, which permanently removed interest rate adjustments and the interest rate on the 2014 Senior Notes became fixed. The interest rates for each series of the 2020 Senior Notes and 2019 Senior Notes are not subject to adjustments.
In January 2020, we entered into a series of forward contracts (“2020 Rate Lock Agreements”) to lock the 30-year treasury rate (the “benchmark interest rate” with respect to the 2020 Rate Lock Agreements) on a portion of the 2020 Senior Notes. The 2020 Rate Lock Agreements had a notional amount of $350.0 million in aggregate and matured in the same quarter. The 2020 Rate Lock Agreements were terminated on the date of the pricing of the $750.0 million of 3.300% Senior Notes due in 2050 and we recorded the fair value of $21.5 million as a loss within Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) (“AOCI”) as of March 31, 2020, which is being amortized over the life of the debt. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018, we entered into a series of forward contracts (the “2018 Rate Lock Agreements”) to lock the benchmark interest rate with notional amount of $500.0 million in aggregate. In October 2014, we entered into a series of forward contracts to lock the 10-year treasury rate (the “benchmark interest rate” with respect to the 2014 Rate Lock Agreements) on a portion of the 2014 Senior Notes with a notional amount of $1.00 billion in aggregate. For additional details, refer to Note 17 “Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities” and Note 8 “Debt” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
The original discounts on the 2020 Senior Notes, the 2019 Senior Notes and the 2014 Senior Notes amounted to $0.3 million, $6.7 million and $4.0 million, respectively, and are being amortized over the life of the debt. Interest is payable as follows: semi-annually on March 1 and September 1 of each year for the 2020 Senior Notes; semi-annually on March 15 and September 15 of each year for the 2019 Senior Notes; and semi-annually on May 1 and November 1 of each year for the 2014 Senior Notes. The indenture for the Senior Notes (the “Indenture”) includes covenants that limit our ability to grant liens on our facilities and enter into sale and leaseback transactions, subject to certain allowances under which certain sale and leaseback transactions are not restricted.
In certain circumstances involving a change of control followed by a downgrade of the rating of a series of Senior Notes by at least two of Moody’s, S&P and Fitch, unless we have exercised our rights to redeem the Senior Notes of such series, we will be required to make an offer to repurchase all or, at the holder’s option, any part, of each holder’s Senior Notes of that series pursuant to the offer described below (the “Change of Control Offer”). In the Change of Control Offer, we will be required to offer payment in cash equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes repurchased plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on the Senior Notes repurchased, up to, but not including, the date of repurchase.
As of June 30, 2021, we were in compliance with all of our covenants under the Indenture associated with the Senior Notes.
Revolving Credit Facility:
In November 2017, we entered into a Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) providing for a $750.0 million five-year unsecured Revolving Credit Facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”), which replaced our prior Credit Facility. Subject to the terms of the Credit Agreement, the Revolving Credit Facility may be increased by an amount up to $250.0 million in the
aggregate. In November 2018, we entered into an Incremental Facility, Extension and Amendment Agreement (the “Amendment”), which amended the Credit Agreement to (a) extend the Maturity Date (the “Maturity Date”) from November 30, 2022 to November 30, 2023, (b) increase the total commitment by $250.0 million and (c) effect certain other amendments to the Credit Agreement as set forth in the Amendment. After giving effect to the Amendment, the total commitments under the Credit Agreement amount to $1.00 billion. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, we made a principal payment of $50.0 million. As of June 30, 2021, we had no outstanding aggregate principal amount of borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility.
We may borrow, repay and reborrow funds under the Revolving Credit Facility until the Maturity Date, at which time such Revolving Credit Facility will terminate, and all outstanding loans under such facility, together with all accrued and unpaid interest, must be repaid. We may prepay outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility at any time without a prepayment penalty.
Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility will bear interest, at our option, at either: (i) the Alternative Base Rate (“ABR”) plus a spread, which ranges from 0 bps to 75 bps, or (ii) the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus a spread, which ranges from 100 bps to 175 bps. The spreads under ABR and LIBOR are subject to adjustment in conjunction with credit rating downgrades or upgrades. We are also obligated to pay an annual commitment fee on the daily undrawn balance of the Revolving Credit Facility, which ranges from 10 bps to 25 bps, subject to an adjustment in conjunction with changes to our credit rating. As of June 30, 2021, we elected to pay interest on the borrowed amount under the Revolving Credit Facility at LIBOR plus a spread of 100.0 bps and we pay an annual commitment fee of 10 bps on the daily undrawn balance of the Revolving Credit Facility.
The Revolving Credit Facility requires us to maintain an interest expense coverage ratio as described in the Credit Agreement, on a quarterly basis, covering the trailing four consecutive fiscal quarters of no less than 3.50 to 1.00. In addition, we are required to maintain the maximum leverage ratio as described in the Credit Agreement, on a quarterly basis of 3.00 to 1.00, covering the trailing four consecutive fiscal quarters for each fiscal quarter, which can be increased to 4.00 to 1.00 for a period of time in connection with a material acquisition or a series of material acquisitions. As of June 30, 2021, our maximum allowed leverage ratio was 3.00 to 1.00.
We were in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Agreement as of June 30, 2021 (the interest expense coverage ratio was 18.70 to 1.00 and the leverage ratio was 1.18 to 1.00). Considering our current liquidity position, short-term financial forecasts and ability to prepay the Revolving Credit Facility, if necessary, we expect to continue to be in compliance with our financial covenants at the end of our fiscal year ending June 30, 2022.
Contractual Obligations
The following is a schedule summarizing our significant obligations to make future payments under contractual obligations as of June 30, 2021:
__________________
(1)Represents $3.45 billion aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes due from fiscal year 2025 to fiscal year 2050 and $20.0 million principal amount of Notes Payable due in fiscal year 2022.
(2)The interest payments associated with the Senior Notes payable included in the table above are based on the principal amount multiplied by the applicable interest rate for each series of Senior Notes. Our future interest payments are subject to change if our then effective credit rating is below investment grade as discussed above. The interest payment under the Revolving Credit Facility for the undrawn balance is payable at 10 bps as a commitment fee based on the daily undrawn balance, and we utilized the existing rate for the projected interest payments included in the table above. Our future interest payments for the Revolving Credit Facility are subject to change due to any upgrades or downgrades to our then effective credit rating.
(3)Represents an estimate of significant commitments to purchase inventory from our suppliers as well as an estimate of significant purchase commitments associated with goods, services and other assets in the ordinary course of business. Our obligation under these purchase commitments is generally restricted to a forecasted time-horizon as mutually agreed upon between the parties. This forecasted time-horizon can vary among different suppliers. Actual expenditures will vary based upon the volume of the transactions and length of contractual service provided. In addition, the amounts paid under these arrangements may be less in the event the arrangements are renegotiated or canceled. Certain agreements provide for potential cancellation penalties.
(4)Represents the estimated income tax payable obligation related to uncertain tax positions as well as related accrued interest. We are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes.
(5)Operating lease obligations represent the undiscounted lease payments under non-cancelable leases, but exclude non-lease components.
(6)As part of our employee compensation program, we issue cash-based long-term incentive (“Cash LTI”) awards to many of our employees. Cash LTI awards issued to employees under the Cash Long-Term Incentive Plan (“Cash LTI Plan”) generally vest in three or four equal installments. The amounts in the table above are those committed under the Cash LTI Plan; the expected total payment after estimated forfeitures is approximately $209 million. For additional details, refer to Note 10 “Equity, Long-term Incentive Compensation Plans and Non-Controlling Interest” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
(7)Represents an estimate of expected benefit payments up to fiscal year 2031 that was actuarially determined and excludes the minimum cash required to contribute to the plan. As of June 30, 2021, our defined benefit pension plans do not have material required minimum cash contribution obligations.
(8)Represents the amount committed under our non-qualified executive deferred compensation plan. We are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years due to the uncertainties in the timing around participant’s separation and any potential changes that participants may decide to make to the previous distribution elections.
(9)Represents the transition tax liability associated with our deemed repatriation of accumulated foreign earnings resulting from the enactment of the Tax Act into law on December 22, 2017.
(10)Represents severance payments due upon dismissal of an employee or upon termination of employment in certain other circumstances as required under Israeli law.
(11)Represents amounts committed for accrued dividends payable for quarterly cash dividends for unvested RSUs granted with dividend equivalent rights. For additional details, refer to Note 10 “Equity, Long-term Incentive Compensation Plans and Non-Controlling Interest” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
We have agreements with financial institutions to sell certain of our trade receivables and promissory notes from customers without recourse. In addition, we periodically sell certain letters of credit (“LC”), without recourse, received from customers as payment for goods and services.
The following table shows total receivables sold under factoring agreements and proceeds from sales of LC for the indicated periods:
Factoring and LC fees for the sale of certain trade receivables were recorded in other expense (income), net and were not material for the periods presented.
We maintain guarantee arrangements available through various financial institutions for up to $75.2 million, of which $59.7 million had been issued as of June 30, 2021, primarily to fund guarantees to customs authorities for value-added tax (“VAT”) and other operating requirements of our subsidiaries in Europe, Israel, and Asia.
Working Capital:
Working capital was $3.59 billion as of June 30, 2021, which represents an increase of $569.3 million compared to our working capital as of June 30, 2020. As of June 30, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity consisted of $2.49 billion of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. Our liquidity may be affected by many factors, some of which are based on the normal ongoing operations of the business, spending for business acquisitions, and other factors such as uncertainty in the global and regional economies and the semiconductor, semiconductor-related and electronic device industries. Although cash requirements will fluctuate based on the timing and extent of these factors, we believe that cash generated from operations, together with the liquidity provided by existing cash and cash equivalents balances and our $1.00 billion Revolving Credit Facility, will be sufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements associated with working capital needs, capital expenditures, cash dividends, stock repurchases and other contractual obligations, including repayment of outstanding debt, for at least the next 12 months.
Our credit ratings as of June 30, 2021 are summarized below:
In June 2021, Moody's upgraded our senior unsecured credit rating from Baa1 to A2. Factors that can affect our credit ratings include changes in our operating performance, the economic environment, conditions in the semiconductor and semiconductor capital equipment industries, our financial position, material acquisitions and changes in our business strategy.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of June 30, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial position, changes in financial condition, revenues and expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that are material to investors. Refer to Note 16 “Commitments and Contingencies” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information related to indemnification obligations.