Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to KL Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. The only activities through December 31, 2020, were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, described below, and, after our IPO, those related to identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We will incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $71,932 which consisted of formation costs and franchise tax.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had no cash. Until the consummation of the IPO, our only sources of liquidity were an initial purchase of common stock by the Sponsor and loans from the Sponsor.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the registration statement for the Company’s IPO was declared effective by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on January 7, 2021 (the “Effective Date”). On January 12, 2021, the Company consummated the IPO of 28,750,000 units (the “Units”), including the issuance of 3,750,000 Units as a result of the underwriter’s full exercise of its over-allotment option. Each Unit consists of one Class A common stock, $0.0001 par value, and one-third of one redeemable warrant entitling its holder to purchase one Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share. The Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $287,500,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, the Company consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) with the Sponsor of an aggregate of 5,166,667 warrants (“Private Placement Warrants”), each at a price of $1.50 per Sponsor Private Warrant, generating total proceeds of $7,750,000.
Transaction costs amounted to $16,239,997 consisting of $5,750,000 of underwriting discount, $10,062,500 of deferred underwriter’s fee and $427,497 of other offering costs. In addition, as of January 12, 2021, $2,000,000 of cash was held outside of the Trust Account and is available for working capital purposes.
Following the closing of the IPO on January 12, 2021, an amount of $287,500,000 ($10.00 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the IPO and the sale of the Private Placement was placed in a trust account.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or its affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if the estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete a Business Combination or because we may become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete a Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of the financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the period reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Recent accounting standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a) (4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.