ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
This MD&A is intended to provide investors with an understanding of our recent performance, financial condition and prospects. This discussion and analysis compares 2020 results to 2019. For a discussion that compares our 2019 results to 2018, see Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Part II, Item 7 of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K. The reference to "N.M." indicates that the calculation is not meaningful. In addition, we provide commentary regarding organic sales growth, which describes the impact of changes in volume, product mix and net selling prices on net sales. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates and acquisitions also impact the year-over-year change in net sales. Dollar amounts are reported in millions, except per share dollar amounts, unless otherwise noted.
The following will be discussed and analyzed:
•Overview of Business
•Overview of 2020 Results
•Impact of COVID-19
•Results of Operations and Related Information
•Unaudited Quarterly Data
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
•New Accounting Standards
•Information Concerning Forward-Looking Statements
Throughout this MD&A, we refer to financial measures that have not been calculated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., or GAAP, and are therefore referred to as non-GAAP financial measures. These measures include adjusted gross and operating profit, adjusted net income, adjusted earnings per share, adjusted other (income) and expense, net, and adjusted effective tax rate. We believe these measures provide our investors with additional information about our underlying results and trends, as well as insight to some of the financial measures used to evaluate management.
Non-GAAP financial measures are not meant to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the comparable GAAP measures, and they should be read only in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are limitations to these non-GAAP financial measures because they are not prepared in accordance with GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies due to potential differences in methods of calculation and items being excluded. We compensate for these limitations by using these non-GAAP financial measures as a supplement to the GAAP measures and by providing reconciliations of the non-GAAP and comparable GAAP financial measures.
The non-GAAP financial measures exclude the following items for the relevant time periods as indicated in the reconciliations included later in this MD&A:
•2018 Global Restructuring Program - In 2018, we initiated a restructuring program to reduce our structural cost base by streamlining and simplifying our manufacturing supply chain and overhead organization. See Item 8, Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
•Softex Indonesia Acquisition-Related Costs - Transaction and integration costs associated with the acquisition of Softex Indonesia. See Item 8, Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
•Brazil Business Tax Credits - In the fourth quarter of 2020, we received a favorable legal ruling that resolved certain matters related to prior years' business taxes in Brazil. See Item 8, Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
•Property Sale Gain - In the fourth quarter of 2019, we recognized a gain on the sale of property associated with a former manufacturing facility that was closed in 2012 as part of a past restructuring.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2020 Annual Report
Overview of Business
We are a global company focused on leading the world in essentials for a better life, with manufacturing facilities in 34 countries, including our equity affiliates, and products sold in more than 175 countries and territories. Our products are sold under well-known brands such as Kleenex, Scott, Huggies, Pull-Ups, Kotex and Depend. We have three reportable business segments: Personal Care, Consumer Tissue and K-C Professional. These business segments are described in greater detail in Item 8, Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements.
In operating our business, we seek to:
•grow our portfolio of brands through innovation, category development and commercial execution,
•leverage our cost and financial discipline to fund growth and improve margins, and
•allocate capital in value-creating ways.
We describe our business outside North America in two groups - Developing and Emerging Markets ("D&E") and Developed Markets. D&E Markets comprise Eastern Europe, the Middle East and Africa, Latin America and Asia-Pacific, excluding Australia and South Korea. Developed Markets consist of Western and Central Europe, Australia and South Korea.
On October 1, 2020, we acquired Softex Indonesia, a leader in the fast-growing Indonesian personal care market, in an all-cash transaction for approximately $1.2 billion. This transaction significantly expands our presence in an important D&E market and is a strong strategic fit with our core business. Softex Indonesia generated net sales of approximately $420 in 2019. We financed the transaction through a combination of short-term commercial paper, cash on hand and the issuance of a $600 bond. See Item 8, Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
Overview of 2020 Results
•Net sales of $19.1 billion increased 4 percent. Organic sales increased 6 percent. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates reduced sales by 2 percent.
•In North America, organic sales increased 10 percent in consumer products and decreased 5 percent in K-C Professional.
•Outside North America, organic sales increased 3 percent in D&E Markets and 6 percent in Developed Markets.
•Operating Profit and Net Income Attributable to Kimberly-Clark were $3,244 and $2,352 in 2020, respectively.
•Diluted earnings per share were $6.87 in 2020 compared to $6.24 in 2019. Results in 2020 and 2019 include net charges of $0.94 and $0.72, respectively, related to the 2018 Global Restructuring Program. Results in 2020 also include acquisition-related costs of $0.08 associated with the acquisition of Softex Indonesia and a benefit of $0.15 related to the resolution of certain business tax matters in Brazil. Results in 2019 also include a net gain of $0.07 related to the sale of property associated with a former manufacturing facility that was closed as part of a past restructuring.
•We continue to focus on generating cash flow and allocating capital to shareholders. Cash provided by operations was $3.7 billion in 2020. We raised our dividend in 2020 by 4 percent, the 48th consecutive annual increase in our dividend. Altogether, share repurchases and dividends in 2020 amounted to $2.15 billion.
In 2021, we plan to continue to execute our strategies for long-term success which include delivering balanced, sustainable growth by growing our brands in-line with or ahead of category growth, leveraging our cost and financial discipline to fund growth and improve margins, and allocating capital in value-creating ways. Our growth strategy is built on two pillars. Elevate our core business is our first pillar and is driven by delivering value-added innovations and driving category opportunities. Accelerating growth in D&E markets is our second pillar and emphasizes Personal Care and K-C Professional with Latin America, China, Eastern Europe and ASEAN as our priority markets. Both strategies are enabled by our focus on accelerating and investing in our commercial capabilities through digital marketing, revenue growth management, consumer-inspired innovation and strong in-market execution.
Our strong legacy of financial discipline supports our growth strategy by driving ongoing supply chain productivity through our FORCE (Focused On Reducing Costs Everywhere) program, completing the execution of the 2018 Global Restructuring program, controlling discretionary spending, driving down working capital and maintaining the top-tier return on invested
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2020 Annual Report
capital. Our capital allocation strategy is consistent with our historical approach of disciplined capital spending, payment of a top tier dividend, evaluation of acquisition opportunities and allocation of excess cash flow to share repurchases.
We are subject to risks and uncertainties, which can affect our business operations and financial results. See Item 1A, "Risk Factors" in this Form 10-K for additional information.
Impact of COVID-19
We continue to actively address the COVID-19 situation and its impact globally. We believe that we will emerge from these events well positioned for long-term growth, though we cannot reasonably estimate the duration and severity of this global pandemic or its ultimate impact on the global economy and our business and results.
We have experienced increased volatility in demand for some of our products as consumers adapt to the evolving environment. Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, particularly in March, demand increased in our Consumer Tissue and Personal Care business segments across all major geographies as consumers increased home inventory levels in response to COVID-19. The increase was followed by a period of demand softness as consumers used existing home inventories and demand returned to more normal levels. Demand for our consumer tissue products was elevated throughout 2020 as more people spent more time at home. Our K-C Professional business experienced volume declines throughout 2020 reflecting the reduction in away from home demand.
During 2020, we experienced temporary closures of certain facilities, though we did not experience a material impact from a plant closure and our facilities were largely exempt or partially exempt from government closure orders. At many of our facilities, we have been experiencing increased employee absences, which may continue in the current situation.
During 2020, we also experienced increased volatility in foreign currency exchange rates and commodity prices, as certain countries experienced increased macro-economic volatility from the COVID-19 situation.
Results of Operations and Related Information
This section presents a discussion and analysis of net sales, operating profit and other information relevant to an understanding of 2020 results of operations.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2020 Annual Report
Consolidated
(a) Corporate & Other and Other (income) and expense, net includes income and expenses not associated with the business segments, including adjustments as indicated in the Non-GAAP Reconciliations.
GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations of Selected Financial Results
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2020 Annual Report
(a) "As Adjusted Non-GAAP" may not equal "As Reported" plus "Adjustments" as a result of rounding.
Analysis of Consolidated Results
(a) Total may not equal the sum of volume, net price, mix/other and currency due to rounding.
(b) Combined impact of changes in volume, net price and mix/other.
(c) Combined benefits of the FORCE program and 2018 Global Restructuring Program.
(d) Includes impact of changes in product mix, marketing, research and general expenses, foreign currency transaction effects and other manufacturing costs.
Net sales of $19.1 billion increased 4 percent compared to the year ago period. Operating profit was $3,244 in 2020 and $2,991 in 2019. Adjusted operating profit was $3,582 in 2020, up 9 percent compared to $3,281 in 2019. Results benefited from organic sales growth, $455 of FORCE cost savings and $120 of cost savings from the 2018 Global Restructuring Program. Input costs decreased $175, driven by pulp. The comparison was impacted by other manufacturing cost increases, unfavorable currency effects, increased advertising spending and higher general and administrative costs.
Other (income) and expense, net of $54 in 2020 primarily reflected tax credits recognized related to a favorable legal ruling that resolved certain matters related to prior years' business taxes in Brazil. In 2019, Other (income) and expense, net of $210 primarily reflected gains on the sales of manufacturing facilities and associated real estate related to the 2018 Global Restructuring Program and property associated with a former manufacturing facility that was closed as part of a past restructuring. Adjusted other (income) and expense, net was $32 and $15 of expense in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2020 Annual Report
The effective tax rate of 23.1 percent in 2020 increased compared to the effective tax rate of 21.7 percent in 2019. The rate in 2019 included a net benefit of $47 related to a nonrecurring capital loss from a legal entity restructuring. See additional details in Item 8, Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements. The adjusted effective tax rate was 22.7 percent compared to 23.0 percent in 2019.
Our share of net income of equity companies was $142 in 2020 and $123 in 2019. Kimberly-Clark de Mexico, S.A.B. de C.V. ("KCM") results in 2020 benefited from organic sales growth, lower input costs and cost savings but were negatively impacted by unfavorable currency effects.
Diluted earnings per share were $6.87 in 2020 and $6.24 in 2019. Adjusted earnings per share of $7.74 in 2020 increased 12 percent compared to $6.89 in 2019. The increase was driven by growth in adjusted operating profit, along with higher net income from equity companies and declines in the share count and adjusted effective tax rate.
Business Segments
Personal Care
(a) Total may not equal the sum of volume, net price, mix/other, acquisition and currency due to rounding.
(b) Combined impact of changes in volume, net price and mix/other.
(c) Combined benefits of the FORCE program and 2018 Global Restructuring Program.
(d) Includes impact of changes in product mix, marketing, research and general expenses, foreign currency transaction effects and other manufacturing costs.
Net sales in North America increased 6 percent. Volumes increased 4 percent, primarily driven by broad-based growth in baby and child care as well as increases in adult care. Changes in net selling prices and product mix each increased sales by 1 percent.
Net sales in D&E Markets decreased 1 percent. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates decreased sales by 9 percent, primarily in Latin America. Volumes increased 4 percent led by growth in China, Eastern Europe, Brazil and India. Changes in product mix and the Softex Indonesia acquisition each increased sales by 2 percent. The improvements in product mix were primarily in China.
Net sales in Developed Markets outside North America increased 1 percent. Changes in product mix increased sales by 2 percent, primarily in South Korea, and volumes increased 1 percent. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates and net selling prices each decreased sales by 1 percent.
Operating profit of $1,933 increased 2 percent. The comparison was positively impacted by organic sales growth, cost savings and lower input costs, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency effects, increases in other manufacturing costs and higher marketing and general and administrative costs.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2020 Annual Report
Consumer Tissue
(a) Total may not equal the sum of volume, net price, mix/other and currency due to rounding.
(b) Combined impact of changes in volume, net price and mix/other.
(c) Combined benefits of the FORCE program and 2018 Global Restructuring Program.
(d) Includes impact of changes in product mix, marketing, research and general expenses, foreign currency transaction effects and other manufacturing costs.
Net sales in North America increased by 17 percent. Volume increased 14 percent reflecting strong demand related to the COVID-19 and work from home environment, along with improved performance in Kleenex facial tissue. Volumes were up double-digits in all major product categories. Changes in net selling prices increased sales by 4 percent, driven by lower promotion spending. Changes in product mix decreased sales by 2 percent.
Net sales in D&E Markets decreased 1 percent. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates decreased sales by approximately 6 percent, primarily in Latin America, and changes in net selling prices decreased sales by 2 percent. Volumes increased 4 percent, led by improvements in Latin America, and changes in product mix increased sales by 2 percent.
Net sales in Developed Markets outside North America increased 14 percent. Volumes increased 12 percent. driven by strong growth in South Korea and Western and Central Europe and reflecting strong demand related to the COVID-19 and work from home environment. Changes in product mix increased sales by 1 percent.
Operating profit of $1,448 increased 44 percent. Results benefited from higher volumes and net selling prices, cost savings and lower input costs, partially offset by increases in marketing and general and administrative costs, other manufacturing costs and unfavorable foreign currency effects.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2020 Annual Report
K-C Professional
(a) Total may not equal the sum of volume, net price, mix/other and currency due to rounding.
(b) Combined impact of changes in volume, net price and mix/other.
(c) Combined benefits of the FORCE program and 2018 Global Restructuring Program.
(d) Includes impact of changes in product mix, marketing, research and general expenses, foreign currency transaction effects and other manufacturing costs.
Net sales in North America decreased 5 percent. Volumes decreased 10 percent, reflecting lower away from home demand and challenging business conditions following the outbreak of COVID-19. Changes in product mix and net selling prices increased sales by 3 percent and 2 percent, respectively.
Net sales in D&E Markets decreased 21 percent. Volumes decreased by 17 percent, reflecting lower away from home demand and challenging business conditions following the outbreak of COVID-19 with declines in all major markets. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates and product mix decreased sales by 5 percent and 2 percent, respectively, partially offset by changes in net selling prices which increased sales by 3 percent, all primarily related to Latin America.
Net sales in Developed Markets outside North America decreased 4 percent. Volumes decreased 11 percent, reflecting lower away from home demand and challenging business conditions following the outbreak of COVID-19, primarily in Western and Central Europe. Changes in product mix and net selling prices increased sales by 4 percent and 3 percent, respectively, also primarily in Western and Central Europe.
Operating profit of $528 decreased 20 percent. The comparison was impacted by lower volumes, other manufacturing cost increases, and increased general and administrative costs. Results benefited from favorable net selling prices and cost savings.
2018 Global Restructuring Program
Annual pre-tax savings from the 2018 Global Restructuring Program are now expected to be $540 to $560 by the end of 2021. Savings for 2020 were $120, bringing cumulative savings to $420.
To implement this program, we expect to incur incremental capital spending of approximately $600 to $700 by the end of 2021. See Item 8, Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2020 Annual Report
Unaudited Quarterly Data
(a) Quarterly results in 2020 and 2019 were impacted by charges related to the 2018 Global Restructuring Program. See Item 8, Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for details. Third and fourth quarter results in 2020 were impacted by acquisition-related costs associated with the acquisition of Softex Indonesia. See Item 8, Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for details. Fourth quarter results in 2020 were also impacted by business tax credits related to the resolution of certain Brazil tax matters. See Item 8, Note 1 for details.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Provided by Operations
Cash provided by operations was $3.7 billion in 2020 compared to $2.7 billion in 2019. The increase was driven by improved working capital and higher earnings.
Obligations
The following table presents our total contractual obligations for which cash flows are fixed or determinable.
•The unconditional purchase obligations are for the purchase of raw materials, primarily superabsorbent materials, pulp and utilities. Although we are primarily liable for payments on the above operating leases and unconditional purchase obligations, based on historic operating performance and forecasted future cash flows, we believe exposure to losses, if any, under these arrangements is not material.
•The open purchase orders displayed in the table represent amounts for goods and services we have negotiated for delivery.
The table does not include amounts where payments are discretionary or the timing is uncertain. The following payments are not included in the table:
•We will fund our defined benefit pension plans to meet or exceed statutory requirements and currently expect to contribute approximately $50 to these plans in 2021.
•Other postretirement benefit payments are estimated using actuarial assumptions, including expected future service, to project the future obligations. Based upon those projections, we anticipate making annual payments for these obligations of approximately $50 through 2030.
•Accrued income tax liabilities for uncertain tax positions, deferred taxes and noncontrolling interests.
Investing
Our capital spending was $1.2 billion in 2020 and 2019, including incremental spending related to the 2018 Global Restructuring Program. Acquisition, net of cash acquired of $1.1 billion in 2020 reflected the purchase of Softex Indonesia.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2020 Annual Report
Proceeds from dispositions of property in 2019 of $242 primarily reflects the proceeds from the sales of manufacturing facilities and associated real estate related to the 2018 Global Restructuring Program and property associated with a former manufacturing facility that was closed as part of a past restructuring. We expect capital spending to be approximately $1.2 billion to $1.3 billion in 2021, including spending associated with the 2018 Global Restructuring Program and other growth initiatives.
Financing
We issue long-term debt in the public market periodically. Proceeds from the offerings are used for general corporate purposes, including repayment of maturing debt or outstanding commercial paper indebtedness. See Item 8, Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
Our short-term debt, which consists of U.S. commercial paper with original maturities up to 90 days and/or other similar short-term debt issued by non-U.S. subsidiaries, was $223 as of December 31, 2020 (included in debt payable within one year on the consolidated balance sheet). The average month-end balance of short-term debt for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $365. These short-term borrowings provide supplemental funding for supporting our operations. The level of short-term debt generally fluctuates depending upon the amount of operating cash flows and the timing of customer receipts and payments for items such as pension contributions, dividends and income taxes.
At December 31, 2020, total debt was $8.4 billion compared to $7.7 billion at December 31, 2019.
We maintain a $2.0 billion revolving credit facility which expires in June 2023 and a $750 revolving credit facility which expires in June 2021. These facilities, currently unused, support our commercial paper program, and would provide liquidity in the event our access to the commercial paper markets is unavailable for any reason.
In July 2017, the United Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), announced that it intends to phase out LIBOR by the end of 2021. We are currently evaluating the potential effect of the eventual replacement of the LIBOR, but we do not expect the effect to be material. Accounting guidance has been issued to ease the transition to alternative reference rates from a financial reporting perspective. See Item 8, Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
We paid $1.5 billion in dividends in 2020. The Board of Directors approved a dividend increase of 6.5 percent for 2021. We repurchase shares of Kimberly-Clark common stock from time to time pursuant to publicly announced share repurchase programs. During 2020, we repurchased 4.9 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $700 through a broker in the open market. We are targeting full-year 2021 share repurchases between $650 and $750, subject to market conditions. On January 22, 2021, the Corporation’s Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program, pursuant to which the Corporation is authorized to repurchase up to 40 million shares of the Corporation’s common stock, subject to a limit of $5 billion in aggregate expenditures. The authorization is incremental to the remaining shares available to be repurchased under the current share repurchase program authorized on November 13, 2014.
We believe that our ability to generate cash from operations and our capacity to issue short-term and long-term debt are adequate to fund working capital, payments for our 2018 Global Restructuring Program, capital spending, pension contributions, dividends and other needs for the foreseeable future. Further, we do not expect restrictions or taxes on repatriation of cash held outside of the U.S. to have a material effect on our overall business, liquidity, financial condition or results of operations for the foreseeable future.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2020 Annual Report
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of net sales and expenses during the reporting period. The critical accounting policies we used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements are those that are important both to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require significant judgments by management with regard to estimates used. The critical judgments by management relate to accruals for sales incentives and trade promotion allowances, pension and other postretirement benefits, deferred income taxes and potential income tax assessments. These critical accounting policies have been reviewed with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Sales Incentives and Trade Promotion Allowances
Trade promotion programs include introductory marketing funds such as slotting fees, cooperative marketing programs, temporary price reductions and other activities conducted by our customers to promote our products. Rebate and promotion accruals are based on estimates of the quantity of customer sales. Promotion accruals also consider estimates of the number of consumer coupons that will be redeemed and timing and costs of activities within the promotional programs. Generally, the estimated redemption value of consumer coupons and related expense are based on historical patterns of coupon redemption, influenced by judgments about current market conditions such as competitive activity in specific product categories, and the cost is recorded when the related revenue from customers is realized. Our related accounting policies are discussed in Item 8, Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements.
Employee Postretirement Benefits
Substantially all regular employees in the U.S. and the United Kingdom are covered by defined contribution retirement plans and certain U.S. and United Kingdom employees previously earned benefits covered by defined benefit pension plans that currently provide no future service benefit (the "Principal Plans"). Certain other subsidiaries have defined benefit pension plans or, in certain countries, termination pay plans covering substantially all regular employees. Our related accounting policies and account balances are discussed in Item 8, Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements.
Changes in certain assumptions could affect pension expense and the benefit obligations, particularly the estimated long-term rate of return on plan assets and the discount rate used to calculate the obligations:
•Long-term rate of return on plan assets. The expected long-term rate of return is evaluated on an annual basis. In setting these assumptions, we consider a number of factors including projected future returns by asset class relative to the target asset allocation. Actual asset allocations are regularly reviewed and they are periodically rebalanced to the targeted allocations when considered appropriate.
As of December 31, 2020, the Principal Plans had cumulative unrecognized investment and actuarial losses of approximately $1.1 billion. These unrecognized net losses may increase future pension expense if not offset by (i) actual investment returns that exceed the assumed investment returns, (ii) other factors, including reduced pension liabilities arising from higher discount rates used to calculate pension obligations, or (iii) other actuarial gains, and whether such accumulated actuarial losses at each measurement date exceed the "corridor" as required. If the expected long-term rate of return on assets for the Principal Plans were lowered by 0.25 percent, the impact on annual pension expense would not be material in 2021.
•Discount rate. The discount (or settlement) rate used to determine the present value of our future U.S. pension obligation at December 31, 2020 was based on a portfolio of high quality corporate debt securities with cash flows that largely match the expected benefit payments of the plan. For the United Kingdom plan, the discount rate was determined based on yield curves constructed from a portfolio of high quality corporate debt securities. Each year's expected future benefit payments were discounted to their present value at the appropriate yield curve rate to determine the pension obligations. If the discount rate assumptions for these same plans were reduced by 0.25 percent, the increase in annual pension expense would not be material in 2021, and the December 31, 2020 pension liability would increase by about $146.
•Other assumptions. There are a number of other assumptions involved in the calculation of pension expense and benefit obligations, primarily related to participant demographics and benefit elections.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2020 Annual Report
Pension expense for defined benefit pension plans is estimated to approximate $85 in 2021, including incremental charges resulting from 2018 Global Restructuring Program actions. Pension expense beyond 2021 will depend on future investment performance, our contributions to the pension trusts, changes in discount rates and various other factors related to the covered participants in the plans.
Substantially all U.S. retirees and employees have access to our unfunded health care and life insurance benefit plans. Changes in significant assumptions could affect the consolidated expense and benefit obligations, particularly the discount rate used to calculate the obligations and the health care cost trend rate:
•Discount rate. The determination of the discount rates used to calculate the benefit obligations of the plans is discussed in the pension benefit section above, and the methodology for each country is the same as the methodology used to determine the discount rate for that country's pension obligation. If the discount rate assumptions for these plans were reduced by 0.25 percent, the impact to 2021 other postretirement benefit expense and the increase in the December 31, 2020 benefit liability would not be material.
•Health care cost trend rate. The health care cost trend rate is based on a combination of inputs including our recent claims history and insights from external advisers regarding recent developments in the health care marketplace, as well as projections of future trends in the marketplace.
Deferred Income Taxes and Potential Assessments
As a global organization, we are subject to income tax requirements in various jurisdictions in the U.S. and internationally. Changes in certain assumptions related to income taxes could significantly affect consolidated results, particularly with regard to valuation allowances on deferred tax assets, undistributed earnings of subsidiaries outside the U.S. and uncertain tax positions. Our income tax related accounting policies, account balances and matters affecting income taxes are discussed in Item 8, Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements.
•Deferred tax assets and related valuation allowances. We have recorded deferred tax assets related to, among other matters, income tax loss carryforwards, income tax credit carryforwards and capital loss carryforwards and have established valuation allowances against these deferred tax assets. These carryforwards are primarily in non-U.S. taxing jurisdictions and in certain states in the U.S. Foreign tax credits earned in the U.S. in current and prior years, which cannot be used currently, also give rise to net deferred tax assets. In determining the valuation allowances to establish against these deferred tax assets, many factors are considered, including the specific taxing jurisdiction, the carryforward period, income tax strategies and forecasted earnings for the entities in each jurisdiction. A valuation allowance is recognized if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
•Undistributed earnings. As of December 31, 2020, we have accumulated undistributed earnings generated by our foreign subsidiaries of approximately $7.9 billion. Earnings of $5.2 billion were previously subject to tax, primarily due to the one-time transition tax on foreign earnings required by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Any additional taxes due with respect to such previously-taxed earnings, if repatriated, would generally be limited to foreign and U.S. state income taxes. Deferred taxes have been recorded on $0.7 billion of earnings, most of which were previously taxed for U.S. federal income tax purposes, of foreign consolidated subsidiaries expected to be repatriated. We do not intend to distribute the remaining $4.5 billion of previously taxed foreign earnings and therefore have not recorded deferred taxes for foreign and U.S. state income taxes on such earnings. While the transition tax resulted in a reduction of the excess amount for financial reporting over the tax basis in our foreign subsidiaries, any remaining amount of financial reporting over tax basis after such reduction could be subject to additional taxes, if repatriated. However, we consider any excess to be indefinitely reinvested. The determination of deferred tax liabilities on the amount of financial reporting over tax basis or the $4.5 billion of previously taxed foreign earnings is not practicable.
•Uncertain tax positions. We record our global tax provision based on the respective tax rules and regulations for the jurisdictions in which we operate. Where we believe that a tax position is supportable for income tax purposes, the item is included in our income tax returns. Where treatment of a position is uncertain, a liability is recorded based upon the expected most likely outcome taking into consideration the technical merits of the position based on specific tax regulations and facts of each matter. These liabilities may be affected by changing interpretations of laws, rulings by tax authorities or the expiration of the statute of limitations.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2020 Annual Report
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are not subject to amortization and are tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. Intangible assets that are deemed to have finite lives are amortized over their useful lives, generally ranging from 10 to 20 years. We typically obtain the assistance of third-party valuation specialists to measure the acquisition date fair values of goodwill and other intangible assets acquired.
Events and conditions that could result in impairment include a sustained drop in the market price of our common shares, increased competition or loss of market share, obsolescence, product claims that result in a significant loss of sales or profitability over the product life, deterioration in macroeconomic conditions, or declining financial performance in comparison to projected results.
Our related accounting policies and our acquisition of Softex Indonesia are discussed in Item 8, Notes 1 and 3, respectively, to the consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill
In our evaluation of goodwill impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors such as macroeconomic, industry and competitive conditions, legal and regulatory environments, historical and projected financial performance, significant changes in the reporting unit and the magnitude of excess fair value over carrying amount from the previous quantitative impairment testing. If the result of a qualitative test indicates a potential for impairment, a quantitative test is performed. When a quantitative test is considered necessary, estimates of fair value for goodwill impairment testing are determined based on a discounted cash flow model and a market-based approach. We use inputs from our long-range planning process to determine growth rates for sales and earnings. The other key estimates and factors used in the discounted cash flow include, but are not limited to, discount rates, actual business trends experienced, commodity prices, foreign exchange rates, inflation and terminal growth rates.
For 2020, we completed the required annual assessment of goodwill for impairment for all of our reporting units using a qualitative assessment as of the first day of the third quarter, and we determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value is more than the carrying amount for each of our reporting units.
Other Intangible Assets
We evaluate the useful lives of our other intangible assets, primarily brands, to determine if they are finite or indefinite-lived. Reaching a determination on useful life requires significant judgments and assumptions regarding the future effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, other economic factors (such as the stability of the industry, known technological advances and expected changes in distribution channels), the level of required maintenance expenditures, and the expected lives of other related groups of assets.
Our estimate of the fair value of our brand assets is based on a discounted cash flow model and a market-based approach using inputs which include projected revenues from our long-range plan, assumed royalty rates that could be payable if we did not own the brands, and a discount rate. The cash flows used in the discounted cash flow model are consistent with those we use in our internal planning, which gives consideration to actual business trends experienced and the long-term business strategy.
We performed our 2020 impairment assessment of our intangible assets as of the first day of the third quarter of 2020, and based upon a qualitative assessment, no impairment indicators were found to be present.
New Accounting Standards
See Item 8, Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for a description of new accounting standards and their anticipated effects on our consolidated financial statements.
Information Concerning Forward-Looking Statements
Certain matters contained in this report concerning the business outlook, including the anticipated cost savings from our FORCE program, costs and savings from the 2018 Global Restructuring Program, cash flow and uses of cash, growth initiatives, innovations, marketing and other spending, net sales, anticipated currency rates and exchange risks, including the impact in Argentina, raw material, energy and other input costs, effective tax rate, contingencies and anticipated transactions of Kimberly-Clark, including dividends, share repurchases and pension contributions, constitute "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and are based upon management's expectations and
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2020 Annual Report
beliefs concerning future events impacting Kimberly-Clark. There can be no assurance that these future events will occur as anticipated or that our results will be as estimated. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they were made, and we undertake no obligation to publicly update them.
The assumptions used as a basis for the forward-looking statements include many estimates that, among other things, depend on the achievement of future cost savings and projected volume increases. In addition, many factors outside our control, including pandemics (including the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak), epidemics, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, the prices and availability of our raw materials, potential competitive pressures on selling prices for our products, energy costs, general economic and political conditions globally and in the markets in which we do business, as well as our ability to maintain key customer relationships and to realize the expected benefits and synergies of the Softex Indonesia acquisition, could affect the realization of these estimates.
The factors described under Item 1A, "Risk Factors" in this Form 10-K, or in our other SEC filings, among others, could cause our future results to differ from those expressed in any forward-looking statements made by us or on our behalf. Other factors not presently known to us or that we presently consider immaterial could also affect our business operations and financial results.