ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The discussion and analysis presented below refer to and should be read in conjunction with our audited Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes under Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. The matters discussed in these forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties, and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those made, projected, or implied in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, particularly in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements.”
Management’s discussion and analysis, which we refer to as “MD&A,” of our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows should be read together with the audited Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes included under Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," to provide an understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition, and results of our operations. We believe the assumptions underlying the Consolidated Financial Statements are reasonable. However, the Consolidated Financial Statements included herein may not necessarily reflect our results of operations, financial position, and cash flows in the future.
As discussed in Note 2. Disposed and Discontinued Operations to our audited Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data", we completed the sale of our high-end oscillators business ("Timing Device Business") in the fourth quarter of 2017 and the sale of our speaker and receiver product line ("Speaker and Receiver Product Line") in the third quarter of 2016. Accordingly, the results of operations and related assets and liabilities for the Timing Device Business and the Speaker and Receiver Product Line have been reclassified as discontinued operations for all periods presented. Unless otherwise indicated, discussion within this MD&A and elsewhere within this Annual Report on Form 10-K refers to results from continuing operations.
Our Business
We are a market leader and global provider of advanced micro-acoustic, audio processing, and precision device solutions, serving the mobile consumer electronics, communications, medtech, defense, electric vehicle, and industrial markets. We use our leading position in micro-electro-mechanical systems ("MEMS") microphones and strong capabilities in audio processing technologies to optimize audio systems and improve the user experience in mobile, ear, and Internet of Things ("IoT") applications. We are also a leader in acoustic components, high-end capacitors, and mmWave radio frequency ("RF") solutions for a diverse set of markets. Our focus on the customer, combined with unique technology, proprietary manufacturing techniques, rigorous testing, and global scale, enables us to deliver innovative solutions that optimize the user experience. References to "Knowles," the "Company," "we," "our," or "us" refer to Knowles Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries, unless the context otherwise requires.
Our Business Segments
We are organized into two reportable segments based on how management analyzes performance, allocates capital, and makes strategic and operational decisions. These segments were determined in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 280 - Segment Reporting and are comprised of (i) Audio and (ii) Precision Devices ("PD"). The segments are aligned around similar product applications serving our key end markets, to enhance focus on end market growth strategies.
•Audio Segment
Our Audio group designs and manufactures innovative audio products, including microphones, balanced armature speakers, and audio processors used in applications that serve the mobile, ear, and IoT markets. Locations include the sales, support, and engineering facilities in North America, Europe, and Asia, as well as manufacturing facilities in Asia.
•PD Segment
Our PD group specializes in the design and delivery of high performance capacitor products and mmWave RF solutions for technically demanding applications. Our high performance capacitor products are used in applications such as power supplies and medical implants, which sell to a diverse set of customers for mission critical applications across the communications, medtech, defense, electric vehicle, and industrial markets. Our mmWave RF solutions primarily solve high frequency filtering challenges for our military customers, who use them in their satellite communication and radar systems, as well as our telecommunications infrastructure customers deploying mmWave 5G base stations. Locations include the sales, support, engineering, and manufacturing facilities in North America, Europe, and Asia.
We sell our products directly to original equipment manufacturers ("OEMs") and to their contract manufacturers and suppliers and to a lesser extent through distributors worldwide.
COVID-19 Impact
During 2020, COVID-19, the most recently discovered coronavirus, spread throughout areas of the world where we operate. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. This has resulted in global business disruption, which has impacted our business operations, results of operations, customer demand, and the productivity of our facilities, particularly in China, Malaysia, and the Philippines.
We took various steps to minimize the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and to protect the health and safety of our employees. Such steps included, but were not limited to, significantly reducing employee travel; having office workers work remotely; suspending our share repurchase program; suspending annual wage increases; temporarily reducing salaries of employees, including the CEO and executive team; and reducing the cash compensation of our board of directors. Most restrictions have been lifted at our facilities and the majority of our office workers have now returned to working on-site. In locations where public health protocols have accommodated returning to work at our facilities, we have implemented additional safety measures, including increased frequency in cleaning and disinfecting as well as hygiene and social distancing practices. During the third quarter of 2020, as our end markets began to show signs of recovery and we generated better than expected operating cash flow, we reinstated employee salaries including executive management salaries. We also restored the cash compensation for our board of directors and resumed the share repurchase program in the fourth quarter of 2020.
The situation related to COVID-19 continues to be complex and rapidly evolving. We cannot reasonably estimate the duration of the pandemic or fully ascertain its impact to our future results. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we considered and determined that the only impact on our long-lived assets (including goodwill and intangible assets, property, plant, and equipment, and lease right-of-use assets) was the impairment charges discussed in Note 4. Impairments to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” We concluded that it is not more likely than not that any of our other long-lived assets have carrying values exceeding their respective fair values. Our analysis considered, among other factors; the nature of our products and services as well as our position within our industry and our expectation that we will continue generating positive operating cash flows over the long-term. In addition, we have not experienced and do not anticipate a material impact to the realizability of current assets, such as accounts receivable or inventories.
As the COVID-19 pandemic evolves, we will continue to actively monitor developments and business conditions and may take further actions that alter business operations as may be required by applicable authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers, stockholders, and communities. It is not clear what potential effects any such alterations or modifications may have on our business, including the effects on our financial results.
Recent Developments
On December 20, 2019, we acquired substantially all of the assets of the MEMS Microphone Application-specific integrated circuit Design Business (“ASIC Design Business”) from ams AG for $57.9 million. The acquired business, which does not generate revenues, includes intellectual property and an assembled workforce. The acquisition’s operations are included in the Audio segment. For additional information, refer to Note 3. Acquisitions to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
On January 3, 2019, we acquired substantially all of the assets of DITF Interconnect Technology, Inc. ("DITF") for $11.1 million. The acquired business provides thin film components to the defense, telecommunication, industrial, and medtech
markets. This acquisition's operations are included in the PD segment. For additional information, refer to Note 3. Acquisitions to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
For discussion related to the results of operations and changes in financial condition for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on February 12, 2020 and is incorporated by reference herein.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to the GAAP financial measures included in this item, we have presented certain non-GAAP financial measures. We use non-GAAP measures as supplements to our GAAP results of operations in evaluating certain aspects of our business, and our executive management team and Board of Directors focus on non-GAAP items as key measures of our performance for business planning purposes. These measures assist us in comparing our performance between various reporting periods on a consistent basis, as these measures remove from operating results the impact of items that, in our opinion, do not reflect our core operating performance. We believe that our presentation of non-GAAP financial measures is useful because it provides investors and securities analysts with the same information that we use internally for purposes of assessing our core operating performance. The Company does not consider these non-GAAP financial measures to be a substitute for the information provided by GAAP financial results. For a reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures, see the reconciliation included herein.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $764.3 million, compared with $854.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $90.5 million or 10.6%. Audio revenues decreased $91.6 million primarily due to lower shipping volumes related to the COVID-19 pandemic during the first half of 2020, which caused lower demand for hearing health products and MEMS microphones ("MEMS") in the ear and IoT markets. Audio revenues were also impacted by lower average pricing on mature products, partially offset by increased demand for MEMS in the computing markets, driven by work-from-home and remote-learning trends. PD revenues had an increase of $1.1 million primarily due to higher demand from the electric vehicle, industrial, and defense markets, partially offset by decreases in the medtech market as hospitals have reduced elective procedures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold ("COGS") for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $490.8 million, compared with $525.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $34.3 million or 6.5%. This decrease was primarily the result of product cost reductions and lower shipping volumes in Audio, partially offset by reduced plant productivity as a result of the disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic that we experienced within our manufacturing operations.
Restructuring Charges
We undertake restructuring programs from time to time to better align our operations with current market conditions. Such activities include facility consolidations, headcount reductions, and other measures to further optimize operations. We may have restructuring charges in the future as we continuously evaluate our operational footprint. Details regarding restructuring programs undertaken during the reporting period are as follows:
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we restructured our Intelligent Audio product line, which is included in our Audio segment. This resulted in a reduction in workforce and the refocusing of certain research and development activities. As a result, we recorded restructuring charges of $1.5 million within Gross Profit, primarily for fixed asset write-off costs directly associated with the product line. In addition, we recorded restructuring charges of $6.8 million within Operating expenses, primarily for rationalizing the research and development workforce and contract termination costs associated with the product line.
In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded restructuring charges of $0.8 million within Gross profit, primarily for actions to rationalize the remainder of the Audio segment workforce, as a direct result of the lower demand we experienced from the COVID-19 pandemic for our remaining Audio products. We also recorded restructuring charges of $3.2 million within Operating expenses, primarily for actions associated with rationalizing the remaining Audio workforce.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded total restructuring charges of $6.0 million. We recorded $1.7 million within Gross profit, primarily for actions associated with transferring certain operations of capacitors manufacturing to other existing facilities in order to further optimize operations in the PD segment. We also recorded restructuring charges of $4.3 million within Operating expenses, primarily for actions associated with rationalizing the Audio segment workforce.
Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $271.2 million, compared with $328.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $56.8 million or 17.3%. Gross profit margin (gross profit as a percentage of revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 35.5%, compared with 38.4% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreases were primarily due to lower average pricing on mature products and lower shipping volumes in the Audio segment. In addition, we experienced disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic within our manufacturing operations, which negatively impacted plant productivity. Gross profit and margins benefited from product cost reductions.
Non-GAAP gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $275.4 million, compared with $333.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $58.2 million or 17.4%. Non-GAAP gross profit margin (non-GAAP gross profit as a percentage of revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 36.0%, as compared with 39.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreases were primarily due to lower average pricing on mature products and lower shipping volumes in the Audio segment. In addition, we experienced disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic within our manufacturing operations, which negatively impacted plant productivity, partially offset by the benefits of product cost reductions.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $92.9 million and $96.8 million, respectively, a decrease of $3.9 million or 4.0%. Research and development expenses as a percentage of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 12.2% and 11.3%, respectively. The decrease in expenses was primarily driven by operating cost reductions in our Audio segment as a result of headcount reductions to optimize the workforce, partially offset by increased expense related to our acquisition of the ASIC Design Business. The increase in expenses as a percentage of revenues was due to the decrease in our revenues.
Selling and Administrative Expenses
Selling and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $131.5 million, compared with $145.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $14.2 million or 9.7%. Selling and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were 17.2%, compared with 17.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in expenses was primarily driven by operating cost reduction efforts, which were implemented to minimize the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The cost reduction efforts included, but were not limited to, temporarily reducing salaries of employees, suspending annual wage increases, and significantly reducing employee travel. In addition, we incurred lower stock-based compensation as certain performance targets will not be met due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by higher legal expenses related to protecting our intellectual property. The increase in expenses as a percentage of revenues was due to the decrease in our revenues.
Impairment Charges
Impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $7.6 million and relate to facilities in our Intelligent Audio product line. For additional information related to these impairment charges, refer to Note 4. Impairments to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $16.4 million, compared with $14.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1.9 million or 13.1%. The increase in interest expense is primarily due to higher average outstanding borrowings. For additional information on borrowings and interest expense, refer to Note 12. Borrowings to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Other expense, net
Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.5 million, compared with expense of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a change of $1.1 million. The change is primarily due to the net unfavorable impacts from foreign currency exchange rate changes in 2020.
Provision for Income Taxes and Non-GAAP Provision for Income Taxes
The effective tax rate ("ETR") for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a 74.3% provision, compared with a 25.0% provision for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in the ETR was primarily due to the mix of earnings and losses by taxing jurisdictions.
The ETR for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was favorably impacted by two tax holidays granted to us by Malaysia. For additional information on these tax holidays, see Note 13. Income Taxes to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
The non-GAAP ETR for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a 10.1% provision, compared with a 14.8% provision for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the non-GAAP ETR was due to the mix of earnings and losses by taxing jurisdictions and a one-time tax benefit related to new regulations released in 2020 applicable to the filing of the 2019 U.S. tax return.
The ETR and non-GAAP ETR deviate from the statutory U.S. federal income tax rate, mainly due to the taxing jurisdictions where we generate taxable income or loss, the favorable impact of our significant tax holidays in Malaysia, and judgments as to the realizability of our deferred tax assets. A significant portion of our pre-tax income is subject to a lower tax rate as a result of our Malaysian tax holidays, subject to our annual satisfaction of certain conditions we expect to continue to satisfy. Unless extended or renegotiated, our existing significant tax holiday in Malaysia will expire on December 31, 2021. The U.S. operations were in a cumulative loss position as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Based on this, and other relevant information, the Company concluded that tax losses and deferred tax assets would not be benefited in the U.S.
Earnings from Continuing Operations
Earnings from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.9 million, compared with $49.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $46.8 million. As described above, the decrease is primarily due to lower gross profit and an increase in impairment and operating restructuring charges, partially offset by the reductions in all other operating expenses and income tax expense.
Earnings and Adjusted Earnings from Continuing Operations Before Interest and Income Taxes
Earnings before interest and income taxes ("EBIT") from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $27.7 million, compared with $80.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $53.1 million or 65.7%. EBIT margin (EBIT from continuing operations as a percentage of revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 3.6%, as compared with 9.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreases in EBIT and EBIT margin were primarily due to lower gross profit and an increase in impairment and operating restructuring charges, partially offset by the reductions in all other operating expenses.
Adjusted earnings before interest and income taxes ("Adjusted EBIT") from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $79.3 million, compared with $126.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $47.6 million or 37.5%. Adjusted EBIT margin (adjusted EBIT from continuing operations as a percentage of revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 10.4%, as compared with 14.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreases in Adjusted EBIT and Adjusted EBIT margin were primarily due to lower non-GAAP gross profit, partially offset by a decrease in non-GAAP operating expenses.
Earnings (Loss) from Discontinued Operations, net
Earnings from discontinued operations was $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with a loss of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We recorded a tax benefit for a refund received during the first quarter of 2020 related to the Timing Device Business.
Diluted Earnings per Share from Continuing Operations and Non-GAAP Diluted Earnings per Share from Continuing Operations
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations was $0.03 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $0.53 for the year ended December 31, 2019. As described above, the decrease is primarily due to lower gross profit and an increase in both impairment and restructuring charges, partially offset by the reductions in all other operating expenses and income tax expense.
Non-GAAP diluted earnings per share from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.67, compared with $1.07 for the year ended December 31, 2019. As described above, the decrease is primarily due to lower non-GAAP gross profit, partially offset by the reductions in non-GAAP operating expenses and non-GAAP income tax expense.
Reconciliation of GAAP Financial Measures to Non-GAAP Financial Measures (1)
(1) In addition to the GAAP financial measures included herein, Knowles has presented certain non-GAAP financial measures that exclude certain amounts that are included in the most directly comparable GAAP measures. Knowles believes that non-GAAP measures are useful as supplements to its GAAP results of operations to evaluate certain aspects of its operations and financial performance, and its management team primarily focuses on non-GAAP items in evaluating Knowles' performance for business planning purposes. Knowles also believes that these measures assist it with comparing its performance between various reporting periods on a consistent basis, as these measures remove from operating results the impact of items that, in Knowles' opinion, do not reflect its core operating performance. Knowles believes that its presentation of non-GAAP financial measures is useful because it provides investors and securities analysts with the same information that Knowles uses internally for purposes of assessing its core operating performance.
(2) Production transfer costs represent duplicate costs incurred to migrate manufacturing to facilities primarily in Asia. These amounts are included in the corresponding Gross profit and Earnings from continuing operations before interest and income taxes for each period presented.
(3) In 2020, Other expenses represent the ongoing net lease cost (income) related to facilities not used in operations and expenses related to shareholder activism. In 2019, Other expenses of $4.4 million represent expenses related to shareholder activism and the remaining Other expenses relate to the acquisition of the ASIC Design Business by the Audio segment and the acquisition of DITF by the PD segment. In 2018, Other expenses in Gross profit and Operating expenses represent expenses related to acquisitions and the remaining Other expenses represent an adjustment to pre-spin-off pension obligations.
(4) Under GAAP, certain convertible debt instruments that may be settled in cash (or other assets) upon conversion are required to be separately accounted for as liability (debt) and equity (conversion option) components of the instrument in a manner that reflects the issuer’s nonconvertible debt borrowing rate. Accordingly, for GAAP purposes we are required to recognize imputed interest expense on the Company’s $172.5 million of convertible senior notes due 2021 that were issued in a private placement in May 2016. The imputed interest rate is 8.12% for the convertible notes due 2021, while the actual coupon interest rate of the notes was 3.25%. The difference between the imputed interest expense and the coupon interest expense is excluded from management’s assessment of the Company’s operating performance because management believes that this non-cash expense is not indicative of its core, ongoing operating performance.
(5) Income tax effects of non-GAAP reconciling adjustments are calculated using the applicable tax rates in the jurisdictions of the underlying adjustments.
(6) The non-GAAP reconciling adjustments are those adjustments made to reconcile Earnings from continuing operations before interest and income taxes to Adjusted earnings from continuing operations before interest and income taxes.
(7) The number of shares used in the diluted per share calculations on a non-GAAP basis excludes the impact of stock-based compensation expense expected to be incurred in future periods and not yet recognized in the financial statements, which would otherwise be assumed to be used to repurchase shares under the GAAP treasury stock method. In addition, the Company entered into convertible note hedge transactions to offset any potential dilution from the convertible notes. Although the anti-dilutive impact of the convertible note hedges is not reflected under GAAP, the Company includes the anti-dilutive impact of the convertible note hedges in non-GAAP diluted average shares outstanding, if applicable.
Segment Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Audio
Revenues
Audio revenues were $591.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $682.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $91.6 million or 13.4%. Revenues decreased primarily due to lower shipping volumes related to the COVID-19 pandemic during the first half of 2020, which caused lower demand for hearing health products and MEMS in the ear and IoT markets. Audio revenues were also impacted by lower average pricing on mature products, partially offset by increased demand for MEMS in the computing markets, driven by work-from-home and remote-learning trends.
Earnings and Adjusted Earnings from Continuing Operations Before Interest and Income Taxes
Audio EBIT from continuing operations was $44.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $107.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $62.4 million or 58.2%. EBIT margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 7.6%, compared to 15.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreases were primarily due to lower average pricing on mature products and lower shipping volumes for hearing health products. Audio also experienced disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic within our manufacturing operations, which negatively impacted plant productivity. In addition, we were also impacted by higher legal expenses related to protecting our intellectual property, impairment charges, and increased restructuring charges, which were partially offset by benefits from reductions in both product and operating costs.
Audio Adjusted EBIT was $85.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $130.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $45.3 million or 34.8%. Adjusted EBIT margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 14.4%, compared with 19.1% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreases were primarily due to lower average pricing on mature products and lower shipping volumes for hearing health products. Audio also experienced disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic within our manufacturing operations, which negatively impacted plant productivity. In addition, we were also impacted by higher legal expenses related to protecting our intellectual property, which were partially offset by benefits from reductions in both product and operating costs.
Precision Devices
Revenues
PD revenues were $173.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $172.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1.1 million or 0.6%. Revenues increased primarily due to higher demand from the electric vehicle, industrial, and defense markets, partially offset by decreases in the medtech market as hospitals have reduced elective procedures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Earnings and Adjusted Earnings from Continuing Operations Before Interest and Income Taxes
PD EBIT from continuing operations was $31.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $30.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1.3 million or 4.3%. EBIT margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 18.3%, compared with 17.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increases were primarily driven by benefits of productivity initiatives, lower production transfer costs, and reduced restructuring charges, partially offset by factory overhead increases to support manufacturing capacity, higher raw material costs, and manufacturing disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
PD Adjusted EBIT was $35.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $37.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $2.5 million or 6.6%. Adjusted EBIT margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 20.3%, compared with 21.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreases were primarily driven by factory overhead increases to support manufacturing capacity, higher raw material costs, and manufacturing disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by the benefits of product cost reductions.
Financial Condition
Historically, we have generated and expect to continue to generate positive cash flow from operations. Our ability to fund our operations and capital needs will depend on our ongoing ability to generate cash from operations and access to capital markets. We believe that our future cash flow from operations and access to capital markets will provide adequate resources to fund our working capital needs, capital expenditures, strategic investments, and share repurchases. We have secured a revolving line of credit in the United States from a syndicate of commercial banks to provide additional liquidity. Furthermore, if we were to require additional cash above and beyond our cash on the balance sheet, the free cash flow generated by the business, and availability under our revolving credit facility, we would most likely seek to raise long-term financing through the U.S. debt or bank markets.
In May 2016, we sold the Notes and concurrently entered into convertible note hedge transactions and separate warrants. The Notes will mature in November 2021, unless earlier repurchased by us or converted pursuant to their terms. The Notes are unsecured, senior obligations and interest is payable semiannually in arrears. The Notes will be convertible into cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination thereof, at our election. We have primarily used the net proceeds to reduce borrowings outstanding. For additional information, refer to Note 12. Borrowings to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
On January 3, 2019, the Company acquired substantially all of the assets of DITF for $11.1 million. The acquired business provides thin film components to the defense, telecommunication, industrial, and medtech markets. This acquisition's operations are included in the PD segment. For additional information, refer to Note 3. Acquisitions to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
On December 20, 2019, the Company acquired substantially all of the assets of the ASIC Design Business for $57.9 million. The acquired business, which does not generate revenues, includes intellectual property and an assembled workforce. The acquisition’s operations are included in the Audio segment. For additional information, refer to Note 3. Acquisitions to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
On February 24, 2020, we announced that our Board of Directors had authorized a share repurchase program of up to $100 million of our common stock. The timing and amount of any shares repurchased will be determined by us based on our evaluation of market conditions and other factors, and will be made in accordance with applicable securities laws in either the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. We are not obligated to purchase any shares under the program, and the program may be suspended or discontinued at any time. The actual timing, number, and share price of shares repurchased will depend on a number of factors, including the market price of our common stock, general market and economic conditions, and applicable legal requirements. Any shares repurchased will be held as treasury stock. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased 1,078,363 shares of common stock for a total of $16.2 million.
On September 4, 2020, we entered into a new Credit Agreement (the "New Credit Agreement"). For additional information, refer to Note 12. Borrowings to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Our ability to make payments on and to refinance our indebtedness, as well as any debt that we may incur in the future, will depend on our ability in the future to generate cash from operations and financings. Due to the global nature of our operations, a significant portion of our cash is generated and typically held outside the United States. Our cash and cash equivalents totaled $147.8 million and $78.4 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Of these amounts, cash held by our non-U.S. operations totaled $101.4 million and $74.6 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
To the extent we repatriate these funds to the U.S., we may be required to pay U.S. state income taxes and applicable foreign withholding taxes on those amounts during the period when such repatriation occurs. Management will continue to reassess our need to repatriate the earnings of our foreign subsidiaries.
Cash Flow Summary
Cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities as reflected in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows are presented on a consolidated basis (including discontinued operations). Cash flows are summarized in the following table:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities in 2020 increased $4.2 million compared to 2019, primarily due to reductions in receivables and inventory, partially offset by the lower earnings and higher non-cash charges during the year ended December 31, 2020 and the reduction in accounts payable. The change in receivables was driven by the timing of cash collections while lower earnings was primarily driven by lower revenues in the current year. The change in inventory was a result of control initiatives put in place during 2020, while the change in accounts payable is a result of our timing of payments and reduced operating spending.
Investing Activities
Capital expenditures, primarily to support capacity expansion, innovation, and cost savings, were $31.9 million and $41.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The cash used in investing activities during 2020 was driven by capital expenditures to support our manufacturing capacity expansion. The cash used in investing activities during 2019 was driven by capital expenditures and the acquisitions of the ASIC Design Business and DITF.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities during 2020 is primarily related to the $16.2 million of repurchases of common stock and the $6.1 million payment of taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards. Cash used in financing activities during 2019 is primarily related to the net payments under our revolving credit facility of $9.0 million and the $6.4 million payment of taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards, partially offset by the net proceeds of $9.8 million from exercise of stock-based awards.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Free Cash Flow
In addition to measuring our cash flow generation and usage based upon the operating, investing, and financing classifications included in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, we also measure free cash flow and free cash flow as a percentage of revenues. Free cash flow is calculated as cash flow provided by operating activities less capital expenditures. Our management believes these measures are useful in measuring our cash generated from operations that is available to repay debt, fund acquisitions, and repurchase Knowles’ common stock. Free cash flow and free cash flow as a percentage of revenues are not presented in accordance with GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies in our industry. As such, free cash flow and free cash flow as a percentage of revenues should not be considered in isolation from, or as an alternative to, any other liquidity measures determined in accordance with GAAP.
Our businesses tend to have stronger revenues in the third and fourth quarters of each fiscal year. This is particularly true of those businesses that serve the consumer electronics market. Our businesses tend to have short product cycles due to the highly technical nature of the industries they serve, which can result in new OEM product launches that can impact quarterly revenues, earnings, and cash flow.
The following table reconciles our free cash flow to cash flow provided by operating activities:
In 2020, we generated free cash flow of $96.2 million, representing 12.6% of revenues, compared to free cash flow in 2019 of $82.7 million, representing 9.7% of revenues. The increase in free cash flow in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to decreased capital expenditures.
In 2021, we expect capital expenditures to be in the range of 5.0% to 7.0% of revenues.
Contingent Obligations
We are involved in various legal proceedings, claims, and investigations arising in the normal course of business. Legal contingencies are discussed in Note 15. Commitments and Contingent Liabilities to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
A summary of our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 and the years when these obligations are expected to be due is as follows:
(1) Relates to the maturity of indebtedness under our New Credit Facility and our Notes due in November 2021. Does not give effect to any early repayment of or future amounts which may be drawn under the New Credit Facility.
(2) Represents commitments related to operating and finance leases. See Note 8. Leases to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." We also have an operating lease for a facility in Santa Clara, California that has not yet commenced with total fixed lease payments of approximately $5 million, which are not included in the table above.
(3) Represents off-balance sheet commitments for purchase obligations related to open purchase orders with our vendors.
(4) Amounts represent estimated contributions under our subsidiary's non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans. See Note 16. Employee Benefit Plans to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Borrowings
In May 2016, we issued $172.5 million aggregate principal amount of 3.25% convertible senior notes due November 1, 2021, unless earlier repurchased by us or converted pursuant to their terms. Interest is payable semiannually in arrears on May 1 and November 1 of each year, commencing on November 1, 2016. The Notes are governed by an indenture (the "Indenture") between us, as issuer, and U.S. Bank National Association as trustee. Upon conversion, we will pay or deliver cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at our election. The initial conversion rate is 54.2741 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of Notes. The initial conversion price is $18.4250 per share of common stock. The conversion rate will be subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of certain specified events but will not be adjusted for accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, upon the occurrence of a make-whole fundamental change (as defined in the Indenture), we may be required, in certain circumstances, to increase the conversion rate by a number of additional shares for a holder that elects to convert the Notes in connection with such make-whole fundamental change.
On September 4, 2020, the Company entered into the New Credit Agreement, which provides for a senior secured revolving credit facility (the "New Credit Facility") with borrowings in an aggregate principal amount at any time outstanding not to exceed $400.0 million. Up to $100.0 million of the New Credit Facility will be available in Euro, Pounds Sterling, and other currencies requested by the Company and agreed to by each Lender and up to $50.0 million of the New Credit Facility will be made available in the form of letters of credit denominated in currencies approved by the issuing banks.
The New Credit Agreement serves as refinancing of indebtedness and terminates the Company's Revolving Credit Facility Agreement dated as of October 11, 2017 ("Prior Credit Facility"). The Prior Credit Facility consisted of a $400.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility.
At any time during the term of the New Credit Facility, the Company will be permitted to increase the commitments under the New Credit Facility or to establish one or more incremental term loan facilities under the New Credit Facility in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $200.0 million for all such incremental facilities.
Commitments under the New Credit Facility will terminate, and loans outstanding thereunder will mature, on January 2, 2024; provided, that if all the Notes have not been repaid, refinanced, and/or converted to common stock of the Company by August 2, 2021 (the "Springing Maturity Test Date"), then the commitments under the New Credit Facility will terminate, and the loans outstanding thereunder will mature, on such earlier date unless, from and after the Springing Maturity Test Date and for so long as the Notes have not been repaid, refinanced, and/or converted to common stock of the Company, the Company does not maintain liquidity (as defined in the New Credit Agreement) for any period of three consecutive business days of $150.0 million or more.
The New Credit Agreement includes requirements, to be tested quarterly, that the Company maintains (i) a minimum ratio of Consolidated EBITDA to consolidated interest expense of 3.25 to 1.0, (the "Interest Coverage Ratio"), (ii) a maximum ratio of Consolidated total indebtedness to Consolidated EBITDA of 3.75 to 1.0 (the "Total Leverage Ratio"), and (iii) a maximum ratio of senior secured indebtedness to Consolidated EBITDA of 3.25 to 1.0 (the "Senior Secured Leverage Ratio"). For these ratios, Consolidated EBITDA and consolidated interest expense are calculated using the most recent four consecutive fiscal quarters in a manner defined in the New Credit Agreement. At December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with these covenants and it expects to remain in compliance with all of its debt covenants over the next twelve months.
The interest rates under the New Credit Facility will be, at the Borrowers' option (1) LIBOR (or, in the case of borrowings under the New Credit Facility denominated in Euro, EURIBOR) plus the rates per annum determined from time to time based on the total leverage ratio of the Company as of the end of and for the most recent period of four fiscal quarters for which financial statements have been delivered (the "Applicable Margin"); or (2) in the case of borrowings denominated in U.S. dollars, alternate base rate ("ABR") (as defined in the New Credit Agreement) plus the Applicable Margin. The Applicable Margin for LIBOR could range from 1.50% to 2.50% while the Applicable Margin for ABR could range from 0.50% to 1.50%.
The interest rate under the New Credit Facility is variable based on LIBOR at the time of the borrowing and the Applicable Margin. In addition, a commitment fee accrues on the average daily unused portion of the New Credit Facility at a rate of 0.225% to 0.375%.
Risk Management
We are exposed to certain market risks which exist as part of our ongoing business operations, including changes in currency exchange rates, the dependence on key customers, price volatility for certain commodities, and changes in interest rates. We do not engage in speculative or leveraged transactions and do not hold or issue financial instruments for trading purposes.
Foreign Currency Exposure
We conduct business through our subsidiaries in many different countries and fluctuations in currency exchange rates could have a significant impact on the reported results of operations, which are presented in U.S. dollars. A significant and growing portion of our products are manufactured in lower-cost locations and sold in various countries. Cross-border transactions, both with external parties and intercompany relationships, could result in increased foreign exchange exposures. A weakening of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar would adversely affect the U.S. dollar value of the Company’s foreign currency-denominated sales, but would be beneficial to the cost of materials, products, and services purchased overseas. A strengthening of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar would positively affect the U.S. dollar value of the Company’s foreign currency-denominated sales, but would have a negative effect on the cost of materials, products, and services purchased overseas. Our foreign currency exposure is primarily driven by changes in the Chinese renminbi (yuan), the Malaysian ringgit, and the Philippine peso. Based on our current sales and manufacturing activity, a sustained 10% weakening of the U.S. dollar for a period of one year would reduce our operating results by approximately $17.2 million pre-tax. See Note 11. Hedging Transactions and Derivative Instruments to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for information on the Company's hedges of foreign currency exchange rate risk.
Dependence on Key Customers; Concentration of Credit
The loss of any key customer and our inability to replace revenues provided by a key customer may have a material adverse effect on our business and financial condition. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, Apple Inc. accounted for approximately 23%, 22%, and 19% of our total revenues, respectively. No other customer accounted for more than 10% of total revenues during these periods. If a key customer fails to meet payment obligations, our operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Commodity Pricing
We use a wide variety of raw materials, primarily metals, and semi-processed or finished components, which are generally available from a number of sources. While the required raw materials are generally available, commodity pricing for various precious metals, such as palladium, gold, brass, stainless steel, and copper, fluctuates. As a result, our operating results are exposed to such fluctuations. Although some cost increases may be recovered through increased prices to customers if commodity prices trend upward, we also attempt to control such costs through fixed-price contracts with suppliers and various other programs through our global supply chain activities.
Interest Rates
Borrowings under our New Credit Facility are at variable interest rates. We did not have variable rate borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are based on the application of GAAP. GAAP requires the use of estimates, assumptions, judgments, and subjective interpretations of accounting principles that have an impact on the assets, liabilities, revenues, and expense amounts we report. These estimates can also affect supplemental information contained in our public disclosures, including information regarding contingencies, risk, and our financial condition. The significant accounting policies used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements are discussed in Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." The accounting assumptions and estimates discussed in the section below are those that we consider most critical to an understanding of our financial statements because they inherently involve significant judgments and estimates. We believe our use of estimates and underlying accounting assumptions conforms to GAAP and is consistently applied. We review valuations based on estimates for reasonableness on a consistent basis.
Revenue Recognition: Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. The majority of our revenue is generated through the manufacture and sale of a broad range of specialized products and components. For product and component sales, each good sold to a customer typically represents a distinct performance obligation. Our performance obligation to provide goods to a customer is typically satisfied at a point in time upon completion of the shipping process as indicated by the terms of the contract, at which point control is transferred to the customer and revenue is recognized. We have no significant arrangements with multiple performance obligations. Remaining performance obligations consist of the aggregate amount of the total transaction price that is unsatisfied or partially satisfied. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our total remaining performance obligations were immaterial. We recognize sales-based royalty revenue under third-party license agreements as the related sales are made by licensees.
The terms of a contract or historical business practice can give rise to variable consideration, including customer discounts, rebates, and returns. We estimate variable consideration using either the expected value or most likely amount method. We include amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will not occur in a subsequent reporting period. Our estimates of variable consideration are based on all reasonably available information (historical, current, and forecasted). Rebates are recognized over the contract period based on expected revenue levels. Sales discounts and rebates totaled $4.2 million, $4.7 million, and $8.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Returns and allowances totaled $5.4 million, $6.6 million, and $7.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Inventories: Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, determined on the first-in, first-out ("FIFO") basis. The value of inventory may decline as a result of surplus inventory, price reductions, or technological obsolescence. It is the Company’s policy to carry reserves against the carrying value of inventory when items have no future demand (obsolete inventory) and additionally, where inventory items on hand have demand, yet have insufficient forecasted activity to consume the entire stock within a reasonable period. It is the Company’s policy to carry reserves against the carrying value of such at-risk inventory items after considering the nature of the risk and any mitigating factors.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets: Goodwill represents the excess of purchase consideration over the fair value of the net assets of businesses acquired. Goodwill and certain other intangible assets deemed to have indefinite lives (primarily trademarks) are not amortized. Instead, goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if there are events or circumstances indicating the carrying value of individual reporting units or assets may exceed their respective fair values on a more likely than not basis. The Company performs its annual impairment assessment in the fourth quarter of each year on October 1. Recoverability of goodwill is measured at the reporting unit level. The Company has three reporting units. The goodwill balances associated with the Mobile Consumer Electronics ("MCE"), Hearing Health Technologies ("HHT"), and Capacitors reporting units were $741.0 million, $137.8 million, and $31.2 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2020.
The impairment assessment compares the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. Impairment is measured as the amount by which the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value. Fair value is estimated using a discounted cash flow model that includes the Company’s market participant assumptions, forecasted future cash flows based on historical performance and future estimated results, determinations of appropriate discount rates, and other assumptions which are considered reasonable and inherent in the discounted cash flow analysis. Significant assumptions used in the assessment include forecasted revenue and terminal growth rates, profit margins, income taxes, and the Company's weighted average cost of capital. These assumptions require significant judgment and actual results may differ from estimated amounts. The fair value of all of the Company’s reporting units exceeded the carrying values by at least 25%, resulting in no goodwill impairment charges. Potential circumstances that could have a negative effect on the fair value of our reporting units include, but are not limited to, lower than forecasted growth rates or profit margins and changes in the weighted average cost of capital. A reduction in the estimated fair value of the reporting units could trigger an impairment in the future. The Company cannot predict the occurrence of certain events or changes in circumstances that might adversely affect the carrying value of goodwill and intangible assets.
In testing its indefinite-lived trademarks for impairment, the Company uses a relief from royalty method to calculate and compare the fair value of the intangible asset to its carrying value. This method estimates the fair value of trademarks by calculating the present value of royalty income that could hypothetically be earned by licensing the trademark to a third party. Any excess of carrying value over the estimated fair value is recognized as an impairment loss. No impairment of indefinite-lived intangibles was indicated for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, or 2018.
See Note 7. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information on goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets.
Other Intangible and Long-Lived Assets: Other intangible assets with determinable lives consist primarily of customer relationships, developed technology, patents, and trademarks and are amortized over their estimated useful lives, typically ranging from 5 to 10 years. We rely on patents and proprietary technology, and seek patent protection for products and production methods. We capitalize external legal costs incurred in the defense of our patents when we believe that a significant, discernible increase in value will result from the defense and a successful outcome of the legal action is probable. These costs are amortized over the remaining estimated useful life of the patent, which is typically 7 to 10 years. We assess future economic benefit and/or the successful outcome of legal action related to patent defense, which involves considerable management judgment and a different outcome could result in material write-offs of the carrying value of these assets. No legal costs were capitalized related to the defense of our patents during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Long-lived assets and intangible assets with determinable lives are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. If an indicator of impairment exists for any grouping of assets, an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows is produced and compared to its carrying value. If an asset is determined to be impaired, the loss is measured by the excess of the carrying amount of the asset over its fair value as determined by an estimate of discounted future cash flows.
We recorded impairment charges of $7.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to facilities in our Intelligent Audio product line. There were no impairments recorded during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. See Note 4. Impairments to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional details.
Income Taxes and Deferred Tax Balances: We record a provision for income taxes for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations using the asset and liability method. Under this method, we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the tax rates that are expected to apply to taxable income for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce deferred tax assets to the net amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
We establish valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets if, based on all available positive and negative evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In making such assessments, significant weight is given to evidence that can be objectively verified. The assessment of the need for a valuation allowance requires considerable judgment on the part of management with respect to the benefits that could be realized from future taxable income, as well as other positive and negative factors.
We have evaluated our deferred tax assets for each of the reporting periods, including an assessment of cumulative income over the prior three-year period. Since we are in a cumulative loss position in the U.S., there is significant negative evidence that impairs the ability to rely on projections of future income. Due to a lack of significant positive evidence and cumulative losses in the respective prior three-year periods, a valuation allowance was required for the 2020, 2019, and 2018 periods. It is reasonably possible that we may have a material adjustment to the valuation allowance for our U.S subsidiary in 2021.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if we believe that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. Adjustments are made to these reserves when facts and circumstances change, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results. The provision for income taxes includes the effects of any reserves that are believed to be appropriate, as well as the related net interest and penalties. The effective tax rates on a continuing operations basis for 2020, 2019, and 2018 were a 74.3% provision, 25.0% provision, and 7.4% benefit, respectively.
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Reform Act was enacted which significantly changed U.S. tax law. Since enactment of the Tax Reform Act, the IRS and U.S. Treasury Department have issued and are expected to issue further interpretive guidance that impacts taxpayers. We will continue to evaluate such guidance as it is issued and will recognize any resulting impact in the period the related regulations are enacted.
Stock-Based Compensation: The principal awards issued under the stock-based compensation plans include stock options, restricted stock units ("RSUs"), and performance share units ("PSUs"). The cost for such awards is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award. The value of the portion of the award that is expected to ultimately vest is generally recognized as expense on a straight-line basis, generally over the explicit service period and is included in Cost of goods sold, Research and development expenses, and Selling and administrative expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings, depending on the functional area of the underlying employees. The cost related to PSUs is recognized based on the expected attainment of performance targets. Changes in estimates that impact the number of shares expected to vest are recognized prospectively through cumulative adjustments.
We use the Black-Scholes valuation model to estimate the fair value of stock options granted to employees. The fair value of each RSU granted is equal to the share price at the date of the grant. The fair value of each PSU is determined using a binomial model simulation. At the time of grant, we estimates forfeitures, based on historical experience, in order to estimate the portion of the award that will ultimately vest. See Note 14. Equity Incentive Program to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information related to our stock-based compensation.