ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of Kodak for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. All references to Notes relate to Notes to the Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT PURSUANT TO SAFE HARBOR PROVISIONS OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995
This report on Form 10-K includes "forward-looking statements" as that term is defined under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
Forward-looking statements include statements concerning Kodak’s plans, objectives, goals, strategies, future events, future revenue or performance, capital expenditures, liquidity, investments, financing needs and business trends and other information that is not historical information. When used in this document, the words “estimates,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “projects,” “plans,” “intends,” “believes,” “predicts,” “forecasts,” “strategy,” “continues,” “goals,” “targets” or future or conditional verbs, such as “will,” “should,” “could,” or “may,” and similar expressions, as well as statements that do not relate strictly to historical or current facts, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. All forward-looking statements, including management’s examination of historical operating trends and data, are based upon Kodak’s expectations and various assumptions. Future events or results may differ from those anticipated or expressed in the forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause actual events or results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements include, among others, the risks and uncertainties described in more detail in this report on Form 10-K under the headings “Business,” “Risk Factors,” “Legal Proceedings” and/or “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources,” and in other filings the Company makes with the SEC from time to time, as well as the following:
•
Kodak’s ability to improve and sustain its operating structure, cash flow, profitability and other financial results;
•
Kodak’s ability to achieve cash forecasts, financial projections, and projected growth;
•
Kodak’s ability to achieve the financial and operational results contained in its business plans;
•
Kodak’s ability to comply with the covenants in its various credit facilities;
•
Kodak’s ability to fund continued investments, capital needs and restructuring payments and service its debt and Series B Preferred Stock and Series C Preferred Stock;
•
The impact of the global economic environment or medical epidemics such as the COVID-19 pandemic;
•
The impact of the investigations, litigations and claims arising out of the circumstances surrounding the DFC Announcement;
•
Changes in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, interest rates and tariff rates;
•
Kodak’s ability to effectively anticipate technology trends and develop and market new products, solutions and technologies;
•
Kodak’s ability to effectively compete with large, well-financed industry participants;
•
Continued sufficient availability of borrowings and letters of credit under the ABL Credit Agreement and L/C Facility Agreement, Kodak’s ability to obtain additional financing if and as needed and Kodak’s ability to provide or facilitate financing for its customers;
•
The performance by third parties of their obligations to supply products, components or services to Kodak and the ability to address supply chain disruptions and continue to obtain raw materials and components available from single sources of supply; and
•
Kodak’s ability to effect strategic transactions, such as acquisitions, strategic alliances, divestitures and similar transactions, or to achieve the benefits sought to be achieved from such strategic transactions.
There may be other factors that may cause Kodak’s actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements. All forward-looking statements attributable to Kodak or persons acting on its behalf apply only as of the date of this report on Form 10-K and are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements included in this document. Kodak undertakes no obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances that arise after the date made or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events, except as required by law.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Revenue Recognition
Kodak's revenue transactions include sales of products (such as components and consumables for use in Kodak, and other manufacturers’ equipment, specialty materials and film-based products), equipment, software, services, integrated solutions, and intellectual property and brand licensing. Complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting, including the allocation of transaction price to the various performance obligations and determination of the stand-alone selling price of each performance obligation. For equipment sales, revenue recognition may depend on completion of installation based on the type of equipment, level of customer specific customization and other contractual terms. In instances in which the agreement with the customer contains a customer acceptance clause, revenue is deferred until customer acceptance is obtained, provided the customer acceptance clause is considered to be substantive.
At the time revenue is recognized, Kodak also records reductions to revenue for customer incentive programs. Such incentive programs include cash and volume discounts and promotional allowances. For those incentives that require the estimation of sales volumes or redemption rates, such as for volume rebates, Kodak uses historical experience and both internal and customer data to estimate the sales incentive at the time revenue is recognized. In the event that the actual results of these items differ from the estimates, adjustments to the sales incentive accruals are recorded. Future market conditions and product transitions may require Kodak to take actions to increase customer incentive offers, possibly resulting in an incremental reduction of revenue at the time the incentive is offered.
Valuation and Useful Lives of Long-Lived Assets, Including Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Kodak performs a test for goodwill impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its’ carrying amount.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at a level of reporting referred to as a reporting unit, which is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment (a component) if the component constitutes a business for which discrete financial information is available and regularly reviewed by segment management.
As a result of the change in segments that became effective as of January 1, 2020, Kodak’s goodwill reporting units changed. The Digital Printing segment has three goodwill reporting units: Electrophotographic Printing Solutions, Prosper and Versamark, and Software. The Advanced Materials and Chemicals segment has two goodwill reporting units: Motion Picture and Industrial Films and Chemicals, and Advanced Materials and Functional Printing. The Traditional Printing segment, Brand segment and Eastman Business Park segment each have one goodwill reporting unit.
As of December 31, 2019, the goodwill balance of $12 million under the prior year segment reporting structure was comprised of $6 million for the Brand, Film and Imaging segment and $6 million for the Kodak Software segment, which had only one reporting unit (Software). The goodwill in the Brand, Film and Imaging segment was reported in the Consumer Products reporting unit.
The goodwill previously reported in the Consumer Products goodwill reporting unit was transferred to the Brand goodwill reporting unit using a relative fair value allocation to affected reporting units. Goodwill previously reported in the Software reporting unit was transferred to the Digital Printing segment and remains in its own reporting unit. As of December 31, 2020, goodwill is recorded in the Brand and Software reporting units.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Kodak estimates the fair value of its reporting units using the guideline public company method and discounted cash flow method. To estimate fair value utilizing the guideline public company method, Kodak applies valuation multiples, derived from the operating data of publicly-traded benchmark companies, to the same operating data of the reporting units. The valuation multiples are based on earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”). To estimate fair value utilizing the discounted cash flow method, Kodak establishes an estimate of future cash flows for each reporting unit and discounts those estimated future cash flows to present value.
Kodak performed a quantitative test of impairment for all reporting units for its annual goodwill impairment test as of December 31, 2020. Kodak utilized the discounted cash flow method and guideline public company method to estimate the fair value of reporting units with goodwill. For these reporting units, Kodak selected equal weighting of the guideline public company method and the discounted cash flow method as the valuation approaches produced comparable ranges of fair value. Fair values for the other reporting units were estimated using the discounted cash flow method only.
To estimate fair value utilizing the discounted cash flow method, Kodak established an estimate of future cash flows for the period ranging from January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2025 and discounted the estimated future cash flows to present value. The expected cash flows were derived from earnings forecasts and assumptions regarding growth and margin projections, as applicable. The discount rates are estimated based on an after-tax weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”) for each reporting unit reflecting the rate of return that would be expected by a market participant. The WACC also takes into consideration a company specific risk premium for each reporting unit reflecting the risk associated with the overall uncertainty of the financial projections. Discount rates of 14% to 30% were utilized in the valuation based on Kodak’s best estimates of the after-tax WACC of each reporting unit.
A terminal value was included for all reporting units at the end of the cash flow projection period to reflect the remaining value that the reporting unit is expected to generate. The terminal value was calculated using either the constant growth method (“CGM”) based on the cash flows of the final year of the discrete period or the H-model, which assumes the growth during the terminal period starts at a higher rate and declines in a linear manner over a specified transition period toward a stable growth rate.
Based upon the results of Kodak’s December 31, 2020 analysis, Kodak concluded that the fair value of the reporting units substantially exceeded their carrying values, therefore no impairment of goodwill was indicated. Impairment of goodwill could occur in the future if a reporting unit’s fair value changes significantly, if Kodak’s market capitalization significantly declines, if a reporting unit’s carrying value changes materially compared with changes in its fair values, or as a result of changes in operating segments or reporting units.
Kodak performed interim tests of impairment for goodwill as of June 30, 2020 due to the continued uncertainty regarding the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its operations, and as of March 31, 2020, due to the decline in market capitalization as of that date since the last goodwill impairment test (December 31, 2019) and the uncertainty regarding the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic at that time. Kodak utilized the discounted cash flow method to estimate the fair value of all reporting units for both tests. Kodak established an estimate of future cash flows for the period ranging from July 1, 2020 to December 31, 2024 for the June 30, 2020 interim test, and April 1, 2020 to December 31, 2024 for the March 31, 2020 interim test. The future cash flows were discounted to present value. The expected cash flows were derived from earnings forecasts and assumptions regarding the timing and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on each reporting unit as of each applicable interim test date. The discount rates are estimated based on an after-tax WACC for each reporting unit reflecting the rate of return that would be expected by a market participant. The WACC also takes into consideration a company specific risk premium for each reporting unit reflecting the risk associated with the overall uncertainty of the financial projections. Discount rates of 16% to 55% were utilized in the June 30, 2020 valuation, and 21% to 55% for the March 31, 2020 valuation, both based on Kodak’s best estimates of the after-tax WACC of each reporting unit as of the applicable valuation date.
A terminal value was included for all reporting units at the end of the cash flow projection period to reflect the remaining value that the reporting unit is expected to generate. The terminal value was calculated using either the CGM based on the cash flows of the final year of the discrete period or the H-model, which assumes the growth during the terminal period starts at a higher rate and declines in a linear manner over a specified transition period toward a stable growth rate.
Based upon the results of Kodak’s June 30, 2020 and March 31, 2020 analyses, no impairment of goodwill was indicated. No interim impairment test for goodwill was performed as of September 30, 2020.
The carrying value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset related to the Kodak trade name is evaluated for potential impairment annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired.
Kodak performed its annual test of impairment for the Kodak trade name as of December 31, 2020. The fair value of the Kodak trade name was valued using the income approach, specifically the relief from royalty method based on the following significant assumptions: (a) forecasted revenues ranging from January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2025, including a terminal year with growth rates ranging from -4.5% to 2.5%; (b) an after-tax royalty rate of 0.4% of expected net sales determined with regard to comparable market transactions and profitability analysis; and (c) discount rates ranging from 16% to 30%, which were based on the after-tax WACC.
Based on the results of Kodak’s December 31, 2020 assessment, the fair value of the Kodak trade name exceeded its carrying value. Impairment of the Kodak trade name could occur in the future if expected revenues decline or if there are significant changes in the discount rates or royalty rates. A one percent increase in the discount rate and a 10% miss in expected revenues would impact the fair value of the Kodak trade name by $3 million.
Kodak performed an interim impairment test of the Kodak trade name as of June 30, 2020 and March 31, 2020. The fair value of the Kodak trade name was valued using the income approach, specifically the relief from royalty method based on the following significant assumptions: (a) forecasted revenues ranging from July 1, 2020 to December 31, 2024 for the June 30, 2020 interim test, and April 1, 2020 to December 31, 2024 for the March 31, 2020 interim test, both valuations included a terminal year with growth rates ranging from -3% to 2.5% (b) an after-tax royalty rate of 0.4% of expected net sales, and (c) discount rates ranging from 16% to 25% for the June 30, 2020 interim test, and 23% to 32% for the March 31, 2020 interim test. The discount rates are based on the after-tax WACC.
Based on the results of Kodak’s March 31, 2020 assessment, the carrying value of the Kodak trade name exceeded its fair value and Kodak recorded a pre-tax impairment charge of $3 million. Based on the results of Kodak’s June 30, 2020 assessment, the fair value of the Kodak trade name exceeded its’ carrying value. No interim impairment test for the Kodak tradename was deemed necessary as of September 30, 2020.
Long-lived assets other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. When evaluating long-lived assets for impairment, the carrying value of an asset group is compared to its estimated undiscounted future cash flows. An impairment is indicated if the estimated future cash flows are less than the carrying value of the asset group. The impairment is the excess of the carrying value over the fair value of the long-lived asset group. Kodak updated its estimate of undiscounted cash flows for each asset group as of June 30, 2020 and March 31, 2020 using a probability weighted approach in determining the likelihood of possible adverse impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic as of each applicable interim test date. In addition, Kodak updated its estimate of undiscounted cash flows for each asset group as of December 31, 2020. Based on the results of the impairment tests, no impairments were recorded.
The value of property, plant, and equipment is depreciated over its expected useful life in such a way as to allocate it as equitably as possible to the periods during which services are obtained from their use, which aims to distribute the value over the remaining estimated useful life of the unit in a systematic and rational manner. An estimate of useful life not only considers the economic life of the asset, but also the remaining life of the asset to the entity. Impairment of long-lived assets other than goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets could occur in the future if expected future cash flows decline or if there are significant changes in the estimated useful life of the assets.
Series A Preferred Stock and Convertible Notes Embedded Conversion Features and Term Extension Derivatives
On November 15, 2016, the Company issued 2,000,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock no par value per share. On May 24, 2019, the Company issued $100 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes. The Company concluded that the Series A Preferred Stock and Convertible Notes are considered more akin to debt-type instruments and that the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded conversion features and term extension at the Company’s option (in the case of the Convertible Notes), except where the conversion price is increased to the liquidation preference in the case of the Series A Preferred Stock, were not considered clearly and closely related to the Series A Preferred Stock or the Convertible Notes. Accordingly, these embedded features were bifurcated from the Series A Preferred Stock and Convertible Notes and separately accounted for on a combined basis at fair value as two single derivatives. The Company allocated $43 million of the net Series A Preferred Stock proceeds to the Series A Preferred Stock derivative liability based on the aggregate fair value of the embedded conversion features on the date of issuance which reduced the original carrying value of the Series A Preferred Stock. The Company allocated $14 million of the net Convertible Notes proceeds to the Convertible Notes derivative liability based on the aggregate fair value of the embedded features on the date of issuance which reduced the original carrying value of the Convertible Notes. The derivatives are being accounted for at fair value with subsequent changes in the fair value being reported as part of Other charges, net in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. With the conversion of the Convertible Notes in the third quarter of 2020, the Convertible Notes derivative liability expired. The fair value of the Convertible Notes derivative was a liability of $51 million at December 31, 2019 and was reported in Other long-term liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. The fair value of the Series A Preferred Stock derivative as of December 31, 2020 was a liability of $9 million which is reported in Other current liabilities and as of December 31, 2019 was a liability of $1 million which is included in Other long-term liabilities in the accompanying Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
The fair value of the embedded conversion features derivative is calculated using unobservable inputs (Level 3 fair measurements). The value of the Optional Conversion associated with the Series A Preferred Stock is calculated using a binomial lattice model.
The following table presents the key inputs in the determination of fair value for the Series A Preferred Stock embedded conversion features derivative:
The Fundamental Change and Reorganization Conversion values at issuance were calculated as the difference between the total value of the Series A Preferred Stock and the sum of the net present value of the cash flows if the Series A Preferred Stock is redeemed on its fifth anniversary and the values of the other embedded derivatives. The Fundamental Change and Reorganization Conversion values reduce the value of the embedded conversion features derivative liability. Other than events which alter the likelihood of a fundamental change or reorganization event, the value of the Fundamental Change and Reorganization Conversion reflects the value as of the issuance date, amortized for the passage of time.
Taxes
Kodak recognizes deferred tax liabilities and assets for the expected future tax consequences of operating losses, credit carry-forwards and temporary differences between the carrying amounts and tax basis of Kodak’s assets and liabilities.
Kodak records a valuation allowance to reduce its net deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Kodak has considered forecasted earnings, future taxable income, the geographical mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which Kodak operates and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for these valuation allowances. As of December 31, 2020, Kodak has net deferred tax assets before valuation allowances of approximately $1,081 million and a valuation allowance related to those net deferred tax assets of approximately $1,112 million, resulting in net deferred tax liabilities of approximately $31 million.
Kodak considers both positive and negative evidence, in determining whether a valuation allowance is needed by territory, including, but not limited to, whether particular entities are in three-year cumulative income positions. As of March 31, 2020, Kodak determined that it was more likely than not that deferred tax assets outside the U.S. which were not offset with valuation allowances as of March 31, 2020 would not be realized due to reductions in estimates of future profitability as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in locations outside the U.S. Accordingly, Kodak recorded a provision of $167 million associated with the establishment of a valuation allowance on those deferred tax assets. During 2019, Kodak determined that it was more likely than not that a portion of the deferred tax assets outside the U.S. would not be realized due to reduced sales volumes and profits in locations outside the U.S. and accordingly recorded a provision of $19 million associated with the establishment of a valuation allowance on those deferred tax assets.
Kodak may be able to make the determination that the realization of deferred tax assets in certain foreign jurisdictions is more likely than not in the future. Kodak will continue to evaluate whether valuation allowances are needed, at a jurisdictional level, in future reporting periods. It is possible that sufficient positive evidence, including sustained profitability, may become available in future periods with respect to one or more jurisdictions to reach a conclusion that all or part of the valuation allowance with respect to such jurisdictions could be reversed.
Utilization of net operating losses (“NOL”) and tax credits may be subject to limitations in the event of significant changes in stock ownership of the Company in the future. Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, imposes annual limitations on the utilization of NOL carryforwards, other tax carryforwards, and certain built-in losses as defined under that Section, upon an ownership change. In general terms, an ownership change may result from transactions that increase the aggregate ownership of five percent stockholders in Kodak’s stock by more than 50 percentage points over a three-year testing period. The Company has a relatively high concentration of stockholders that hold 5% or more of the outstanding stock. Future transactions, when combined with reported transactions within the testing period could aggregate an ownership change during the testing period in excess of 50 percentage points. A Section 382 ownership change would significantly impair Kodak’s ability to utilize NOLs and tax credits in the U.S. As of December 31, 2020, Kodak had available U.S. NOL carry-forwards for income tax purposes of approximately $1,309 million and unused foreign tax credits of $358 million. Any impairment of these tax attributes would be fully offset by a corresponding decrease in Kodak’s U.S. valuation allowance, which would result in no net tax provision.
Kodak has deferred tax liabilities of $22 million and $19 million for potential taxes on undistributed earnings, including foreign withholding taxes, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In general, the amount of tax expense or benefit from continuing operations is determined without regard to the tax effects of other categories of income or loss, such as Other comprehensive (loss) income. However, an exception to this rule applies when there is a loss from continuing operations and income from items outside of continuing operations that must be considered. This exception requires that income from discontinued operations, extraordinary items, and items charged or credited directly to other comprehensive income be considered in determining the amount of tax benefit that results from a loss in continuing operations. This exception affects the allocation of the tax provision amongst categories of income.
Kodak operates within multiple taxing jurisdictions worldwide and is subject to audit in these jurisdictions. These audits can involve complex issues, which may require an extended period of time for resolution. Management’s ongoing assessments of the outcomes of these issues and related tax positions require judgment, and although management believes that adequate provisions have been made for such issues, there is the possibility that the ultimate resolution of such issues could have an adverse effect on the earnings of Kodak. Conversely, if these issues are resolved favorably in the future, the related provisions would be reduced, thus having a positive impact on earnings.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits
Kodak’s defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit costs and obligations are estimated using several key assumptions. These assumptions, which are reviewed at least annually by Kodak, include the discount rate, long-term expected rate of return on plan assets (“EROA”), salary growth, healthcare cost trend rate, mortality trends and other economic and demographic factors. Actual results that differ from Kodak’s assumptions are recorded as unrecognized gains and losses and are amortized to earnings over the estimated future service period of the active participants in the plan or, if the plan is almost entirely inactive, the average remaining lifetime expectancy of inactive participants, to the extent such total net unrecognized gains and losses exceed 10% of the greater of the plan's projected benefit obligation or the calculated value of plan assets. Significant differences in actual experience or significant changes in future assumptions would affect Kodak’s pension and other postretirement benefit costs and obligations.
Asset and liability modeling studies are utilized by Kodak to adjust asset exposures and review a liability hedging program through the use of forward-looking correlation, risk and return estimates.
Those forward-looking estimates of correlation, risk and return generated from the modeling studies are also used to estimate the EROA. The EROA is estimated utilizing a forward-looking building block model factoring in the expected risk of each asset category, return and correlation over a five to seven-year horizon, and weighting the exposures by the current asset allocation.
Historical inputs are utilized in the forecasting model to frame the current market environment with adjustments made based on the forward-looking view. Kodak aggregates investments into major asset categories based on the underlying benchmark of the strategy. Kodak’s asset categories include broadly diversified exposure to U.S. and non-U.S. equities, U.S. and non-U.S. government and corporate bonds, inflation-linked bonds, commodities and absolute return strategies. Each allocation to these major asset categories is determined within the overall asset allocation to accomplish unique objectives, including enhancing portfolio return, providing portfolio diversification, or hedging plan liabilities.
The EROA, once set, is applied to the calculated value of plan assets in the determination of the expected return component of Kodak’s pension expense. Kodak uses a calculated value of plan assets, which recognizes gains and losses in the fair value of assets over a four-year period, to calculate expected return on assets. At December 31, 2020, the calculated value of the assets of Kodak’s major U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans was approximately $4.1 billion and the fair value of the assets of Kodak’s major U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans was approximately $4.4 billion. Asset gains and losses that are not yet reflected in the calculated value of plan assets are not included in amortization of unrecognized gains and losses.
Kodak reviews its EROA assumption annually. To facilitate this review, every three years, or when market conditions change materially, Kodak’s larger plans will undertake asset allocation or asset and liability modeling studies. The weighted average EROA used to determine the 2020 net pension expense for major U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans was 6.00% and 3.27%, respectively.
Generally, Kodak bases the discount rate assumption for its significant plans on high quality corporate bond yields in the respective countries as of the measurement date. Specifically, for its U.S., Canadian, Euro-zone and UK plans, Kodak determines a discount rate using a cash flow model to incorporate the expected timing of benefit payments and an AA-rated corporate bond yield curve. For Kodak's U.S. plans, the Citigroup Above Median Pension Discount Curve is used. For Kodak’s other non-U.S. plans, discount rates are determined by comparison to published local high-quality bond yields or indices considering estimated plan duration and removing any outlying bonds, as warranted.
Kodak uses the spot yield curve approach to estimate the service and interest costs by applying the specific spot rates along the yield curve used to determine the benefit obligations to relevant projected cash outflows.
The salary growth assumptions are determined based on Kodak’s long-term actual experience and future and near-term outlook. The healthcare cost trend rate assumptions are based on historical cost and payment data, the near-term outlook and an assessment of the likely long-term trends.
The following table illustrates the sensitivity to a change to certain key assumptions used in the calculation of expense for the year ending December 31, 2021 and the projected benefit obligation (“PBO”) at December 31, 2020 for Kodak's major U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans:
Total pension income from continuing operations before special termination benefits, curtailments and settlements for the major defined benefit pension plan in the U.S. was $91 million for 2020 and is expected to be approximately $86 million in 2021. Pension income from continuing operations before special termination benefits, curtailments and settlements for the major non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans was less than $1 million for 2020 and is projected to be $3 million of expense in 2021.
Workers’ Compensation
Kodak self-insures and participates in high-deductible insurance programs with retention and per occurrence deductible levels for claims related to workers’ compensation. The estimated liability for workers’ compensation is based on actuarially estimated, discounted cost of claims, including claims incurred but not reported. Historical loss development factors are utilized to project the future development of incurred losses, and the amounts are adjusted based on actual claim experience, settlements, claim development trends, changes in state regulations and judicial interpretations.
A 25 basis-point change in the discount rate would have had a $2 million impact on the expense and net liability as of December 31, 2020.
Stock Compensation
Officers, directors and employees of the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries are eligible to receive awards. The principal awards issued are non-qualified stock options and restricted stock units. Stock options are at exercise prices equal to or greater than the closing price of Kodak’s stock on the date of grant and expire seven years after the grant date. Stock-based compensation awards granted under Kodak’s stock incentive plan are generally subject to a three-year vesting period from the date of grant, or a later date as determined by the Executive Compensation Committee.
Compensation expense is recognized over the service or performance period for each separately vesting tranche of the award and is adjusted for actual forfeitures before vesting. Kodak assesses the likelihood that performance-based shares will be earned based on the probability of meeting the performance criteria. For those performance-based awards that are deemed probable of achievement, expense is recorded, and for those awards that are deemed not probable of achievement, no expense is recorded. Kodak assesses the probability of achievement each quarter.
The fair value of restricted stock units is based on the closing market price of the Company’s stock on the grant date.
Kodak generally utilizes the Black-Scholes option valuation model to estimate the fair value of stock options. The expected term of options granted is the period of time the options are expected to be outstanding and is calculated using a simplified method based on the option’s vesting period and original contractual term. The historical volatility of the Company’s stock is used to estimate expected volatility. The risk-free rate is based on the yield on U.S. Treasury notes with a term equal to the option’s expected term.
Given the volatility of the Company’s stock price in the third quarter of 2020, the Company utilized a lattice-based valuation model to value time-based vesting awards granted July 27, 2020 and a Monte Carlo simulation valuation model to value options granted on July 27, 2020 which vested upon conversion of the Convertible Notes.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Carrying values of excess and obsolete inventories are reduced to net realizable value. Judgment is required to assess the ultimate demand for and realizable value of inventory. The analysis of inventory carrying values considers several factors including length of time inventory is on hand, historical sales, product shelf life, product life cycle, product category, and product obsolescence.
Accounts Receivable Reserves
Accounts receivable reserves are based on historical collections experience as well as reserves for specific receivables deemed to be at risk for collection. The collectability of customer receivables is reviewed on an ongoing basis considering past due invoices and the current creditworthiness of each customer. Judgment is required in assessing the ultimate realization of accounts receivables.
New Accounting Pronouncements
A description of new accounting pronouncements is contained in Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”.
OVERVIEW
Revenue declined $213 million (17%) from 2019 to 2020. Currency impacted revenue favorably in 2020 compared to 2019 ($9 million).
Segments within the print industry and the film industry face competition from digital substitution. Kodak’s strategy is to:
•
Focus product investment in core competency areas of print, advanced materials and chemicals, leveraging Kodak’s proprietary technologies to deliver technologically advanced products in the product goods packaging, graphic communications, and functional printing markets;
•
Grow revenues through a focus on customers across Kodak’s print divisions, increasing overall share;
•
Promote the use of film and expand the applications of Kodak’s film and chemicals to best utilize the existing infrastructure; and
•
Continue to streamline processes to drive cost reductions and improve operating leverage.
A discussion of opportunities and challenges related to Kodak’s strategy follows:
•
The COVID-19 pandemic had a material impact on 2020 revenues and earnings. The duration and extent of demand declines and recovery is unclear. Kodak has worked closely with government officials in the jurisdictions where it operates to keep its manufacturing facilities open. The manufacturing facilities have generally been operating at below normal capacity during the pandemic to date. Kodak has endeavored to address the recommended actions of government and health authorities to protect employees world-wide, with particular measures in place for those working in plants and distribution facilities. Kodak intends to continue to work with government authorities and implement employee safety measures so that the manufacturing and distribution of products during the pandemic can continue. However, uncertainty resulting from the pandemic could result in an unforeseen disruption to Kodak’s operations or supply chain. Kodak reduced operating costs, largely beginning in the second quarter of 2020, through the use of temporary furloughs and pay cuts (approximately $25 million in 2020) for its employees and direct government assistance around the world reimbursing certain salary and benefits of employees (approximately $8 million in 2020). The furloughs and pay cuts were maintained through the end of 2020 and largely ended in January 2021.
•
Traditional Printing’s digital plate products include traditional digital plates and KODAK SONORA Process Free Plates. SONORA Process Free Plates allow Kodak customers to skip the plate processing step prior to mounting plates on a printing press. This improvement in the printing process saves time and costs for customers. Also, SONORA Process Free Plates reduce the environmental impact of the printing process because they eliminate the use of chemicals (including solvents), water and power that is otherwise required to process a traditional plate. While traditional digital plate offerings are experiencing volume and pricing pressure, innovations in Kodak product lines which command premium prices, such as SONORA Process Free Plates, are expected to offset some of the long-term price erosion in the market and manufacturing efficiencies. Traditional Printing’s revenues accounted for 58% of Kodak’s total revenues in 2020. Traditional Printing’s revenues declined $135 million (19%) in 2020. The prior year period included $13 million of intellectual property licensing revenue associated with the strategic relationship established with HuaGuang in September 2019. Excluding the $13 million of licensing revenue, 2020 revenues declined $122 million, primarily reflecting volume and pricing declines. Segment earnings declined by $27 million (56%) compared to the prior year period, reflecting the license revenue in the prior year, the impact of reduced volumes on manufacturing costs and revenue partially offset by operating cost reductions through the use of temporary furloughs and pay cuts.
None of the Traditional Printing segment’s manufacturing facilities were ordered to close by governmental authorities. Many of the segment’s customers around the globe continued to operate, but at decreased volumes. Therefore, demand for the segment’s products declined. The Traditional Printing segment may also be impacted by supply chain disruptions and travel restrictions. With the decline in customer demand, manufacturing volumes were reduced. The duration and extent of demand declines and recovery is unclear. Manufacturing employees were temporarily furloughed, as necessary, under reduced production plans. The segment utilized furloughs and pay-cuts for non-manufacturing employees in a way which allowed continued operation and product development.
•
In Digital Printing, the legacy Versamark business is expected to continue to decline as a percentage of the segment’s total revenue as the Prosper business continues to grow. The Prosper Inkjet Systems business is expected to continue to build profitability, excluding the negative impacts during the COVID-19 pandemic. Investment in the next generation technology, Ultrastream, is focused on the ability to place Ultrastream writing systems in OEM and hybrid applications. Digital Printing revenue declined $52 million (18%) in 2020, primarily reflecting volume declines. Despite the revenue declines, segment earnings only declined $1 million (11%) from 2019 to 2020 driven by cost reductions.
None of the Digital Printing segment’s manufacturing facilities were ordered to close by governmental authorities. Many of the segment’s customers around the globe continued to operate, but at decreased volumes. Therefore, demand for the segment’s products declined. The Digital Printing segment may also be impacted by supply chain disruptions and travel restrictions. With the decline in customer demand, manufacturing volumes were reduced.
The duration and extent of demand declines and recovery is unclear. Manufacturing employees were temporarily furloughed, as necessary, under reduced production plans. The segment utilized furloughs and pay-cuts for non-manufacturing employees in a way which allowed continued operation and product development.
•
Advanced Materials and Chemicals revenue declined $28 million (14%) from 2019 to 2020. The segment loss improved $11 million (32%) from 2019 to 2020 due to price increases on consumer still photographic film and solvents as well as operating cost reductions. Kodak plans to continue to promote the use of film to utilize as much film manufacturing capacity as possible.
Advanced Materials and Chemicals has experienced adverse impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, most notably in Motion Picture where the industry has been heavily impacted and productions in affected regions had been suspended. None of the Advanced Materials and Chemicals segment’s manufacturing facilities were ordered to close by governmental authorities. However, each of the segment’s product lines was impacted by lowered demand and may also be impacted by supply chain disruptions and travel restrictions. The duration and extent of demand declines and recovery is unclear. Manufacturing volumes were reduced due to the customer demand decline in the near-term. Manufacturing employees were temporarily furloughed, as necessary, under reduced production plans.
•
Kodak is working to organically expand its KSM production at Eastman Business Park in Rochester, New York while exploring alternatives to obtain necessary cGMP and FDA certification to make regulated KSMs and active pharmaceutical ingredients (“APIs”) and otherwise utilize its assets and technology in the healthcare space. Depending on its assessment of the business opportunity and availability of capital, Kodak may also explore alternative means to further expand its chemical manufacturing operations for purposes of producing materials to support the healthcare industry. A portion of the capital raised by the Company on February 26, 2021 is being used to fund these exploratory activities and may be used to fund expansion opportunities that the Company considers attractive.
•
Film and related component manufacturing operations and Kodak Research Laboratories utilize capacity at Eastman Business Park (“EBP”), which helps cost absorption for both Kodak operations and tenants at Eastman Business Park.
•
Kodak plans to capitalize on its intellectual property through new business or licensing opportunities, focusing on opportunities in smart material applications and printed electronics markets and also pursuing limited opportunities in 3D printing materials.
DETAILED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Revenues from Continuing Operations by Reportable Segment
Segment Operational EBITDA and Consolidated Loss from Continuing Operations Before Income Taxes
(1)
Consulting and other costs are primarily professional services and internal costs associated with certain corporate strategic initiatives and investigations, including the divestiture of FPD and debt refinancing in 2019.
(2)
Consists of third-party costs such as security, maintenance, and utilities required to maintain land and buildings in certain locations not used in any Kodak operations and the costs, net of any rental income received, of underutilized portions of certain properties.
(3)
$6 million of income from the transition services agreement with the purchaser of FPD (“Purchaser”) was recognized in the each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The income was reported in Other operating (income) expense, net in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. Other operating (income) expense, net is typically excluded from the segment measure. However, the income from the transition services agreement was included in the segment measure.
(4)
As reported in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
Kodak increased employee benefit reserves by approximately $4 million in 2020 reflecting an increase in workers’ compensation reserves ($7 million) partially offset by a decrease in postemployment benefit reserves ($3 million). In 2019 workers’ compensation reserves increased by approximately $3 million. The increase in reserves in 2020 impacted gross profit and SG&A each by approximately $2 million. The increase in reserves in 2019 impacted gross profit by approximately $2 million and SG&A by approximately $1 million.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenues decreased by approximately $213 million compared with the same period in 2019. Volume declines and pricing and product mix within Traditional Printing ($112 million and $16 million, respectively) and volume declines in Digital Printing and Advanced Materials and Chemicals ($58 million and $42 million, respectively) drove the revenue declines. The revenue declines were offset by improved pricing and product mix in Advanced Materials and Chemicals ($14 million) and favorable mix of products in Digital Printing ($4 million) and favorable foreign currency ($9 million). The prior year period also included intellectual property licensing revenue ($13 million) associated with the HuaGuang relationship entered into in September 2019. See segment discussions for additional details.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for 2020 decreased by approximately $47 million. The decrease reflected volume declines, unfavorable pricing and product mix as well as increased costs in Traditional Printing ($13 million, $16 million and $4 million, respectively), volume declines and increased costs in Advanced Materials and Chemicals (each $11 million), volume declines and unfavorable costs in Digital Printing ($5 million and $13 million, respectively) partially offset by favorable pricing and product mix in Advanced Materials and Chemicals ($14 million), favorable mix of products in Digital Printing ($4 million) and lower depreciation and amortization expenses ($17 million). The prior year period also included intellectual property licensing revenue ($13 million) associated with the HuaGuang relationship entered into in September 2019. See segment discussions for additional details.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Consolidated SG&A for 2020 decreased $39 million primarily due to lower investment in selling and marketing activities driven by cost reduction efforts ($48 million). The temporary furloughs and pay cuts provided approximately $7 million of the $48 million reduction in 2020. Temporary government assistance programs provided approximately $3 million. Additional savings were provided by headcount reductions. The savings provided by the lower investment in selling and marketing activities was partially offset by increased stock compensation expense ($10 million) as discussed in Note 23, Stock-Based Compensation and an increase of $2 million in consulting and project costs with the internal and external investigations that started in the third quarter of 2020. The 2019 period also included $2 million of compensation related to the former CEO separation agreement while the 2020 period included increased bad debt expense primarily attributed to increased collection risk related to the COVID-19 pandemic ($3 million).
Research and Development Costs
Consolidated R&D expenses decreased $8 million in 2020 primarily due primarily due to cost reduction efforts.
Restructuring Costs and Other
These costs, as well as the restructuring costs reported in Cost of revenues, are discussed under the "Restructuring Costs and Other" section in this MD&A.
Other Operating (Income) Expense, Net
For details, refer to Note 16, “Other Operating (Income) Expense, Net.”
Other Charges, Net
The change in Other charges, net was primarily driven by the embedded conversion features derivative liability associated with the Convertible Notes. Refer to Note 14, “Financial Instruments” and Note 17, “Other Charges, Net”.
Pension Income
For details, refer to Note 20, “Retirement Plans.”
Provision for Income Taxes
The Provision for income taxes in the year-to-date period was primarily driven by the $167 million provision associated with the establishment of a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets outside the U.S. Refer to Note 18, “Income Taxes”.
Discontinued Operations
Discontinued operations of Kodak include the Flexographic Packaging segment. Refer to Note 29, “Discontinued Operations” in the Notes to Financial Statements for additional information.
TRADITIONAL PRINTING SEGMENT
Revenues
Revenues
The decrease in Traditional Printing revenues of approximately $135 million primarily reflected volume and pricing declines ($97 million and $16 million, respectively) in Prepress Solutions consumables and volume declines in Prepress Solutions service ($6 million) and equipment ($10 million) offset by favorable pricing and product mix ($2 million) in Prepress equipment and favorable foreign currency ($6 million). In addition, the prior year period included $13 million of intellectual property licensing revenue associated with the HuaGuang relationship. The volume declines were primarily driven by COVID-19 pandemic related declines in customer demand.
Operational EBITDA
Traditional Printing Operational EBITDA declined approximately $27 million primarily due to volume and pricing declines ($11 million and $16 million, respectively) in Prepress Solutions consumables, volume declines in Prepress service ($3 million) and higher manufacturing costs driven by unfavorable cost absorption from the volume declines ($10 million) partially offset by lower SG&A expenses ($22 million) driven by headcount reductions, temporary furloughs and pay cuts as well as lower aluminum costs in the current year ($8 million). In addition, the prior year period included $13 million of intellectual property licensing revenue associated with the HuaGuang relationship and $2 million of cost reductions due to retroactive exemptions from U.S. tariffs imposed on aluminum purchases in 2018. The U.S tariffs were imposed on aluminum purchases in 2018 and were included as part of the cost of plates sold in 2018.
DIGITAL PRINTING SEGMENT
Revenues
The decrease in Digital Printing revenues of approximately $52 million primarily reflected volume declines in Electrophotographic Printing Solutions consumables and service ($27 million), Electrophotographic Printing Solutions equipment ($14 million), PROSPER consumables and service ($5 million), PROSPER systems ($3 million) and Software ($4 million) as well as product mix in PROSPER systems ($3 million), all of which were driven by the decline in customer demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
There were also volume declines in VERSAMARK service and consumables ($10 million) due to both declines in the installed base of VERSAMARK systems and the COVID 19 pandemic. The declines were partially offset by improved volume and favorable product mix in PROSPER components ($5 million and $3 million, respectively) and favorable product mix in Electrophotographic Printing Solutions equipment ($2 million) and well as favorable foreign currency ($2 million).
Operational EBITDA
The decrease in Digital Printing Operational EBITDA of $1 million was driven by higher manufacturing costs in Electrophotographic Printing Solutions ($14 million), primarily due to unfavorable cost absorption from the volume declines in Electrophotographic Printing Solutions consumables and service ($4 million). There were also volume declines in Software ($4 million), VERSAMARK service and consumables ($3 million) and PROSPER consumables and service ($2 million) partially offset by improved volume and favorable product mix in PROSPER components ($3 million and $2 million, respectively), volume changes in Electrophotographic Printing Solutions equipment ($3 million), favorable costs in Software ($3 million), favorable product mix in VERSAMARK equipment ($2 million) and lower SG&A costs ($11 million) driven by headcount reductions, temporary furloughs and pay cuts.
ADVANCED MATERIALS AND CHEMICALS SEGMENT
Revenues
The decrease in Advanced Materials and Chemicals revenues of approximately $28 million is the result of volume declines in Motion Picture ($16 million) driven by productions halted as a result of the pandemic, Industrial Film and Chemicals ($11 million) primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic’s impacts on its customers, and Consumer Inkjet Solutions ($7 million) driven by lower sales of ink to the existing installed base of printers. Additionally, current year revenues for KSB declined ($5 million) primarily due to operations in Asia being impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and the prior year period included revenues from Kodakit ($4 million) which ceased operations in January 2020. Partially offsetting these impacts was improved pricing in Industrial Film and Chemicals ($13 million) driven by higher pricing in professional and consumer still photographic film and solvents.
Operational EBITDA
Advanced Materials and Chemicals Operational EBITDA improved approximately 11 million primarily due to favorable pricing ($13 million) in Industrial Film and Chemicals. Also contributing to the improvement were lower selling and administrative expenses ($14 million) driven by headcount reductions, temporary furloughs and pay cuts as well as lower R&D costs ($5 million). Partially offsetting were volume declines in Motion Picture ($5 million) and Consumer Inkjet Solutions ($4 million) as well as unfavorable cost impacts in Industrial Film and Chemicals ($8 million) and Motion Picture ($3 million) driven by unfavorable cost absorption.
RESTRUCTURING COSTS AND OTHER
Restructuring actions taken in 2020 were initiated to reduce Kodak’s cost structure as part of its commitment to drive sustainable profitability and included various targeted reductions in manufacturing, service, sales and other administrative functions.
As a result of these actions, for the year ended December 31, 2020 Kodak recorded $17 million of charges which were reported as Restructuring costs and other in the accompanying Consolidated Statement of Operations.
Kodak made cash payments related to restructuring of approximately $15 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The restructuring actions implemented in 2020 are expected to generate future annual cash savings of approximately $24 million. These savings are expected to reduce future annual Cost of revenues and SG&A expenses by $9 million and $15 million, respectively. Kodak expects the majority of the annual savings to be in effect by the end of 2021 as actions are completed.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 Kodak recorded $16 million of charges which were reported as Restructuring costs and other in the accompanying Consolidated Statement of Operations.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Kodak’s products are sold and serviced in numerous countries across the globe with more than half of sales generated outside the U.S. Current global economic conditions are highly volatile due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The conversion of accounts receivable to cash is taking longer and collection risk has increased since before the pandemic. The economic uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic is an additional complexity in Kodak’s plans to return to sustainable positive cash flow. To mitigate the economic impacts of the pandemic Kodak employed temporary furloughs and pay reductions and adjusted manufacturing volumes to meet changing expectations around production requirements.
The Company is also seeking to take advantage of any available government incentives around the world in response to the COVID-19 pandemic such as employee related tax deferrals or holidays, wage subsidies and loan programs including those under the U.S. CARES Act, although the Company has not yet been able to take advantage of any loan programs and may not qualify for any loans under the programs created under the U.S. CARES Act. Many of the available government incentives for which the Company qualifies are in the form of deferrals of payments that will be required to be paid in the future.
Cash Flow Activity
Operating Activities
Net cash (used in) provided by operating activities declined $47 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with the prior year primarily due to increased cash use for accounts payable and other liabilities, including the payment of $6 million of interest upon the conversion of the Convertible Notes, partially offset by higher reductions of accounts receivable in 2020 and lower cash operating losses. Additionally, cash used in operations in 2019 benefitted from the allocation of $10 million of the proceeds from the divestiture of FPD as consideration for a brand license, the allocation of $13 million of the proceeds from entering the relationship with HuaGuang as consideration for an intellectual property license receipt and the receipt of a $15 million prepayment for transition services, products, and other services as a part of the divestiture of FPD.
Investing Activities
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities decreased $324 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year due to proceeds from the sale of FPD in the prior year.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities improved $308 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year driven by the current year proceeds received from option exercises, the prior year repayment of the Company’s term credit agreement and the prior year payment of contingent consideration partially offset by the issuance of the Convertible Notes and the proceeds from the RED - Rochester borrowing and the current year payment of preferred stock dividends.
Sources of Liquidity
Available liquidity includes cash balances and the unused portion of the ABL Credit Agreement. The amount of available liquidity is subject to fluctuations and includes cash balances held by various entities worldwide. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, approximately $99 million and $72 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents were held within the U.S. and approximately $97 million and $161 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents were held outside the U.S.
Cash balances held outside of the U.S. are generally required to support local country operations, may have high tax costs or other limitations that delay the ability to repatriate, and therefore may not be readily available for transfer to other jurisdictions. Kodak utilizes cash balances outside the U.S. to fund needs in the U.S. through the use of intercompany loans. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019 outstanding intercompany loans to the U.S. were $449 million and $408 million, respectively, which includes short-term intercompany loans from Kodak’s international finance center of $150 million and $110 million.
In China, where approximately $34 million and $89 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents were held as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there are limitations related to net asset balances that impact the ability to make cash available to other jurisdictions in the world. On May 12, 2020, a Chinese subsidiary of Kodak transferred approximately $70 million to a U.S. subsidiary of Kodak in an inter-company transaction.
ABL Credit Agreement
On January 27, 2020 Kodak exercised its right under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “ABL Credit Agreement”) to permanently reduce lender commitments, reducing the commitments from $150 million to $120 million. As a result, the minimum Excess Availability decreased to $15 million from the previous minimum of $18.75 million. (Refer to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement section of Note 9, “Debt and Finance Leases”, for the definition of Excess Availability).
On March 27, 2020, the Company and the subsidiaries of the Company that are guarantors (the “Subsidiary Guarantors”) entered into Amendment No. 3 to the ABL Credit Agreement (the “Amendment”) with the Lenders and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative and collateral agent. The Amendment decreased the available asset-based revolving loans (the “ABL Loans”) and letters of credit from an aggregate amount of up to $120 million to $110 million, subject to the Borrowing Base.
As a result of the additional reduction in lender commitments, the minimum Excess Availability decreased to $13.75 million from the previous amount of $15 million.
The changes provided by the Amendment to the Excess Availability and Equipment Availability combined with increases in Eligible Receivables and Eligible Inventory allowed the Company to decrease Eligible Cash by $13 million at the time of the Amendment without causing Excess Availability to fall below the minimum required.
The Amendment also changed Equipment Availability from (i) the lesser of 75% of Net Orderly Liquidation Value of Eligible Equipment or $6 million to (ii) the lesser of 70% of Net Orderly Liquidation Value of Eligible Equipment or $14.75 million as of March 31, 2020. The Equipment Availability was $14.75 million for September 30, 2020. The $14.75 million amount decreases by $1 million per quarter starting on July 1, 2020 until maturity or the amount is decreased to $0, whichever comes first.
The Company had issued approximately $90 million and $80 million of letters of credit under the ABL Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Under the ABL Credit Agreement the Company is required to maintain Excess Availability above 12.5% of lender commitments ($13.75 million at December 31, 2020). If Excess Availability is below 12.5% of lender commitments the Company has the ability to fund amounts into the Eligible Cash account which will increase Excess Availability for purposes of the previous month-end compliance reporting. The Company had approximately $20 million of Excess Availability under the ABL Credit Agreement for the December 31, 2020 compliance reporting and $22 million of Excess Availability under the ABL Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2019. To maintain Excess Availability of greater than 12.5% of lender commitments ($13.75 million and $18.75 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively), Kodak funded $35 million and $22 million to the Eligible Cash account held with the ABL Credit Agreement Administrative Agent as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which is classified as Restricted Cash in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Under the ABL Credit Agreement, if Excess Availability falls below 12.5% of lender commitments, Kodak may, in addition to the requirement to be in compliance with a minimum Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio, become subject to cash dominion control. Kodak intends to continue to maintain Excess Availability above the minimum threshold which may require additional funding of Eligible Cash. In addition to Eligible Cash, the borrowing base is supported by Eligible Receivables, Eligible Inventory and Eligible Equipment. To the extent the assets supporting the borrowing base decline, if the remaining assets included in the borrowing base are not sufficient to support the required Excess Availability amount, additional funding of Eligible Cash may be required. Since Excess Availability was greater than 12.5% of lender commitments Kodak is not required to have a minimum Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of 1.0 to 1.0. As of December 31, 2020 Fixed Charges (as defined in the ABL Credit Agreement) exceeded EBITDA by approximately $37 million, therefore the Fixed Charges Coverage Ratio was less than 1.0 to 1.0. See “February 26, 2021 Financing Transactions” below for a summary of subsequent amendments to the ABL Credit Agreement.
Other Collateral Requirements
The New York State Workers’ Compensation Board (“NYSWCB”) requires security deposits related to self-insured workers’ compensation obligations. The security deposit required by NYSWCB is based on actuarial calculations of the Company’s obligations and company specific factors such as its declining workforce and reducing exposure. The NYSWCB calculation also includes a financial contingency based on the employer’s credit rating and a calculation of unallocated loss adjustment expenses. In 2020 the NYSWCB waived these charges to provide employers some relief while they endure the economic impacts of COVID. The waived security deposits amounted to $16.7 million in 2020. The increase to the security deposit required by NYSWCB in 2020, not including the waived amounts, was $14.9 million. The Company has agreed to post additional collateral of approximately $3 million for each of the next five years to satisfy the current security deposit obligation.
The collateral obligation can be satisfied by issuing letters of credit or through other means. The amount of security deposit required by NYSWCB will be re-calculated annually. Therefore, the amount of additional collateral required may change each year.
As a result of the Company’s current credit ratings, during the second quarter of 2020 two surety bond holders notified the Company they required approximately $9 million of incremental collateral.
The Company reduced the surety bond value by approximately $9 million in July 2020 with an equivalent increase to an existing letter of credit with the New York Workers’ Compensation board. The Company could be required to provide up to $3 million of letters of credit to the issuers of certain surety bonds in the future to fully collateralize the bonds.
On September 1, 2019 Kodak established a strategic relationship with HuaGuang in the People’s Republic of China. The relationship is comprised of an agreement under which Kodak sold its shares of the Kodak (China) Graphic Communication Co. Ltd. entity which included the offset printing plates facility in Xiamen, China, and related assets and liabilities, to HuaGuang, a supply agreement for HuaGuang to help Kodak fulfill customer demand and a license agreement under which Kodak licensed its plates technology, including its Sonora Process Free plates technology, to HuaGuang with the intent of expanding the plates market in China. Upon the establishment of the relationship, Kodak received net cash proceeds of $30 million, of which $13 million was received in the United States. As part of the arrangement, Kodak established an escrow of $14 million in China to secure minimum payments required under the supply agreement.
February 26, 2021 Financing Transactions
On February 26, 2021 the Company entered into a five-year Term Credit Agreement (the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”), a Series C Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”), a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”), and a Series A Preferred Stock Repurchase and Exchange Agreement (the “Repurchase and Exchange Agreement”).
The Term Loan Credit Agreement provides for an initial term loan in the amount of $225 million and a commitment to provide delayed draw term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $50 million on or before February 26, 2023. The term loan bears interest at a rate of 8.5% per annum payable in cash and 4.0% per annum payable “in-kind” or in cash at the Company’s option, for an aggregate interest rate of 12.5% per annum. The Purchase Agreement provides for the sale of a total of $100 million of Series C Preferred Stock, with an initial sale of $75 million of Series C Preferred Stock and an additional $25 million of this series of preferred stock subject to Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act clearance. The Series C Preferred Stock provides for cumulative dividends payable quarterly “in-kind” in the form of additional shares of Series C Preferred Stock at a rate of 5.0% per annum. The Securities Purchase Agreement provides for the issuance of an aggregate of one million shares of common stock for a purchase price of $10.00 in cash per share for an aggregate purchase price of $10 million and $25 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s newly issued 5.0% unsecured convertible promissory notes due May 28, 2026 to the lenders under the Term Loan Credit Agreement. The convertible notes bear interest at a rate of 5.0% per annum, which will be payable in cash on the maturity date and in additional shares of Common Stock on any conversion date. With the proceeds from these transactions, the Company repurchased one million shares of the Series A Preferred Stock under the terms of the Repurchase and Exchange Agreement for $100 million plus accrued and unpaid dividends. In addition, Kodak has issued one million shares of Series B Preferred Stock in exchange for the remaining Series A Preferred Stock. The Series B Preferred Stock provides for cumulative dividends payable quarterly in cash at a rate of 4.0% per annum. The Company received net proceeds of approximately $235 million on February 26, 2021, before fees of approximately $10 million, as a result of these transactions.
On February 26, 2021 the Company also entered into a cash collateralized Letter of Credit Facility Agreement for up to $50 million and amended its ABL Credit Agreement to decrease the commitments from $110 million to $90 million and to extend the maturity date to February 26, 2024, or the date that is 90 days prior to the earliest scheduled maturity date or mandatory redemption date of any of the Company’s outstanding term loan, convertible notes, Series B Convertible Preferred Stock, Series C Convertible Preferred Stock or any refinancing of any of the foregoing. Pursuant to the Letter of Credit Facility Agreement, the Letter of Credit Lenders committed to issue letters of credit on the Company’s behalf in an aggregate amount of up to $50 million, provided that the Company posts cash collateral in an amount greater than or equal to 103% of the aggregate amount of letters of credit issued and outstanding at any given time (the “L/C Cash Collateral”). The term of the Letter of Credit Facility Agreement is three years, subject to the same automatic springing maturity as the Amended ABL Credit Agreement. The balance on deposit as of February 26, 2021 in the L/C Cash Collateral account was approximately $49 million, of which approximately $14 million was deposited into the L/C Cash Collateral account from proceeds of the financing transactions described herein and the remainder of which was cash collateral previously used to secure letters of credit under the ABL Credit Agreement. The amendment to the ABL Credit Agreement also removed Eligible Cash from the Borrowing Base. Therefore, amounts funded into the Eligible Cash account will no longer increase Excess Availability for purposes of the month-end compliance reporting. The ABL Amendment also adds a requirement, tested quarterly, that the Company maintain Minimum Liquidity (as defined in the Amended ABL Credit Agreement) of at least $80 million, and a corresponding requirement is contained in the Letter of Credit Facility Agreement.
Other Sources/Uses of Cash Related to Financing Transactions
The holders of Series A Preferred Stock are entitled to cumulative dividends payable quarterly in cash at a rate of 5.5% per annum. Until the third quarter of 2018 all dividends owed on the Series A Preferred Stock were declared and paid when due. No quarterly dividend was declared in the third or fourth quarters of 2018 or the first and second quarters of 2019. The Company declared quarterly cash dividends in the third and fourth quarters of 2019 and each quarter of 2020 that were paid when due. In July 2020, the Company declared and paid the four quarterly dividends that were in arrears in the aggregate amount of $11 million. Due to exercises of stock options primarily by ex-employees, the Company received approximately $33 million, net of tax payments, in 2020.
Defined Benefit Pension and Postretirement Plans
Kodak made contributions (funded plans) or paid net benefits (unfunded plans) totaling approximately $17 million relating to its defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit plans in 2020. For 2021, the forecasted contribution (funded plans) and net benefit payment (unfunded plans) requirements for its defined benefit pension and postretirement plans are approximately $17 million.
Capital Expenditures
Cash flows from investing activities included $17 million for capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020. Kodak expects approximately $15 million to $25 million of cash flows for investing activities from capital expenditures for the year ending December 31, 2021, before consideration of any investment Kodak may make utilizing proceeds from the February 26, 2021 financing transactions. Kodak plans to invest some of the proceeds from those financing transactions in growth opportunities in Kodak’s core businesses of print, advanced materials and chemicals as well as corporate infrastructure investments expected to contribute to improvements in cash flow.
U.S. International Development Finance Corporation Non-Binding Letter of Interest
On July 28, 2020 the U.S. International Development Finance Corporation signed a non-binding letter of interest to provide a subsidiary of the Company with a potential $765 million loan to support the launch of Kodak Pharmaceuticals, an initiative that would manufacture pharmaceutical ingredients for essential generic drugs. The DFC Loan would be for facility upgrades and construction, provide working capital, and finance other necessary direct expenditures supporting the launch of Kodak Pharmaceuticals. The signing of the letter of interest indicated Kodak’s successful completion of the DFC’s initial screening, which would be followed by standard due diligence conducted by the DFC before financing would be formally committed. The application process for the DFC Loan was put on hold when investigations were commenced with respect to the circumstances surrounding the DFC Announcement. While the letter of interest with the DFC has never been formally terminated and the Company has not received any communication from the DFC rejecting its application, given the time that has elapsed and the recent changes in administration at the federal government and the DFC the Company is operating on the basis that the DFC Loan as envisioned at the time of the DFC Announcement will not proceed. The Company remains interested in working with the DFC and other governmental agencies to leverage its assets and technology to on-shore manufacturing of pharmaceutical and other healthcare materials. As described under “Overview” above, the Company is also continuing to explore expanding further into the pharmaceutical space on a smaller scale than contemplated by the DFC Loan using other sources of capital, including a portion of the capital raised by the Company on February 26, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In connection with the settlement of certain of the Company’s historical environmental liabilities at EBP and in accordance with the terms of the associated settlement agreement (“Amended EBP Settlement Agreement”), in the event the historical EBP liabilities exceed $99 million, the Company will become liable for 50% of the portion above $99 million with no limitation to the maximum potential future payments. There is no liability recorded related to this guarantee.
Kodak issues indemnifications in certain instances when it sells businesses and real estate, and in the ordinary course of business with its customers, suppliers, service providers and business partners.
Further, the Company indemnifies its directors and officers who are, or were, serving at the Company's request in such capacities. Historically, costs incurred to settle claims related to these indemnifications have not been material to Kodak’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Additionally, the fair value of the indemnifications that Kodak issued during the year ended December 31, 2020 was not material to Kodak’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.