Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes to those statements and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including the risks discussed in Item 1A “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Please refer to our cautionary note on Forward Looking Statements on page 3 of this Form 10-K.
We are a leading developer, manufacturer and seller of miniature displays and optical lenses (our “components”) for sale as individual displays, components, modules or higher-level subassemblies. We also license our intellectual property through technology license agreements. Our component products are used in highly demanding high-resolution portable defense, enterprise and consumer electronic applications, training and simulation equipment and 3D metrology equipment. Our products enable our customers to develop and market an improved generation of products for these target applications.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our audited consolidated financial statements. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition under the percentage-of-completion method, bad debts, inventories, warranty reserves, investment valuations, valuation of stock compensation awards, recoverability of deferred tax assets, liabilities for uncertain tax positions and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for judgments about carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions.
We adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) effective December 31, 2017 (the first day of our fiscal year 2018) and applied the modified retrospective method. Our results for reporting periods beginning after December 31, 2017 are presented under ASC 606, while prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with our historic accounting policies ASC 605. We believe the following critical accounting policies are most affected by our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
Substantially all of our product revenues are primarily derived from the sales of microdisplays, which are sold as individual displays, modules which include electronics and optics, or higher-level subassemblies for use in defense, industrial and consumer near-eye applications such as avionic helmets, thermal weapon sights or virtual reality headsets. We also have development contracts for the design, manufacture and modification of products for the U.S. government or a prime contractor for the U.S. government or for a customer that sells into the industrial or consumer markets. The Company’s contracts with the U.S. government are typically subject to the Federal Acquisition Regulations (“FAR”) and are priced based on estimated or actual costs of producing goods. The FAR provides guidance on the types of costs that are allowable in establishing prices for goods provided under U.S. government contracts. The pricing for non-U.S. government contracts is based on the specific negotiations with each customer.
Our fixed-price contracts with the U.S. government or other customers may result in revenue recognized in excess of amounts currently billed. We disclose the excess of revenues over amounts actually billed as Contract assets and unbilled receivables on the balance sheet. Amounts billed and due from our customers are classified as Accounts receivable on the balance sheets. In some instances, the U.S. government retains a small portion of the contract price until completion of the contract. The portion of the payments retained until final contract settlement is not considered a significant financing component because the intent is to protect the customer. For contracts with the U.S. government, we typically receive interim payments either as work progresses or by achieving certain milestones or based on a schedule in the contract. We recognize a liability for these advance payments in excess of revenue recognized and present it as Contract liabilities and billings in excess of revenue earned on the balance sheets. The advanced payment typically is not considered a significant financing component because it is used to meet working capital demands that can be higher in the early stages of a contract and to protect us from the other party failing to adequately complete some or all of its obligations under the contract. For industrial and consumer purchase orders, we typically receive payments within 30 to 60 days of shipments of the product, although for some purchase orders, we may require an advanced payment prior to shipment of the product.
To determine the proper revenue recognition method for contracts with the same customer, we evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as one single contract and whether the combined or single contract should be accounted for as more than one performance obligation. For most of our development contracts and contracts with the U.S. government, the customer contracts with us to provide a significant service of integrating a set of components into a single unit. Hence, the entire contract is accounted for as one performance obligation. Less frequently, however, we may promise to provide distinct goods or services within a contract in which case we separate the contract into more than one performance obligation. If a contract is separated into more than one performance obligation, we allocate the total transaction price to each performance obligation in an amount based on the estimated relative standalone selling prices of the promised goods or services underlying each performance obligation. In cases where we sell standard products, the observable standalone sales are used to determine the standalone selling price.
The Company recognizes revenue from a contract when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable.
For certain contracts with the U.S. government, the Company recognizes revenue over time as we perform because of continuous transfer of control to the customer and the lack of an alternative use for the product. The continuous transfer of control to the customer is supported by liability clauses in the contract that allow the U.S. government to unilaterally terminate the contract for convenience, pay us for costs incurred plus a reasonable profit and take control of any work in process. For contracts with commercial customers, while the contract may have a similar liability clause, our products historically have an alternative use and thus, revenue is recognized at a point in time.
In situations where control transfers over time, revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. We generally use the cost-to-cost approach to measure the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation for our contracts because we believe it best depicts the transfer of assets to the customer. Under the cost-to-cost measure approach, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation. Revenues are recorded proportionally as costs are incurred.
Accounting for design, development and production contracts requires judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating contract revenues and costs and making assumptions for schedule and technical issues. Due to the size and nature of the work required to be performed on many of our contracts, the estimation of total revenue and cost at completion is complicated and subject to many variables. Contract costs include material, labor and subcontracting costs, as well as an allocation of indirect costs. We have to make assumptions regarding the number of labor hours required to complete a task, the complexity of the work to be performed, the availability and cost of materials and performance by our subcontractors. For contract change orders, claims or similar items, we apply judgment in estimating the amounts and assessing the potential for realization. These amounts are only included in contract value when they can be reliably estimated and realization is considered probable. If our estimate of total contract costs or our determination of whether the customer agrees that a milestone is achieved is incorrect, our revenue could be overstated or understated and the profits or loss reported could be subject to adjustment.
For our commercial customers, the Company’s revenue is recognized when obligations under the terms of a contract with our customer is satisfied and the Company transfers control of the products or services, which is generally upon delivery to the customer. Revenue is recorded as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Provisions for product returns and allowances are reductions in the transaction price and are recorded in the same period as the related revenues. We analyze historical returns, current economic trends and changes in customer demand when evaluating the adequacy of sales returns and other allowances. Certain product sales are made to distributors under agreements allowing for a limited right of return on unsold products. Sales to distributors are primarily made for sales to the distributors’ customers and not for stocking of inventory. Sales, value add and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue.
The Company also licenses its intellectual property (“IP”) through technology license agreements which provides the customer the right to use our IP as it exists at a point in time. These agreements may include other performance obligations including the sale of product to the customer. The satisfaction of the Company’s performance obligation, and related recognition of revenue, occurs when the IP is delivered to the customer, the license period has begun and there are no additional performance obligations in the agreement. When the license is distinct from other obligations in the agreement, the Company treats the license and other performance obligations as separate performance obligations. Accordingly, the license is recognized at a point in time or over time based on the standalone selling price. Under certain license agreements, we may receive royalties based on the sales of the licensed product. We recognize royalty revenue upon the later of when the related sales occur, or when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). Under our current license agreements for which a royalty exists, we have recorded revenue when the related sales by our customer occurs because the performance obligation related to the delivery of the license to the customer has been satisfied.
Inventory
We provide a reserve for estimated obsolete or unmarketable inventory based on assumptions about future demand and market conditions and our production plans. Inventories that are obsolete or slow moving are generally fully reserved (representing the estimated net realizable value) as such information becomes available. Our display products are manufactured based upon production plans whose critical assumptions include non-binding demand forecasts provided by our customers, lead times for raw materials, lead times for wafer foundries to perform circuit processing and yields. If a customer were to cancel an order or actual demand was lower than forecasted demand, we may not be able to sell the excess display inventory and additional reserves would be required. If we were unable to sell the excess inventory, we would establish reserves to reduce the inventory to its estimated realizable value (generally zero).
Investment Valuation
We periodically make equity investments in private companies, accounted for as an equity investment, whose values are difficult to determine. The Company adopted ASU No. 2016-01, Financial Instruments - Overall (Subtopic 825-10): Recognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Liabilities and the related amendments on December 31, 2017. The Company adopted the measurement alternative for equity investments without readily determinable fair values (often referred to as cost method investments) on a prospective basis. When assessing investments in private companies for impairment, we consider such factors as, among others, the share price from the investee’s latest financing round, the performance of the investee in relation to its own operating targets and its business plan, the investee’s revenue and cost trends, the liquidity and cash position, including its cash burn rate and market acceptance of the investee’s products and services. Because these are private companies which we do not control we may not be able to obtain all of the information we would want in order to make a complete assessment of the investment on a timely basis. Accordingly, our estimates may be revised if other information becomes available at a later date.
In addition to the above, we make investments in government and agency-backed securities and corporate debt securities. For all of our investments we provide for an impairment valuation if we believe a decline in the value of an investment is other-than-temporary, which may have an adverse impact on our results of operations. The determination of whether a decline in value is other-than-temporary requires that we estimate the cash flows we expect to receive from the security. We use publicly available information such as credit ratings and financial information of the entity that issued the security in the development of our expectation of the cash flows to be received. Historically, we have periodically recorded other than temporary impairment losses, however we have not done so recently.
Income Taxes
We have historically incurred domestic operating losses from both a financial reporting and tax return standpoint. We establish valuation allowances if it appears more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will not be realized. These judgments are based on our projections of taxable income and the amount and timing of our tax operating loss carryforwards and other deferred tax assets. Given our federal operating tax loss carryforwards, we do not expect to pay domestic federal taxes in the near term. It is possible that we could pay foreign and state income taxes. We are also subject to foreign taxes from our Korean and U.K. subsidiary operations.
Our income tax provision is based on calculations and assumptions that will be subject to examination by tax authorities. Despite our history of operating losses there can be exposures for state taxes or foreign tax that may be due. We regularly assess the potential outcomes of these examinations and any future examinations for the current or prior years in determining the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. Should the actual results differ from our estimates, we would have to adjust the income tax provision in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known. Such adjustment could have a material impact on our results of operations. We have historically established valuation allowances against all of our net deferred tax assets because of our history of generating operating losses and restrictions on the use of certain items. Our evaluation of the recoverability of deferred tax assets has also included analysis of the expiration dates of net operating loss carryforwards. In forming our conclusions as to whether the deferred tax assets are more likely than not to be realized we consider the sources of our income and the projected stability of those sources and product life cycles.
Goodwill
We account for goodwill in accordance with ASC Topic 350. Under ASC Topic 350, goodwill is considered to have an indefinite life, and is carried at cost. Goodwill is not amortized, but is subject to an annual impairment test, as well as between annual tests when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
The Company performs impairment tests of goodwill at its reporting unit level. The goodwill valuations that are utilized to test these assets for impairment are depending on a number of significant estimates and assumptions, including macroeconomic conditions, overall growth rates, competitive activities, cost containment, Company business plans and the discount rate applied to cash flows. We believe these estimates and assumptions are reasonable and are comparable to those that would be used by other market participants. However, actual events and results could differ substantially from those used in our valuations. At December 26, 2020 and December 28, 2019, the ending balance of goodwill was zero.
Results of Operations
We have two principal sources of revenues: product revenues and research and development (“R&D”) revenues. R&D revenues consist primarily of development contracts with agencies or prime contractors of the U.S. government and commercial enterprises.
We manufacture transmissive microdisplays and reflective microdisplays. Our commercial and defense transmissive display production is being performed entirely in our Westborough, Massachusetts facility. FDD, our wholly-owned subsidiary, manufactures our reflective microdisplays in its facility located in Scotland. In 2017, we commenced development of OLED displays which are designed by us and manufactured by third parties for us.
We are a display supplier for the U.S. Army’s Family of Weapon Sights Individual program and are undergoing qualification for the FWS - Crew Served variant. We are also in development for a new series of displays for armored vehicles under the M1A2 program. The FWS, M1A2 and our existing production avionic programs are expected to increase production for the next several years. There are other firms offering products which compete against us in the defense programs and all of the programs we supply product to are subject to the U.S. government defense budget and procurement process. Accordingly, there can be no assurances we will continue to ship under our defense contracts.
We offer microdisplays and optical lenses for use in consumer, enterprise and public safety products and systems which are targeted at AR and VR markets, among other areas. We refer to the sale of microdisplays and optical lenses as our component sales. We also offer head mounted, voice and gesture controlled, hands-free headset system designs that include our components and software for consumer and enterprise applications.
Predicting our R&D revenue and related trends is challenging because we have limited ability to forecast if we will be awarded additional R&D contracts in the future as such awards depend on the U.S. military budget and priorities. We cannot assure that the R&D contracts will result in workable products or if successful our products developed under these contracts will be procured but our customers. If we do not continue to win R&D contracts or if there is no demand for the products developed under these contracts, our ability to achieve profitability and positive cash flow could be negatively affected because the R&D revenues (or the products derived from the R&D contracts) would not be available to cover the allocated overhead and selling, general and administrative costs which may remain. Some of our contracts are fixed priced and we may incur cost overruns which would result on losses on the contracts. If we incur such losses on our contracts our ability to achieve profitability and positive cash flow could be negatively affected.
Because our fiscal year ends on the last Saturday of December every seven years we have a fiscal year with 53 weeks. Our fiscal years 2020, 2019, and 2018 were each 52 week years.
Revenues. Our revenues by display application, which include product sales and amounts earned from research and development contracts, for fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018 by category, were as follows:
Fiscal Year 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year 2019
Sales of our products for Defense applications include systems used by the military both in the field and for training and simulation. Sales of our products for Defense applications may be for a one-time purchase order or for programs that run for several years. Product sales to defense customers increased in 2020 compared to 2019 due to an increase in shipments of our products into the Family of Weapon Sights Individual (FWS-I) program and the Joint Strike Fighter program. FWS-I and Joint Strike Fighter revenues increased in 2020 over 2019 by 167% and 139%, respectively.
Industrial/Enterprise applications revenues represent customers who purchase our display products for use in headsets used for manufacturing, distribution, public safety, 3D metrology equipment and other industrial applications. Our 3D metrology customers are primarily located in Asia and they sell to Asian contract manufacturers who use the 3D metrology machines for quality control purposes. The decrease in Industrial/Enterprise applications revenues in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in sales to customers who use our display components in industrial headsets, 3D metrology and safety applications.
Sales of our displays for Consumer applications is primarily for the use in thermal imaging products, recreational rifle and hand-held scopes and drone racing headsets. The decrease in Consumer applications in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to decreased demand for displays and components used in drone racing headsets.
R&D revenues increased in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to the completion of performance obligations on funded U.S. defense programs partially offset by lower revenues from OLED development contracts. R&D revenues primarily increased in 2020 over 2019 because we were awarded and commenced work on new contracts to develop technologies we believe will be used in U.S. defense programs. These contracts typically reimburse us for direct costs and allocated overhead and selling, general and administrative costs and in some cases profit. In 2020 and 2019 our R&D revenues exceeded funded R&D expenses by approximately $2.4 million and $0.8 million, respectively, and this increase aided our improved operating results in 2020 as compared to 2019.
The decrease in license and royalty revenue in 2020 compared to 2019 is due to the one-time license of IP to RealWear for $3.5 million in 2019 partially offset by royalties earned under IP license agreements.
International sales represented approximately 20% and 44% of product revenues for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our international sales are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. Consequently, a strengthening of the U.S. dollar could increase the price in local currencies of our products in foreign markets and make our products relatively more expensive than competitors’ products that are denominated in local currencies, which could result in a reduction in sales or profitability in those foreign markets. As a result, our financial position and results of operations are subject to exchange rate fluctuation in transactional and functional currency. We have not taken any protective measures against exchange rate fluctuations, such as purchasing hedging instruments with respect to such fluctuations, because of the historically stable exchange rate between the Japanese yen, Great Britain pound and the U.S. dollar. Foreign currency translation impact on our results, if material, is described in further detail under “