Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including, without limitation, those set forth in “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Kosmos is a full-cycle deepwater independent oil and gas exploration and production company focused along the Atlantic Margins. Our key assets include production offshore Ghana, Equatorial Guinea and the U.S. Gulf of Mexico, as well as a world-class gas development offshore Mauritania and Senegal. We also maintain a sustainable proven basin exploration program in Equatorial Guinea, Ghana and the U.S. Gulf of Mexico.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic that emerged at the beginning of 2020 has resulted in travel restrictions, including border closures, travel bans, social distancing restrictions and office closures being ordered in the various countries in which we operate, impacting some of our business operations. These ongoing restrictions have had an impact on the supply chain, resulting in the delay of various operational projects. Globally, the impact of COVID-19 has decreased demand for oil, which also resulted in significant declines in oil prices. The Company’s revenues, earnings, cash flows, capital investments, debt capacity and, ultimately, future rate of growth are highly dependent on oil prices. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, our operations have been impacted as follows:
•Delay to the installation of the Ghana Jubilee catenary anchor leg mooring (“CALM”) buoy. The Government of Ghana implemented certain travel restrictions pertaining to its borders. The contractor responsible for the installation and commissioning of the Jubilee CALM buoy decided to suspend operations and demobilize from Ghana. The contractor returned to Ghana during the third quarter of 2020 to continue installation and commissioning of the CALM buoy. As a result of the delay, the Jubilee joint venture incurred approximately $6 million (gross) per month conducting ship to ship transfer operations until the CALM buoy was installed and commissioned in February 2021.
•Deferral of the planned 2020 Ghana drilling program associated with the termination of the Ghana drilling rig contract. The Company did not incur material costs associated with the termination of the drilling contract and is expected to resume drilling in the second quarter of 2021.
•Deferral of the completion operations on the Kodiak in-fill well drilled during 2020 in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico. Additionally, our U.S. Gulf of Mexico infrastructure led exploration (ILX) program was suspended. The Company did not incur material costs associated with the decision not to extend the drilling contract. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company re-commenced both the completion of the Kodiak in-fill well and our ILX program with the successful drilling of the Winterfell exploration well (formerly known as Monarch) in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico. See further discussion on both operations in U.S. Gulf of Mexico update below.
•Deferral of the 2020 Equatorial Guinea drilling program and ESP program. The Company did not incur material costs associated with the suspension of the programs and expects to restart in early 2021.
•Delay of the construction of the Greater Tortue Ahmeyim Phase 1 development project by approximately 12 months, with first gas now expected in the first half of 2023. Phase 1 of the project was approximately 50% complete as of year-end 2020. This delay resulted in a significant reduction in budgeted spend in 2020 as activity and milestone payments were delayed. With the re-phasing of the project timeline, the partnership approved a revised budget and, as a result, significantly reduced our capital expenditures in 2020.
•Government of Sao Tome and Principe implemented certain travel regulations restricting international travelers from entering the country. These restrictions made it impossible for the Company to safely manage the seismic acquisition in Blocks 10 and 13. As the technical operator of the seismic acquisition, the Company declared force majeure on the seismic acquisition contract and terminated it. Thereafter, BP, as operator of Blocks 10 and 13, declared force majeure on the blocks.
•Delayed expected spud date of the Jaca exploration well in Sao Tome and Principe Block 6 from the fourth quarter of 2020. The Company's interest in Sao Tome and Principe Block 6 was subsequently sold to Shell as discussed in Corporate update below.
•Suspension of the quarterly dividend by the Board of Directors.
•Reduced Company headcount resulting in restructuring charges for employee severance and related benefits totaling approximately $16.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
•Recorded asset impairments totaling $154.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily as a result of lower oil prices arising from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Recent Developments
Corporate
During the third quarter of 2020, Kosmos entered into an agreement with Shell to farm down interests in a portfolio of frontier exploration assets for cash consideration of $96.0 million and future contingent consideration of up to $100.0 million. Under the terms of the agreement, Shell acquired Kosmos' participating interest in blocks offshore Sao Tome and Principe (excluding Block 5 offshore Sao Tome and Principe), Suriname, and Namibia, and will acquire our participating interests in South Africa. Kosmos received proceeds totaling $95.0 million during the fourth quarter of 2020 resulting in gain on sale of assets of $92.1 million, with the remaining proceeds of $1.0 million related to Kosmos' participating interest in South Africa expected to be received in 2021 upon customary approval by the government of The Republic of South Africa. The future contingent consideration is based on the outcome of the first four wells drilled in the purchased assets, excluding South Africa, and is payable upon submission of an appraisal plan to the relevant governmental authority under the relevant host government contract. Shell will pay $50.0 million for each appraisal plan submitted, capped in the aggregate at a maximum of $100.0 million.
In June 2020, the Company received $50 million from Trafigura under a Production Prepayment Agreement of crude oil sales related to a portion of our U.S. Gulf of Mexico production primarily in 2022 and 2023. The Company terminated the Production Prepayment Agreement, and the initial prepayment of $50 million advanced under the Production Prepayment Agreement by Trafigura in the second quarter of 2020 has been extinguished and converted into the GoM Term Loan as of September 30, 2020. The GoM Term Loan is a five-year $200.0 million senior secured term-loan credit agreement secured against the Company's U.S. Gulf of Mexico assets. The GoM Term Loan also includes an accordion feature providing for incremental commitments of up to $100.0 million subject to certain conditions. The net proceeds were used to pay down a portion of the Facility and to fund U.S. Gulf of Mexico working capital and general operating expenses.
Ghana
During the year ended December 31, 2020, Ghana production averaged 131,800 Bopd gross (26,900 Bopd net). Ghana production was impacted as a result of the pause to our in-fill drilling program which is planned to restart in the second quarter of 2021. Jubilee production averaged approximately 83,100 Bopd gross (19,000 Bopd net) with consistent water injection and gas offtake since the work to enhance gas handling capacity was successfully performed by the operator during the first quarter of 2020. TEN production averaged approximately 48,700 Bopd gross (7,900 Bopd net) as the NT-09 producer well came online during the third quarter of 2020.
U.S. Gulf of Mexico
During the year ended December 31, 2020, U.S. Gulf of Mexico production averaged approximately 22,800 Boepd (net) (~81% oil).
In January 2020, we completed drilling the Oldfield exploration well. The well did not encounter commercial quantities of hydrocarbon and was plugged and abandoned.
As a result of market conditions in the second quarter, the operator of the Delta House platform in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico shut-in the facility during the month of May 2020 and accelerated planned maintenance. The shut-ins were primarily limited to May 2020 and all shut-in fields were brought back online by early June 2020.
In the first half of 2020, we successfully drilled a Kodiak development well located in Mississippi Canyon Block 727 (29.1% working interest). Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company elected to defer the completion operations. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company re-commenced the Kodiak development well completion operations. The well is a subsea tieback, which is expected to be brought online through existing infrastructure to the Devils Tower SPAR in the first quarter of 2021.
In September 2020, the Tornado 4 water injector well located in Green Canyon Block 280 (35.0% working interest) commenced operations. The Tornado 4 water injector is providing pressure support for the field, increasing overall oil recovery.
In October 2020, the Company entered into a lease exchange agreement with affiliates of Ridgewood Energy Corporation in which Kosmos farmed down working interests in five blocks in exchange for a working interest in five additional blocks, including a 17.5 percent working interest in the drilling of the Winterfell (formerly known as Monarch) exploration prospect which was spud in the fourth quarter of 2020, re-commencing our ILX program in the U.S. Gulf of
Mexico. Winterfell was designed to test a sub-salt Upper Miocene prospect located in Green Canyon Block 944. In January 2021, we announced the well encountered approximately 26 meters (85 feet) of net oil pay in two intervals. We will now work with partners on an appraisal plan and development options for the discovery.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company purchased additional acreage in 8 blocks in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico from BP for approximately $5.8 million and in a related transaction, sold a portion of the acreage to affiliates of Ridgewood Energy Corporation for approximately $2.4 million.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company qualified for a suspension of federal royalties on oil production on four of our fields in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico, based on certain oil price thresholds. As a result, the Company recognized revenue of approximately $13.7 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 related to this federal royalty suspension for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Equatorial Guinea
Production in Equatorial Guinea averaged approximately 33,600 Bopd gross (11,100 Bopd net) for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In August 2020, we received approval for extensions to the current exploration phase for each of our four exploration blocks offshore Equatorial Guinea, Blocks S, W, 21, and 24.
Mauritania and Senegal
In October 2020, Kosmos withdrew from Block C6 offshore Mauritania.
Greater Tortue Ahmeyim Unit
The Tortue Phase 1 SPA was signed on February 11, 2020, resulting in approximately 100 MMBoe of proved undeveloped reserves being recognized at that time as evaluated by the Company's independent reserve auditor, Ryder Scott, LP. Due to the decrease in commodity prices during 2020 and the related commodity price utilized to calculate proved reserves for SEC purposes, the field did not have proved reserves recognition as of December 31, 2020. Phase 1 of the project is approximately 50% complete at year-end 2020 with first gas for the project expected in the first half of 2023.
Suriname
In July 2020, we provided notice that we declined to enter the final exploration phase of the Suriname Block 45 petroleum agreement.
Sao Tome and Principe
In the third quarter of 2020, we received approval for one year extensions to the current exploration phase for Block 5 offshore Sao Tome and Principe along with the elimination of the exploration well commitment from the current phase of Block 5.
Cote d'Ivoire
In May 2020, a withdrawal notice for our blocks offshore Cote d'Ivoire was issued to partners and the Government of Cote d'Ivoire.
Republic of the Congo
In February 2020, notice of withdrawal from the approval process awarding Kosmos' interest in the offshore Marine XXI block was issued to the Republic of the Congo.
The Republic of South Africa
In January 2021, a 2D seismic survey was acquired over Northern Cape Ultra Deep of approximately 500 line kilometers, fulfilling the current phase work commitment.
Results of Operations
All of our results, as presented in the table below, represent operations from the Jubilee and TEN fields in Ghana, the U.S. Gulf of Mexico (commencing September 14, 2018, the DGE acquisition date), and Equatorial Guinea, which was accounted for as an equity method investment during 2018. Certain operating results and statistics for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are included in the following tables. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, please refer to Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
______________________________________
(1)For the year ended December 31, 2018, we have presented our 50% share of the results of operations, including our basis difference which is reflected in depletion, depreciation and amortization. Under the equity method of accounting, we only recognize our share of the net income of KTIPI as adjusted for our basis differential, which is recorded in (Gain) loss on equity method investments, net in the consolidated statement of operations.
The discussion of the results of operations and the period-to-period comparisons presented below analyze our historical results. The following discussion may not be indicative of future results.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 vs. 2019
Oil and gas revenue. Oil and gas revenue decreased by $695.4 million as a result of lower production across our assets and lower oil prices stemming from the excess market supplies related to the COVID-19 pandemic. We sold 22,111 MBoe at an average realized price per barrel of oil equivalent of $36.36 in 2020 and 24,933 MBoe at an average realized price per barrel of oil equivalent of $60.14 in 2019.
Gain on sale of assets. In December 2020, we closed a farm-out agreement with Shell for a portfolio of frontier exploration assets in blocks offshore Sao Tome and Principe, Suriname, and Namibia. As part of the transaction, we received proceeds in excess of our book basis resulting in a gain of approximately $92.1 million. In November 2019, we closed a farm-out agreement with Shell for Blocks 6 and 11 offshore Sao Tome and Principe. As part of the transaction, we received proceeds in excess of our book basis resulting in a gain of $10.5 million.
Oil and gas production. Oil and gas production costs decreased by $64.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of cost reductions and lower workover costs in the current period.
Facilities insurance modifications, net. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $13.2 million of facilities insurance modification costs associated with the long-term solution to the Jubilee turret bearing issue versus $47.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, these costs were offset by zero hull and machinery insurance proceeds in 2020 and $71.5 million in 2019 as a result of final settlement of the insurance claim.
Exploration expenses. Exploration expenses decreased by $96.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily a result of lower unsuccessful well costs, geological, geophysical and seismic costs incurred in 2020 versus the prior period related to the U.S. Gulf of Mexico business unit.
General and administrative. General and administrative costs decreased by $37.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily a result of lower headcount and other cost reductions.
Depletion, depreciation and amortization. Depletion, depreciation and amortization decreased $78.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily as a result of lower sales volumes during the current period and a lower cost basis in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico associated with an impairment recorded in the first quarter of 2020.
Impairment of long-lived assets. As a result of the impact of COVID-19 on the demand for oil and the related significant decrease in oil prices, we recorded asset impairments totaling $154.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 for oil and gas proved properties in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico.
Interest and other financing costs, net. Interest and other financing costs, net decreased by $45.3 million primarily a result of no refinancing costs in 2020 as compared to the $24.8 million loss on extinguishment of debt primarily associated with the refinancing of our senior secured notes recorded during the second quarter of 2019 and lower interest rates during the current year as compared to the prior year.
Derivatives, net. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded a loss of $17.2 million and $71.9 million, respectively, on our outstanding hedge positions. The losses recorded were a result of changes in the forward curve of oil prices during the respective periods.
Other expenses, net. Other expenses, net increased $13.2 million primarily related to restructuring charges for employee severance and related benefit costs and inventory write downs.
Income tax expense (benefit). For the year ended December 31, 2020, our overall effective tax rate was impacted by: increases to our valuation allowance associated with our U.S. deferred tax assets; by the 35% statutory tax rates applicable to our Ghanaian and Equatorial Guinean operations; and by our exploration operations in tax-exempt jurisdictions or in taxable jurisdictions where we have valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets, and therefore, we do not realize any tax benefit on such losses or expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We are actively engaged in an ongoing process of anticipating and meeting our funding requirements related to our strategy as a full-cycle exploration and production company. We have historically met our funding requirements through cash flows generated from our operating activities and obtained additional funding from issuances of equity and debt, as well as partner carries.
Current oil prices are volatile and could negatively impact our ability to generate sufficient operating cash flows to meet our funding requirements. This volatility could result in wide fluctuations in future oil prices, which could impact our ability to comply with our financial covenants. To partially mitigate this price volatility, we maintain an active hedging program and review our capital spending program on a regular basis. Our investment decisions are based on longer-term commodity prices based on the nature of our projects and development plans. Current commodity prices, combined with our hedging program, planned asset sales and our current liquidity position support our capital program for 2021.
As such, our 2021 capital budget is based on our exploitation and production plans for Ghana, Equatorial Guinea and the U.S. Gulf of Mexico, our infrastructure-led exploration program in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico, and our appraisal and development activities in Mauritania and Senegal.
Our future financial condition and liquidity can be impacted by, among other factors, the success of our exploitation, exploration and appraisal drilling programs, the number of commercially viable oil and natural gas discoveries made and the quantities of oil and natural gas discovered, the speed with which we can bring such discoveries to production, the reliability of our oil and gas production facilities, our ability to continuously export oil and gas, our ability to secure and maintain partners and their alignment with respect to capital plans, the actual cost of exploitation, exploration, appraisal and development of our oil and natural gas assets, and coverage of any claims under our insurance policies.
In April 2020, following the lenders' annual redetermination, the available borrowing base and Facility size were both reduced from $1.6 billion to approximately $1.5 billion. In addition, as part of the April 2020 redetermination process, the Company agreed to conduct an additional redetermination in September 2020. In October 2020, as a result of the September redetermination, the available borrowing base was reduced to approximately $1.32 billion and the Company agreed to conduct
semi-annual redeterminations in March and September, beginning in 2021. The borrowing base calculation includes value related to the Jubilee, TEN, Ceiba and Okume fields.
In September 2020, the Company entered into a five-year $200.0 million senior secured term-loan credit agreement secured against the Company's U.S. Gulf of Mexico assets. The GoM Term Loan also includes an accordion feature providing for incremental commitments of up to $100.0 million subject to certain conditions.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The following table presents the sources and uses of our cash and cash equivalents for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Net cash provided by operating activities. Net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 was $196.1 million compared with net cash provided by operating activities of $628.2 million in 2019 and $260.5 million in 2018, respectively. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019 is primarily a result of lower production across our assets and lower oil prices stemming from the excess market supplies related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in cash provided by operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 when compared to the same period in 2018 is primarily a result of the inclusion of a full year of our U.S. Gulf of Mexico business unit during the year ended December 31, 2019 related to the DGE acquisition, which was completed during the third quarter of 2018. It is also the result of the inclusion of operations from Equatorial Guinea on a consolidated basis for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was previously accounted for as an equity method investment.
The following table presents our liquidity and financial position as of December 31, 2020:
Capital Expenditures and Investments
We expect to incur capital costs as we:
•drill additional wells and execute exploitation activities in Ghana, Equatorial Guinea and in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico;
•execute infrastructure-led exploration efforts in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico and Equatorial Guinea; and
•execute appraisal, exploration and development activities in Mauritania and Senegal;
We have relied on a number of assumptions in budgeting for our future activities. These include the number of wells we plan to drill, our participating, paying and carried interests in our prospects including disproportionate payment amounts, the costs involved in developing or participating in the development of a prospect, the timing of third-party projects, the availability of suitable equipment and qualified personnel and our cash flows from operations. We also evaluate potential corporate and asset acquisition opportunities to support and expand our asset portfolio, which may impact our budget assumptions. These assumptions are inherently subject to significant business, political, economic, regulatory, health, environmental and competitive uncertainties, contingencies and risks, all of which are difficult to predict and many of which are beyond our control. We may need to raise additional funds more quickly if market conditions deteriorate; or one or more of our assumptions proves to be incorrect, or if we choose to expand our acquisition, exploration, appraisal, development efforts or any other activity more rapidly than we presently anticipate. We may decide to raise additional funds before we need them if the conditions for raising capital are favorable. We may seek to sell assets, equity or debt securities or obtain additional bank credit facilities. The sale of equity securities could result in dilution to our shareholders. The incurrence of additional indebtedness could result in increased fixed obligations and additional covenants that could restrict our operations.
2021 Capital Program
We estimate we will spend approximately $225 - $275 million of capital, excluding amounts related to Mauritania and Senegal, for the year ending December 31, 2021. This capital expenditure budget consists of:
•Approximately 80% related to exploitation and production optimization activities across our Ghana, Equatorial Guinea and U.S. Gulf of Mexico assets
•Approximately 20% related to our infrastructure-led exploration and development activities in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico
In Mauritania and Senegal we estimate capital expenditures of approximately $350 million based on our current ownership interest, excluding the impact of the planned Greater Tortue FPSO sale, which we estimate to be approximately $250 million. We expect to fund the remainder of this expenditure from working capital and proceeds from the refinancing of the Carry Advance Agreements with the national oil companies of Mauritania and Senegal.
The ultimate amount of capital we will spend may fluctuate materially based on market conditions and the success of our exploitation and drilling results among other factors. Our future financial condition and liquidity will be impacted by,
among other factors, our level of production of oil and the prices we receive from the sale of oil, our ability to effectively hedge future production volumes, the success of our multi-faceted infrastructure-led exploration and appraisal drilling programs, the number of commercially viable oil and natural gas discoveries made and the quantities of oil and natural gas discovered, the speed with which we can bring such discoveries to production, our partners’ alignment with respect to capital plans, and the actual cost of exploitation, exploration, appraisal and development of our oil and natural gas assets, and coverage of any claims under our insurance policies.
Significant Sources of Capital
Facility
The Facility supports our oil and gas exploration, appraisal and development programs and corporate activities with a borrowing base calculation that includes value related to the Jubilee, TEN, Ceiba and Okume fields. In February 2018, the Company amended and restated the Facility with a total commitment of $1.5 billion from a number of financial institutions with additional commitments up to $0.5 billion being available if the existing financial institutions increase their commitments or if commitments from new financial institutions are added. In November 2018, the Company exercised its option with existing financial institutions to provide the Company with an additional commitment of $100 million in the aggregate under the Facility taking total commitments to $1.6 billion. In December 2018, the Company entered into letter agreements with existing financial institutions, which provided the Company with an additional commitment of $100 million in the aggregate under the Facility effective January 31, 2019. This took the total commitments to $1.7 billion as of January 31, 2019. The commitments were reduced by $100.0 million to $1.6 billion following the Senior Notes issuance in April 2019. In April 2020, following the lenders' annual redetermination, the available borrowing base and Facility size were both reduced from $1.6 billion to approximately $1.5 billion. In addition, as part of the April 2020 redetermination process, the Company agreed to conduct an additional redetermination in September 2020. As a result, in October 2020, the available borrowing base was reduced to approximately $1.32 billion. The Company made repayments totaling $250 million during the fourth quarter of 2020. Additionally, the Company agreed to conduct semi-annual redeterminations every March and September, beginning with March 2021. When our net leverage ratio exceeds 2.50x, we are required under the Facility to maintain a restricted cash balance that is sufficient to meet the payment of interest and fees for the next six-month period on the 7.125% Senior Notes plus the Corporate Revolver or the Facility, whichever is greater. As of December 31, 2020, we exceeded this ratio and restricted approximately $28.5 million in cash to meet our requirements in January 2021.
As of December 31, 2020, borrowings under the Facility totaled $1.2 billion and the undrawn availability under the Facility was $120.0 million, which includes the additional commitments as referenced above.
Interest is the aggregate of the applicable margin (3.25% to 4.50%, depending on the length of time that has passed from the date the Facility was entered into) and LIBOR. Interest is payable on the last day of each interest period (and, if the interest period is longer than six months, on the dates falling at six-month intervals after the first day of the interest period). We pay commitment fees on the undrawn and unavailable portion of the total commitments, if any. Commitment fees are equal to 30% per annum of the then-applicable respective margin when a commitment is available for utilization and, equal to 20% per annum of the then-applicable respective margin when a commitment is not available for utilization. We recognize interest expense in accordance with ASC 835-Interest, which requires interest expense to be recognized using the effective interest method. We determined the effective interest rate based on the estimated level of borrowings under the Facility.
The Facility provides a revolving credit and letter of credit facility. The availability period for the revolving credit facility expires one month prior to the final maturity date. The letter of credit facility expires on the final maturity date. The available facility amount is subject to borrowing base constraints and, beginning on March 31, 2022, outstanding borrowings will be constrained by an amortization schedule. The Facility has a final maturity date of March 31, 2025. As of December 31, 2020, we had no letters of credit issued under the Facility.
We have the right to cancel all the undrawn commitments under the amended and restated Facility. The amount of funds available to be borrowed under the Facility, also known as the borrowing base amount, is determined each year on March 31. In October 2020, the Company agreed to conduct semi-annual redeterminations every March and September, beginning with March 2021. The borrowing base amount is based on the sum of the net present values of net cash flows and relevant capital expenditures reduced by certain percentages as well as value attributable to certain assets’ reserves and/or resources in Ghana and Equatorial Guinea.
If an event of default exists under the Facility, the lenders can accelerate the maturity and exercise other rights and remedies, including the enforcement of security granted pursuant to the Facility over certain assets held by our subsidiaries. The Facility contains customary cross default provisions.
We were in compliance with the financial covenants below contained in the Facility as of September 30, 2020 (the most recent assessment date), which requires the maintenance of:
•the field life cover ratio (as defined in the glossary), not less than 1.30x; and
•the loan life cover ratio (as defined in the glossary), not less than 1.10x; and
•the interest cover ratio (as defined in the glossary), not less than 2.25x.
•the debt cover ratio (as defined in the glossary), amended as described below:
As result of the impact of COVID-19 on the demand for oil and the related significant decrease in oil prices, our ability to comply with one of our financial covenants, the debt cover ratio, may be impacted in future periods. Therefore, in July 2020, we proactively worked with our lender group, prior to any inability to comply with the financial covenants thereunder, to amend the debt cover ratio calculation through December 31, 2021. The amendment makes this covenant less restrictive during the stated period up to a maximum of 4.75x and thereafter gradually returns to the originally agreed upon ratio of 3.5x. The Facility contains customary cross default provisions.
Corporate Revolver
In August 2018, we amended and restated the Corporate Revolver maintaining the borrowing capacity at $400.0 million, extending the maturity date from November 2018 to May 2022 and lowering the margin 100 basis points to 5%. This results in lower commitment fees on the undrawn portion of the total commitments, which is 30% per annum of the respective margin. The Corporate Revolver is available for general corporate purposes and for oil and gas exploration, appraisal and development programs.
As of December 31, 2020, there were $100.0 million in outstanding borrowings under the Corporate Revolver and the undrawn availability under the Corporate Revolver was $300.0 million.
Interest is the aggregate of the applicable margin (5.0%); LIBOR; and mandatory cost (if any, as defined in the Corporate Revolver). Interest is payable on the last day of each interest period (and, if the interest period is longer than six months, on the dates falling at six-month intervals after the first day of the interest period). We pay commitment fees on the undrawn portion of the total commitments. Commitment fees for the lenders are equal to 30% per annum of the respective margin when a commitment is available for utilization.
The Corporate Revolver expires on May 31, 2022. The available amount is not subject to borrowing base constraints. We have the right to cancel all the undrawn commitments under the Corporate Revolver. We are required to repay certain amounts due under the Corporate Revolver with sales of certain subsidiaries or sales of certain assets. If an event of default exists under the Corporate Revolver, the lenders can accelerate the maturity and exercise other rights and remedies, including the enforcement of security granted pursuant to the Corporate Revolver over certain assets held by us.
We were in compliance with the financial covenants below contained in the Corporate Revolver as of September 30, 2020 (the most recent assessment date), which requires the maintenance of:
•the interest cover ratio (as defined in the glossary), not less than 2.25x.
•the debt cover ratio (as defined in the glossary), amended as described below:
As result of the impact of COVID-19 on the demand for oil and the related significant decrease in oil prices, our ability to comply with one of our financial covenants, the debt cover ratio, may be impacted in future periods. Therefore, in July 2020, we proactively worked with our lender group, prior to any inability to comply with the financial covenants thereunder, to amend the debt cover ratio calculation through December 31, 2021. The amendment makes this covenant less restrictive during the stated period up to a maximum of 4.75x and thereafter gradually returns to the originally agreed upon ratio of 3.5x. The Corporate Revolver contains customary cross default provisions.
The U.S. and many foreign economies continue to experience uncertainty driven by varying macroeconomic conditions. Although some of these economies have shown signs of improvement, macroeconomic recovery remains uneven. Uncertainty in the macroeconomic environment and associated global economic conditions have resulted in extreme volatility in credit, equity, and foreign currency markets, including the European sovereign debt markets and volatility in various other markets. If any of the financial institutions within our Facility or Corporate Revolver are unable to perform on their commitments, our liquidity could be impacted. We actively monitor all of the financial institutions participating in our Facility and Corporate Revolver. None of the financial institutions have indicated to us that they may be unable to perform on their
commitments. In addition, we periodically review our banking and financing relationships, considering the stability of the institutions and other aspects of the relationships. Based on our monitoring activities, we currently believe our banks will be able to perform on their commitments.
7.875% Senior Secured Notes due 2021
In April 2019, all of the Senior Secured Notes were redeemed for $543.8 million, including accrued interest and the early redemption premium. The redemption resulted in a $22.9 million loss on extinguishment of debt, which is included in Interest and other financing costs, net on the consolidated statement of operations.
7.125% Senior Notes due 2026
In April 2019, the Company issued $650.0 million of 7.125% Senior Notes and received net proceeds of approximately $640.0 million after deducting commissions and other expenses. We used the net proceeds to redeem all of the Senior Secured Notes, repay a portion of the outstanding indebtedness under the Corporate Revolver and pay fees and expenses related to the redemption, repayment and the issuance of the Senior Notes.
The Senior Notes mature on April 4, 2026. We will pay interest in arrears on the Senior Notes each April 4 and October 4, commencing on October 4, 2019. The Senior Notes are senior, unsecured obligations of Kosmos Energy Ltd. and rank equal in right of payment with all of its existing and future senior indebtedness (including all borrowings under the Corporate Revolver) and rank effectively junior in right of payment to all of its existing and future secured indebtedness (including all borrowings under the Facility). The Senior Notes are guaranteed on a senior, unsecured basis by certain subsidiaries owning the Company's U.S. Gulf of Mexico assets, and on a subordinated, unsecured basis by certain subsidiaries that guarantee the Facility.
At any time prior to April 4, 2022, and subject to certain conditions, the Company may, on one or more occasions, redeem up to 40% of the original principal amount of the Senior Notes with an amount not to exceed the net cash proceeds of certain equity offerings at a redemption price of 107.1% of the outstanding principal amount of the Senior Notes, together with accrued and unpaid interest and premium, if any, to, but excluding, the date of redemption. Additionally, at any time prior to April 4, 2022 the Company may, on any one or more occasions, redeem all or a part of the Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to 100%, plus any accrued and unpaid interest, and plus a “make-whole” premium. On or after April 4, 2022, the Company may redeem all or a part of the Senior Notes at the redemption prices (expressed as percentages of principal amount) set forth below plus accrued and unpaid interest:
We may also redeem the Senior Notes in whole, but not in part, at any time if changes in tax laws impose certain withholding taxes on amounts payable on the Senior Notes at a price equal to the principal amount of the Senior Notes plus accrued interest and additional amounts, if any, as may be necessary so that the net amount received by each holder after any withholding or deduction on payments of the Senior Notes will not be less than the amount such holder would have received if such taxes had not been withheld or deducted.
Upon the occurrence of a change of control triggering event as defined under the Senior Notes indenture, the Company will be required to make an offer to repurchase the Senior Notes at a repurchase price equal to 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of repurchase.
If we sell assets, under certain circumstances outlined in the Senior Notes indenture, we will be required to use the net proceeds to make an offer to purchase the Senior Notes at an offer price in cash in an amount equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Senior Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the repurchase date.
The Senior Notes indenture restricts our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to, among other things: incur or guarantee additional indebtedness, create liens, pay dividends or make distributions in respect of capital stock, purchase or redeem capital stock, make investments or certain other restricted payments, sell assets, enter into agreements that restrict the ability of our subsidiaries to make dividends or other payments to us, enter into transactions with affiliates, or effect certain consolidations, mergers or amalgamations. These covenants are subject to a number of important qualifications and exceptions. Certain of these covenants will be terminated if the Senior Notes are assigned an investment grade rating by both Standard & Poor’s Rating Services and Fitch Ratings Inc. and no default or event of default has occurred and is continuing.
Production Prepayment Agreement, net
In June 2020, the Company received $50 million from Trafigura under a Production Prepayment Agreement of crude oil sales related to a portion of our U.S. Gulf of Mexico production primarily in 2022 and 2023. The Company has terminated the Production Prepayment Agreement and the initial prepayment of $50 million advanced under the Production Prepayment Agreement by Trafigura in the second quarter of 2020 has been extinguished and converted into the GoM Term Loan as of September 30, 2020.
GoM Term Loan
In September 2020, the Company entered into a five-year $200 million senior secured term-loan credit agreement secured against the Company's U.S. Gulf of Mexico assets with net proceeds received of $197.7 million after deducting fees and other expenses. The GoM Term Loan also includes an accordion feature providing for incremental commitments of up to $100 million subject to certain conditions. The net proceeds will be used to pay down a portion of the Facility and to fund U.S. Gulf of Mexico working capital and general operating expenses. The $50 million advanced under the Production Prepayment Agreement with Trafigura in the second quarter of 2020 has been extinguished and converted as part of the GoM Term Loan with the remaining $150 million provided by an affiliate of Beal Bank. The GoM Term Loan bears interest at an effective rate of approximately 6% per annum and matures in 2025, with principal repayments beginning in the fourth quarter of 2021.
The GoM Term Loan contains customary affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants that affect our ability to incur additional indebtedness, create liens, merge, dispose of assets, and make distributions, dividends, investments or capital expenditures, among other things. The GoM Term Loan is guaranteed on a senior, secured basis by certain subsidiaries owning the Company's U.S. Gulf of Mexico assets.
The GoM Term Loan includes certain representations and warranties, indemnities and events of default that, subject to certain materiality thresholds and grace periods, arise as a result of a payment default, failure to comply with covenants, material inaccuracy of representation or warranty, and certain bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings. If there is an event of default, all or any portion of the outstanding indebtedness may be immediately due and payable and other rights may be exercised including against the collateral.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes by period the payments due for our estimated contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
______________________________________
(1)Includes the scheduled maturities for the $650.0 million aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes and borrowings under the Facility, Corporate Revolver and GoM Term Loan. The scheduled maturities of debt related to the Facility are based on, as of December 31, 2020, our level of borrowings and our estimated future available borrowing base commitment levels in future periods. Any increases or decreases in the level of borrowings or increases or decreases in the available borrowing base would impact the scheduled maturities of debt during the next five years and thereafter.
(2)Based on outstanding borrowings as noted in (1) above and the LIBOR yield curves or benchmark rate at the reporting date and commitment fees related to the Facility and Corporate Revolver and interest on the Senior Notes.
(3)Primarily relates to corporate office and foreign office leases.
(4)Does not include purchase commitments for jointly owned fields and facilities where we are not the operator and excludes commitments for exploration activities, including well commitments and seismic obligations, in our petroleum contracts. The Company's liabilities for asset retirement obligations associated with the dismantlement,
abandonment and restoration costs of oil and gas properties are not included. See Note 11 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information regarding these liabilities.
We currently have a commitment to drill two exploration wells and approximately 1,000 square kilometer 3D seismic acquisition requirement in Mauritania. In South Africa, as of December 31, 2020, we had 2D seismic acquisition requirements of approximately 500 line kilometers, which was acquired in January 2021.
In February 2019, Kosmos and BP signed Carry Advance Agreements with the national oil companies of Mauritania and Senegal, which obligate us separately to finance the respective national oil company’s share of certain development costs. Kosmos’ total share for the two agreements combined is up to $239.7 million, which is to be repaid through the national oil companies’ share of future revenues.
The following table presents maturities by expected debt maturity dates, the weighted-average interest rates expected to be paid on the Facility, Corporate Revolver and GoM Term Loan given current contractual terms and market conditions, and the instrument’s estimated fair value. Weighted-average interest rates are based on implied forward rates in the yield curve at the reporting date. This table does not take into account amortization of deferred financing costs.
______________________________________
(1)The amounts included in the table represent principal maturities only. The scheduled maturities of debt are based on the level of borrowings and the available borrowing base as of December 31, 2020. Any increases or decreases in the level of borrowings or increases or decreases in the available borrowing base would impact the scheduled maturities of debt during the next five years and thereafter.
(2)Based on outstanding borrowings as noted in (1) above and the LIBOR yield curves or benchmark rate plus applicable margin at the reporting date. Excludes commitment fees related to the Facility and Corporate Revolver.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We may enter into off-balance sheet arrangements and transactions that can give rise to material off-balance sheet obligations. As of December 31, 2020, our off-balance sheet arrangements and transactions include short-term operating leases and undrawn letters of credit. There are no other transactions, arrangements, or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons that are reasonably likely to materially affect Kosmos’ liquidity or availability of or requirements for capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies
This discussion of financial condition and results of operations is based upon the information reported in our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make assumptions and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date the financial statements are available to be issued. These estimates could change materially if different information or
assumptions were used. We base our assumptions and estimates on historical experience and other sources that we believe to be reasonable at the time. Actual results may vary from our estimates. Our significant accounting policies are detailed in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 2-Accounting Policies.” We have outlined below certain accounting policies that are of particular importance to the presentation of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment or estimates by our management.
Revenue Recognition. We recognize revenues on the volumes of hydrocarbons sold to a purchaser. The volumes sold may be more or less than the volumes to which we are entitled based on our ownership interest in the property. These differences result in a condition known in the industry as a production imbalance. A receivable or liability is recognized only to the extent that we have an imbalance on a specific property greater than the expected remaining proved reserves on such property. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no oil and gas imbalances recorded in our consolidated financial statements.
Our oil and gas revenues are recognized when hydrocarbons have been sold to a purchaser at a fixed or determinable price, title has transferred and collection is probable. Certain revenues are based on provisional price contracts which contain an embedded derivative that is required to be separated from the host contract for accounting purposes. The host contract is the receivable from oil sales at the spot price on the date of sale. The embedded derivative, which is not designated as a hedge, is marked to market through oil and gas revenue each period until the final settlement occurs, which generally is limited to the month after the sale.
Exploration and Development Costs. We follow the successful efforts method of accounting for our oil and gas properties. Acquisition costs for proved and unproved properties are capitalized when incurred. Costs of unproved properties are transferred to proved properties when a determination that proved reserves have been found. Exploration costs, including geological and geophysical costs and costs of carrying unproved properties, are expensed as incurred. Exploratory drilling costs are capitalized when incurred. If exploratory wells are determined to be commercially unsuccessful or dry holes, the applicable costs are expensed and recorded in exploration expense on the consolidated statement of operations. Costs incurred to drill and equip development wells, including unsuccessful development wells, are capitalized. Costs incurred to operate and maintain wells and equipment and to lift oil and natural gas to the surface are expensed as oil and gas production expense.
Receivables. Our receivables consist of joint interest billings, oil and gas sales, related party and other receivables. For our oil sales receivable in Ghana, we require a letter of credit to be posted to secure the outstanding receivable. Receivables from joint interest owners are stated at amounts due, net of any allowances for doubtful accounts. As required by ASU 2016-13, "Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments", we determine our allowance based on historical experience, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts by considering the length of time past due, future net revenues of the debtor’s ownership interest in oil and natural gas properties we operate, and the owner’s ability to pay its obligation, among other things.
Income Taxes. We account for income taxes as required by the ASC 740-Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). We make certain estimates and judgments in determining our income tax expense for financial reporting purposes. These estimates and judgments occur in the calculation of certain tax assets and liabilities that arise from differences in the timing and recognition of revenue and expense for tax and financial reporting purposes. Our federal, state and international tax returns are generally not prepared or filed before the consolidated financial statements are prepared; therefore, we estimate the tax basis of our assets and liabilities at the end of each period as well as the effects of changes in tax laws or tax rates, tax credits, and net operating loss carryforwards. Adjustments related to these estimates are recorded in our tax provision in the period in which we file our income tax returns. Further, we must assess the likelihood that we will be able to realize or utilize our deferred tax assets. If realization is not more likely than not, we must record a valuation allowance against such deferred tax assets for the amount we would not expect to recover, which would result in no benefit for the deferred tax amounts. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we have a valuation allowance to reduce certain deferred tax assets to amounts that are more likely than not to be realized. If our estimates and judgments regarding our ability to realize our deferred tax assets change, the benefits associated with those deferred tax assets may increase or decrease in the period our estimates and judgments change. On a quarterly basis, management evaluates the need for and adequacy of valuation allowances based on the expected realizability of the deferred tax assets and adjusts the amount of such allowances, if necessary.
ASC 740 provides a more-likely-than-not standard in evaluating whether a valuation allowance is necessary after weighing all of the available evidence. When evaluating the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including the following:
•the status of our operations in the particular taxing jurisdiction, including whether we have commenced production from a commercial discovery;
•whether a commercial discovery has resulted in significant proved reserves that have been independently verified;
•the amounts and history of taxable income or losses in a particular jurisdiction;
•projections of future income, including the sensitivity of such projections to changes in production volumes and prices;
•the existence, or lack thereof, of statutory limitations on the period that net operating losses may be carried forward in a jurisdiction; and
•the creation and timing of future income associated with the reversal of deferred tax liabilities in excess of deferred tax assets.
Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities. We utilize oil derivative contracts to mitigate our exposure to commodity price risk associated with our anticipated future oil production. These derivative contracts consist of collars, put options, call options and swaps. We also have used interest rate derivative contracts to mitigate our exposure to interest rate fluctuations related to our long-term debt. Our derivative financial instruments are recorded on the balance sheet as either assets or a liabilities and are measured at fair value. We do not apply hedge accounting to our derivative contracts.
Estimates of Proved Oil and Natural Gas Reserves. Reserve quantities and the related estimates of future net cash flows affect our periodic calculations of depletion and assessment of impairment of our oil and natural gas properties. Proved oil and natural gas reserves are the estimated quantities of crude oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids that geological and engineering data demonstrate with reasonable certainty to be recoverable in future periods from known reservoirs under existing economic and operating conditions. As additional proved reserves are discovered, reserve quantities and future cash flows will be estimated by independent petroleum consultants and prepared in accordance with guidelines established by the SEC and the FASB. The accuracy of these reserve estimates is a function of:
•the engineering and geological interpretation of available data;
•estimates of the amount and timing of future operating cost, production taxes, development cost and workover cost;
•the accuracy of various mandated economic assumptions; and
•the judgments of the persons preparing the estimates.
Asset Retirement Obligations. We account for asset retirement obligations as required by ASC 410-Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations. Under these standards, the fair value of a liability for an asset retirement obligation is recognized in the period in which it is incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. If a reasonable estimate of fair value cannot be made in the period the asset retirement obligation is incurred, the liability is recognized when a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. If a tangible long-lived asset with an existing asset retirement obligation is acquired, a liability for that obligation is recognized at the asset’s acquisition or in service date. In addition, a liability for the fair value of a conditional asset retirement obligation is recorded if the fair value of the liability can be reasonably estimated. We capitalize the asset retirement costs by increasing the carrying amount of the related long-lived asset by the same amount as the liability. We record increases in the discounted abandonment liability resulting from the passage of time in depletion, depreciation and amortization in the consolidated statement of operations. Estimating the future restoration and removal costs requires management to make estimates and judgments because most of the removal obligations are many years in the future and contracts and regulations often have vague descriptions of what constitutes removal. Additionally, asset removal technologies and costs are constantly changing, as are regulatory, political, environmental, safety and public relations considerations.
Inherent in the present value calculation are numerous assumptions and judgments including the ultimate settlement amounts, inflation factors, credit adjusted discount rates, timing of settlement and changes in the legal, regulatory, environmental and political environments. To the extent future revisions to these assumptions impact the present value of the existing asset retirement obligations, a corresponding adjustment is made to the oil and gas property balance.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets. We review our long-lived assets for impairment when changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. ASC 360 - Property, Plant and Equipment requires an impairment loss to be recognized if the carrying amount of a long-lived asset is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value. The carrying amount of a long-lived asset is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset. That assessment shall be based on the carrying amount of the asset at the date it is tested for recoverability, whether in use or under development. Assets to be disposed of and assets not expected to provide any future service potential to us are recorded at the lower of carrying amount or fair value. Oil and gas properties are grouped
in accordance with ASC 932 - Extractive Activities-Oil and Gas. The basis for grouping is a reasonable aggregation of properties typically by field or by logical grouping of assets with significant shared infrastructure.
For long-lived assets whereby the carrying value exceeds the estimated future undiscounted cash flows, the carrying amount is reduced to fair value. Fair value is generally estimated using the income approach described in the ASC 820 - Fair Value Measurement. If applicable, we utilize prices and other relevant information generated by market transactions involving assets and liabilities that are identical or comparable to the item being measured as the basis for determining fair value. The expected future cash flows used for impairment reviews and related fair value measurements are typically based on judgmental assessments of future production, pricing estimates, capital and operating costs, market-based weighted average cost of capital, and risk adjustment factors applied to reserves. These assumptions are applied to develop future cash flow projections that are then discounted to estimated fair value, using a market-based weighted-average cost of capital. Although we base the fair value estimate of each asset group on assumptions we believe to be reasonable, those assumptions are inherently unpredictable and uncertain, and actual results could differ from the estimate. Negative revisions of estimated reserve quantities, increases in future cost estimates, divestiture of a significant component of the asset group, or sustained decreases in crude oil prices could lead to a reduction in expected future cash flows and possibly an additional impairment of long-lived assets in future periods.
We believe the assumptions used in our analysis to test for impairment are appropriate and result in a reasonable estimate of future cash flows and fair value. Kosmos has consistently used an average of third-party industry forecasts to determine our pricing assumptions. Where unproved reserves exist, an appropriately risk-adjusted amount of these reserves may be included in the evaluation.
Consolidations / Equity Method of Accounting. The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of our wholly-owned subsidiaries. They also include Kosmos’ share of the undivided interest in certain assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Investments in corporate joint ventures, which we exercise significant influence over, are accounted for using the equity method of accounting.
Equity method investments are integral to our operations. The other parties, who also have an equity interest in these companies, are independent third parties. Kosmos does not invest in these companies in order to remove liabilities from its balance sheet.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 2-Accounting Policies” for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.