Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Risk Factors Summary”, “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting an initial business combination. We are focusing our search on businesses that are providing or changing technology for traditional financial services with an equity value of approximately $500 million to $2,000 million. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement of the placement units, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to backstop agreements we may enter into), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with an initial business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in our initial public offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of Class A shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination, such as the Katapult Business Combination, will be successful.
Recent Developments
On December 18, 2020, we entered into the Merger Agreement with the Merger Subs, Katapult, and the other signatories thereto.
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, at the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement (the “Transaction” and the “Closing”, respectively), a business combination between us and Katapult will be effected through the merger of Merger Sub 1 with and into Katapult, with Katapult surviving as the surviving company and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “First Merger”), followed immediately by the merger of the resulting company with and into Merger Sub 2, with Merger Sub 2 surviving as the surviving company and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Second Merger” and together with the First Merger, the “Mergers”). Once effective, all equity securities of Katapult will be converted into the right to receive the applicable portion of merger consideration pursuant to the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Merger Agreement.
Under the terms of the Merger Agreement, the aggregate consideration to be paid in the Mergers is $833,000,000, as adjusted in accordance with the terms of the Merger Agreement and apportioned between cash and our common stock (“FinServ Common Shares”), and which shall be adjusted to account for the value of Assumed Options (as defined below). In addition, we will issue to the Pre-Closing Holders an aggregate 7,500,000 restricted FinServ Common Shares.
At the effective time of the First Merger (the “Effective Time”), each Katapult Common Share (as defined below) that is issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time (other than dissenting shares and shares of common stock, par value $0.001 per share, of Katapult (“Katapult Common Shares”) will be canceled and converted into the right to receive the applicable portion of the merger consideration in accordance with an allocation schedule to be provided by Katapult (the “Allocation Schedule”) that will set forth the allocation of the merger consideration (including the Earn-Out Shares (as defined below)) among the equityholders of Katapult.
As of the Effective Time, (a) certain shares of restricted stock in Katapult will vest and the holders thereof be entitled to receive the applicable portion of the merger consideration in accordance with the Allocation Schedule and (b) certain holders of options to purchase Katapult Common Shares will receive options to purchase FinServ Common Shares (the “Assumed Options”) and, if applicable, Earn-Out Shares.
Earn-Out
At the Closing, we will also issue to the Pre-Closing Holders an aggregate 7,500,000 restricted FinServ Common Shares (subject to vesting, forfeiture and certain other restrictions (including on transfer) set forth in the Merger Agreement (the “Earn-Out Shares”)). With respect to the Earn-Out Shares: (i) one-half (1/2) of the Earn-Out Shares will vest if the closing price of the FinServ Common Shares is greater than or equal to $12.00 over any twenty (20) Trading Days (as defined in the Merger Agreement) within any thirty (30) consecutive Trading Day period and (ii) one-half (1/2) of the Earn-Out Shares will vest if the closing price of the FinServ Common Shares is greater than or equal to $14.00 over any twenty (20) Trading Days within any thirty (30) consecutive Trading Day period, in each case, during the Earn-Out Period (as defined in the Merger Agreement) and subject to adjustments as a result of certain recapitalization events and dividends paid prior to the expiration of the Earn-Out Period. In addition, if there is a Change of Control Transaction (as defined in the Merger Agreement) of the Company prior to the expiration of the Earn-Out Period that will result in the holders of FinServ Common Shares receiving a price per share equal to or in excess of the applicable price per share thresholds described above, then Earn-Out Shares will vest in connection with such Change of Control Transaction in the manner set forth in the Merger Agreement.
The Transactions will be consummated subject to the deliverables and provisions as further described in the Merger Agreement.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering and identifying a target for our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective initial business combination candidates.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net income of $154,152, which consists of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,133,614 and interest income on our money market account of $12,294, offset by operating costs of $795,708 and a provision for income taxes of $196,048.
For the period from August 9, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had a net income of $292,962, which consists of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $567,358, offset by operating costs of $171,946 and a provision for income taxes of $102,450.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 5, 2019, we consummated our initial public offering of 25,000,000 Units, which included the partial exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 3,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $250,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 665,500 placement units to the sponsor at a price of $10.00 per placement unit, generating gross proceeds of $6,650,000.
Following our initial public offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the placement units, a total of $250,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $14,267,762 in transaction costs, including $4,400,000 of underwriting fees, $9,350,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $517,762 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $985,959. Net loss of $154,152 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $1,133,614 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $6,497 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from August 9, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $156,163. Net income of $292,962 was impacted by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $567,358, formation costs paid by a related party of $1,000 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $117,233 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities of $251,249,193 held in the trust account. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we withdrew approximately $452,000 of interest earned on the trust account to pay for our franchise and income taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1,043,895 outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete our initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with our initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units identical to the placement units, at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender.
We do not currently believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating our initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” we have until November 5, 2021 to consummate an initial business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate an initial business combination by this time. If an initial business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should an initial business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution, raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after November 5, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support to the Company. We began incurring these fees on November 5, 2019 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the initial business combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of (i) $0.35 per Unit of the gross proceeds of the initial 22,000,000 Units sold in the initial public offering, or $7,700,000, and (ii) $0.55 per Unit of the gross proceeds from the 3,000,000 Units sold pursuant to the over-allotment option, or $1,650,000, aggregating to a deferred fee of $9,350,000.
We entered into a consulting agreement with a related party, pursuant to which the consultant will provide us, among other services, assistance in finding a potential target for a business combination, as well as supervising and performing due diligence on such targets. We will pay the consultant a fee of $10,000 per month, up to a maximum of $150,000. On May 15, 2020, we amended the consulting agreement whereby the monthly fee was reduced to $7,500, from June 1, 2020 through and including September 2020. The monthly fee reverted back to $10,000 per month on October 1, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity.
Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the trust account, net of applicable taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding for the periods. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for Class A and Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net income less income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A and Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidtaed financial statements.