Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-Looking Statements
The following section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” contains statements that are not statements of historical fact and are forward-looking statements within the meaning of federal securities laws. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. These statements reflect our current views with respect to future events and are based on assumptions and subject to risks and uncertainties. Factors that may cause our actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements include those factors described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” beginning on page 24 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should carefully review all of these factors, as well as the comprehensive discussion of forward-looking statements on page 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Overview
We are a clinical-stage pharmaceutical company developing and commercializing products for treating inflammatory and immune diseases with a focus on the eye and nervous system.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we acquired Panoptes, transforming our pipeline with the addition of PP-001. PP-001, is a next-generation, non-steroidal, immuno-modulatory and small-molecule inhibitor of DHODH with what we believe to be best-in-class picomolar potency and a validated immune modulating mechanism designed to overcome the off-target side effects and safety issues associated with DHODH inhibitors. PP-001 has been developed in two clinical-stage ophthalmic formulations: PaniJect, an intravitreal injection for inflammatory diseases of the eye including posterior uveitis, and PaniDrop, a novel nano carrier technology eye drop for ocular surface diseases such as conjunctivitis, dry eye disease and others. Other administration routes are also in development and IND enabling studies are underway for conditions outside the ocular space.
In addition, we are developing Ocular Bandage Gel (“OBG”), a modified form of the natural polymer hyaluronic acid, designed to protect the ocular surface to permit re-epithelialization of the cornea and improve ocular surface integrity. OBG, with unique properties that help hydrate and protect the ocular surface, is in clinical evaluation for patients undergoing PRK surgery for corneal wound repair after refractive surgery and patients with PE as a result of dry eye. We are currently developing OBG as a device but are evaluating the potential to reclassify OBG as a drug. We attended a type-B meeting with the FDA’s CDER division during the first quarter of 2021 to discuss OBG’s path forward as a drug and will continue to evaluate this feedback in reaching a decision.
In May 2020, we were granted a loan (the “Loan”) from Silicon Valley Bank in the amount of approximately $0.278 million pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under Division A, Title I of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), which was enacted in March 2020. The Loan may be prepaid by the Company at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties. Funds from the Loan may only be used for payroll costs, costs used to continue group health care benefits, mortgage payments, rent, utilities, and interest on other debt obligations incurred before February 15, 2020 (“Qualifying Expenses”). We used the entire Loan amount for Qualifying Expenses. Under the terms of the PPP, certain amounts of the Loan may be forgiven if they are used for Qualifying Expenses as described in the CARES Act. If the Loan is not forgiven, the Loan will mature in May 2022 and bear interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum, payable monthly commencing in September 2021.
Throughout our history, we have not generated significant revenue. We have never been profitable, and from inception through December 31, 2020, our losses from operations have aggregated $108.3 million. Our Net Loss was approximately $8.1 million and $7.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development and clinical trials of and seek regulatory approval for our PP-001 and OBG product candidates, and any other product candidates we advance to clinical development. If we obtain regulatory approval for PP-001 and OBG, we expect to incur significant expenses to create an infrastructure to support the commercialization of PP-001 and OBG including sales, marketing and distribution functions.
The continued spread of the COVID-19 pandemic could adversely impact our clinical studies. In addition, COVID-19 has resulted in significant governmental measures being implemented to control the spread of the virus, including quarantines, travel restrictions, and business shutdowns. COVID-19 has also caused volatility in the global financial markets and threatened a slowdown in the global economy, which could negatively affect our ability to raise additional capital on attractive terms or at all. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” beginning on page 24 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The extent to which COVID-19 may impact our business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the outbreak, the emergence of new variants, and the effectiveness of actions to contain and treat COVID-19. We cannot presently predict the scope and severity of any potential disruptions to our business, including to our ongoing and planned clinical studies. Any such shutdowns or other business interruptions could result in material and negative effects to our ability to conduct our business in the manner and on the timelines presently planned, which could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operation, and financial condition. As of the date of this report, there have been no material adverse effects to our ongoing business operations from COVID-19.
We will need additional financing to support our continuing operations. We will seek to fund our operations through public or private equity, debt financings, license and development agreements, or other sources, which may include collaborations with third parties. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We will need to generate significant revenue to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
EyeGate Pharmaceuticals, Inc. was formed in Delaware on December 26, 2004. We were originally incorporated in 1998 under the name of Optis France S.A. in Paris, France. At that time, the name of the French corporation was changed to EyeGate Pharma S.A.S. and became a subsidiary of EyeGate Pharmaceuticals, Inc. EyeGate Pharma S.A.S. was dissolved effective December 30, 2020.
Jade Therapeutics, Inc. (“Jade”) was formed in Delaware on December 31, 2012. Panoptes Pharma Ges.m.b.H. (“Panoptes”) was formed in Austria on July 2, 2013. Jade and Panoptes are wholly owned subsidiaries of EyeGate Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
Financial Overview
Revenues
To date, we have recognized collaboration revenue from U.S. and foreign government grants made to Jade and Panoptes, as well as from BHC as performance obligations toward milestones were met. See Note 2 to our financial statements, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”. We expect to continue to incur significant operating losses as we fund research and clinical trial activities relating to our therapeutic assets, consisting of our DHODH and modified HA-based products, or any other product candidate that we may develop. There can be no guarantee that the losses incurred to fund these activities will succeed in generating revenue.
Research and Development Expenses
We expense all research and development expenses as they are incurred. Research and development expenses primarily include:
• non-clinical development, preclinical research, and clinical trial and regulatory-related costs;
• expenses incurred under agreements with sites and consultants that conduct our clinical trials;
• expenses related to generating, filing, and maintaining intellectual property; and
• employee-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, travel, and stock-based compensation expense.
Substantially all of our research and development expenses to date have been incurred in connection with OBG and our former legacy products. We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the near future as we advance PP-001, OBG, and any other product candidate through clinical development, including the conduct of our planned clinical trials. The process of conducting clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. We are unable to estimate with any certainty the costs we will incur in the continued development of our PP-001, OBG, and any other product candidate that we may develop. Clinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations.
We may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for our product candidate.
The costs of clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a project owing to, but not limited to, the following:
• per patient trial costs;
• the number of sites included in the trials;
• the countries in which the trials are conducted;
• the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
• the number of patients that participate in the trials;
• the number of doses that patients receive;
• the cost of comparative agents used in trials;
• the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
• potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
• the duration of patient follow-up; and
• the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidate.
We do not expect our product candidates to be commercially available, if at all, for the next several years.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related benefits, including stock-based compensation. Our general and administrative expenses consisted primarily of payroll expenses for our full-time employees. Other general and administrative expenses include professional fees for auditing, tax, patent costs and legal services.
We expect that general and administrative expenses will remain consistent for the near future until commercialization of our DHODH and modified HA-based products, which could lead to an increase in these expenses.
Total Other Income (Expense)
Total other income (expense) consists primarily of interest income we earn on interest-bearing accounts, and interest expense incurred on our outstanding financing arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Business Combinations
We applied the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 805, “Business Combinations,” in the accounting for our acquisition of Panoptes. It required us to recognize the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at their acquisition date fair values, which were determined using market, income, and cost approaches, or a combination. Goodwill as of the respective acquisition date was measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair value of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. Goodwill is generally the result of expected synergies of the combined company or an assembled workforce. Indefinite-lived intangible assets acquired were in-process research and development. The fair value for these intangible assets was determined using the income approach. Under the income approach, fair value reflects the present value of the projected cash flows that are expected to be generated by the products incorporating the in-process research and development, if successful.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing financial statements, we are required to estimate and accrue research and development expenses. This process involves the following:
• communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost;
• estimating and accruing expenses in our financial statements as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at the time; and
• periodically confirming the accuracy of our estimates with selected service providers and making adjustments, if necessary.
Examples of estimated research and development expenses that we accrue include:
• fees paid to contract research organizations and investigative sites in connection with clinical studies;
• fees paid to contract manufacturing organizations in connection with non-clinical development, preclinical research, and the production of clinical study materials; and
• professional service fees for consulting and related services.
We base our expense accruals related to non-clinical development, preclinical studies, and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with organizations/consultants that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts may depend on many factors, such as the successful enrollment of patients, site initiation and the completion of clinical study milestones. Our service providers invoice us as milestones are achieved and monthly in arrears for services performed. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates. To date, we have not experienced significant changes in our estimates of accrued research and development expenses after a reporting period.
However, due to the nature of estimates, we cannot assure you that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical studies and other research activities.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have issued options to purchase our common stock and restricted stock. Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service/vesting period. Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards require the use of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected life of the stock-based payment awards and stock price volatility.
We estimate the grant date fair value of stock options and the related compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. This option valuation model requires the input of subjective assumptions including: (1) expected life (estimated period of time outstanding) of the options granted, (2) volatility, (3) risk-free rate and (4) dividends. In general, the assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, but the estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenues are generated primarily through arrangements which generally contain multiple elements, or deliverables, including licenses and R&D activities to be performed by us on behalf of the licensor or grantor. Payments to us under these arrangements typically include one or more of the following: (1) nonrefundable, upfront license fees, (2) funding of discovery research efforts on a full-time equivalent basis, (3) reimbursement of research, development, and intellectual property costs, (4) milestone payments, and (5) royalties on future product sales.
We recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those services. To determine whether arrangements are within the scope of this new guidance, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy our performance obligation. We apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. Upon adoption of ASU No. 2014-09, we recognize revenue from the transaction price applied to each single performance obligation over time as milestones are reached for each performance obligation. We only recognize revenue on those milestones that are within our control and any constrained variable consideration that requires regulatory approval will only be included in the transaction price when performance is complete.
In addition, we may receive government grant funds for specified therapeutic research activities. Revenue under these grants will be recorded when we perform the activities specified by the terms of each grant and are entitled to the funds.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-04, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, which simplifies the accounting for goodwill impairment. The guidance removes Step 2 of the goodwill impairment test, which requires a hypothetical purchase price allocation. A goodwill impairment will now be the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. All other goodwill impairment guidance will remain largely unchanged. Entities will continue to have the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine if a quantitative impairment test is necessary. The same one-step impairment test will be applied to goodwill at all reporting units, even those with zero or negative carrying amounts. Entities will be required to disclose the amount of goodwill at reporting units with zero or negative carrying amounts. The new standard was effective for us on January 1, 2020 and is required to be applied prospectively. We adopted ASU No. 2017-04 effective January 1, 2020 and the adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements and related disclosures.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. ASU No. 2016-13 replaces the incurred loss impairment methodology in current GAAP with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. The new guidance is effective for smaller reporting companies in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. We do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material effect on our Consolidated Financial Statements and related disclosures.
Other Information
Net Operating Loss Carryforwards
As of December 31, 2020, we have federal and state income tax net operating loss (“NOL”) carryovers of approximately $62.1 million and $43.2 million, respectively. Federal NOL carryovers as of December 31, 2017 totaling $46.0 million and state NOL carryovers as of December 31, 2019 totaling $41.1 million will expire at various dates through 2039. Federal NOL carryovers generated during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 totaling $16.1 million will be carried forward indefinitely, but their utilization will be limited to 80% of taxable income. As of December 31, 2020 we also have federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of approximately $2.3 million and $0.495 million, respectively, to offset future income taxes, which expire at various times through 2040.
Utilization of these net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards may be subject to a substantial limitation under Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code, and comparable provisions of state, local and foreign tax laws due to changes in ownership of our company that have occurred previously or that could occur in the future. Under Section 382 of the Code and comparable provisions of state, local and foreign tax laws, if a corporation undergoes an “ownership change,” generally defined as a greater than 50% change by value in its equity ownership over a three-year period, the corporation’s ability to use its pre-change net operating loss carryforwards and other pre-change tax attributes, such as research and development tax credits, to reduce its post-change income may be limited. We have not completed a study to determine whether our initial public offering, our registered direct offering, our follow-on public offerings, and other transactions that have occurred over the past three years may have triggered an ownership change limitation. We may also experience ownership changes in the future as a result of subsequent shifts in our stock ownership. As a result, if we generate taxable income, our ability to use our pre-change net operating loss and tax credits carryforwards to reduce U.S. federal and state taxable income may be subject to limitations, which could result in increased future tax liability to us. In addition, the TCJA enacted on December 22, 2017 limits the amount of NOLs that we are permitted to deduct in any taxable year to 80% of our taxable income in such year. The TCJA also eliminates the ability to carry back NOLs to prior years but allows NOLs generated after 2017 to be carried forward indefinitely. As such, there is a risk that due to such items, our existing NOLs could expire or be unavailable to offset future income.
JOBS Act
Effective December 31, 2020, we are no longer considered an “emerging growth company” under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Collaboration Revenue. Collaboration Revenue was $0.012 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.686 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The revenue recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the Panoptes acquisition and the accompanying revenue we now generate from government funds from the date of its acquisition. The revenue recognized in the year ended December 31, 2019 was a result of the termination of the license agreements with BHC and no further revenue will be recognized related to these agreements.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and Development Expenses were $3.566 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $5.389 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $1.823 million was primarily due to a decrease in OBG clinical activities following the completion of the PRK pivotal study in 2019, as well as the $0.500 million adjustment recorded in 2019 to the present value of the Jade earn-out payment due upon FDA approval of OBG. These decreases were partially offset by increases in OBG manufacturing and the expiration of a prepaid agreement in 2020 with a research vendor.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and Administrative Expenses were $4.659 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $4.406 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $0.253 million was mainly due to increases in professional fees and acquisition costs as a result of the Panoptes acquisition. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in personnel-related costs.
Other Income, Net. Other Income, Net was $0.133 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.108 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $0.025 million was mainly due to a gain recognized on the dissolution of EyeGate Pharma S.A.S. in 2020, partially offset by less interest earned on our cash balances.
Income Tax Expense. Income Tax Expense was $0.012 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.095 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The 2020 and 2019 tax expense was a result of an increase in the state blended tax rate, which was applied to the deferred tax liability balance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since becoming a public company in 2015, we have financed our operations from several registered offerings and private placements of our securities, payments from license agreements, and U.S. and foreign government grants. From inception through March 25, 2021, we have raised a total of approximately $108.9 million from such sales of our equity and debt securities, both as a public company and prior to our IPO, as well as approximately $14.9 million in payments received under our license agreements and government grants and $0.278 million received pursuant to the Loan under the PPP.
On October 2, 2019, we completed a private placement of 600,000 shares of Common Stock and warrants to purchase up to 600,000 shares of Common Stock to an affiliate of Armistice Capital, LLC, with a combined purchase price per share and warrant of $3.125. The total net proceeds from the private placement were approximately $1.8 million. The warrants have an exercise price of $3.125 per share, subject to adjustments as provided under the terms of the warrants, and will be exercisable on the six-month anniversary of their issuance date. The warrants are exercisable for five years from the issuance date.
On January 3, 2020, we completed a registered direct offering for 500,000 shares of Common Stock with a purchase price of $10.00 per share. The total net proceeds to the Company from the offering were approximately $4.5 million.
On January 6, 2021, we completed a private placement of 1,531,101 shares of Common Stock and warrants to purchase up to 1,531,101 shares of Common Stock to an affiliate of Armistice Capital, LLC, with a combined purchase price per share and warrant of $5.225. The total net proceeds from the private placement were approximately $8.0 million. The warrants have an exercise price of $5.225 per share, subject to adjustments as provided under the terms of the warrants, and will be exercisable on the six-month anniversary of their issuance date. The warrants are exercisable for five years from the issuance date.
At December 31, 2020, we had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents totaling approximately $1.2 million.
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $7.317 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $8.154 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a net loss of $8.092 million, partially offset by non-cash expense for stock-based compensation in the amount of $0.724 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a net loss of $7.097 million and a decrease in deferred revenue of $2.686 million, partially offset by non-cash expenses for stock-based compensation and contingent consideration in the amounts of $0.852 million and $0.500 million, respectively, as well as an increase in accounts payable and accrued expense of $0.157 million.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $0.244 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the acquisition of Panoptes and the dissolution of EyeGate Pharma S.A.S. during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financing Activities. We received $4.998 million in cash from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.921 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received net proceeds of $4.501 million from the completion of a registered direct stock offering, $0.278 from the Loan under the PPP, and $0.218 million from the exercise of warrants. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received net proceeds of $1.8 million from the private placement with an affiliate of Armistice Capital, LLC and $2.150 million from the exercise of warrants.
Funding Requirements and Other Liquidity Matters
Our PP-001 and modified HA-based product pipeline is still in various stages of clinical development. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially if and as we:
• seek marketing approval for our PP-001 or modified HA-based products or any other products that we successfully develop;
• establish a sales and marketing infrastructure to commercialize our PP-001 or modified HA-based products in the United States, if approved; and
• add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and future commercialization efforts.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We do not have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our Stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of a Common Stockholder. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with pharmaceutical partners, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates, including our PP-001 and modified HA-based products, on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market PP-001 and modified HA-based products, or any other products that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Based on our cash on hand at December 31, 2020 and the approximately $8.0 million in net proceeds received from a private placement that closed on January 6, 2021, we believe we will have sufficient cash to fund planned operations through August 31, 2021. However, the acceleration or reduction of cash outflows by management can significantly impact the timing for raising additional capital to complete development of its products. To continue development, we will need to raise additional capital through debt and/or equity financing, or access additional funding through U.S. and/or foreign grants. Although we successfully completed our IPO and several subsequent registered offerings and private placements of our securities, additional capital may not be available on terms favorable to us, if at all. On May 13, 2019, the SEC declared effective our registration statement on Form S-3, registering a total of $50,000,000 of our securities for sale to the public from time to time in what is known as a “shelf offering”. We do not know if our future offerings, including offerings pursuant to our shelf registration statement, will succeed. Accordingly, no assurances can be given that management will be successful in these endeavors. Our recurring losses from operations have caused management to determine there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our Consolidated Financial Statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities or any other adjustments that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no material off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Lease obligations reflect our obligation to make payments in connection with operating leases for our office space.
(2) Licensing Agreement obligations represent our commitments under license agreements, including those made by us under our license agreement with BioTime.
(3) This table does not include (a) anticipated expenditures under supply agreements for periods for which we are not yet bound under binding purchase orders, (b) contracts that are entered into in the ordinary course of business that are not material in the aggregate in any period presented above, and (c) contingent consideration in connection with acquisitions.
In addition, in the course of normal business operations, we have agreements with contract service providers to assist in the performance of our research and development and manufacturing activities. Expenditures to contract research organizations vary based on the study and phases during the clinical development stages. Subject to required notice periods and our obligations under binding purchase orders, we can elect to discontinue the work under these agreements at any time. We could also enter into additional collaborative research, contract research, manufacturing, and supplier agreements in the future, which may require upfront payments and even long-term commitments of cash.