ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our plans and financial condition. The following financial information is derived from our financial statements and should be read in conjunction with such financial statements and notes thereto set forth elsewhere herein.
Overview
Kiromic BioPharma, Inc. (together with its subsidiary, “we,” “us,” “our” or the “Company”) is a target discovery and gene-editing company utilizing artificial intelligence and our proprietary neural network platform with a therapeutic focus on immuno-oncology. We are focused on extending the benefits of immunotherapy by leveraging our proprietary technologies. Our approach seeks to generate a therapeutic immune response in patients by unleashing the demonstrated natural power of a patient's own immune system to recognize tumor-specific peptide sequences presented on cancer cells, known as tumor specific iso-antigens, capable of generating an immunological response and therefore eradicate cancer cells. We are developing our brand of chimeric antigen receptor (“CAR”) T cell product candidates known as ALEXIS. These are designed to treat cancer by capitalizing on the immune system's ability to destroy cancer cells. These products are in the pre-initial new drug (“IND”) stages of the US Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”) clinical trial process. We are currently going through the IND enabling trials process and we expect that first in human dosing in Phase I of clinical trials will commence in the third quarter of 2021.
CAR T cell therapy, a form of cancer immunotherapy, has recently emerged as a revolutionary and potentially curative therapy for patients with hematologic cancers, including refractory cancers. In 2017, two autologous anti-CD19 CAR T cell therapies, Kymriah, developed by Novartis International AG, and Yescarta, developed by Kite Pharma, Inc., were approved by the FDA for the treatment of relapsing/remitting B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia and relapsing/remitting large B cell lymphoma, respectively. Autologous CAR T cell therapies are manufactured individually for the patient's use by modifying the patient's own T cells outside the body, causing the T cells to express CARs. The entire manufacturing process is dependent on the viability of each patient's T cells and takes approximately two to four weeks. Allogenic T cell therapies involve engineering healthy donor T cells, which we believe will allow for the creation of an inventory of off-the-shelf products that can be delivered to a larger portion of eligible patients throughout the world.
We have not generated any revenue from sales to date, and we continue to incur significant research and development and other expenses related to our ongoing operations. As a result, we are not and have never been profitable and have incurred losses in each period since we began principal business operations in 2012.
Trends and Uncertainties-COVID-19
We are subject to risks and uncertainties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is highly uncertain and difficult to predict, as the responses that we, other businesses and governments are taking continue to evolve. Furthermore, capital markets and economies worldwide have also been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and it is possible that it could cause a local and/or global economic recession. Policymakers around the globe have responded with fiscal policy actions to support the healthcare industry and economy as a whole. The magnitude and overall effectiveness of these actions remain uncertain.
The severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the duration and severity of the pandemic and the extent and severity of the impact on the Company's service providers, suppliers, contract research organizations and our clinical trials, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. As of the date of this report, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may in the future materially impact our financial condition, liquidity or results of operations is uncertain.
Recent Developments
After considering the Form 10-K filing date of March 31, 2021, management extended its consideration of the going concern assumption through March 31, 2022. Management's plans were updated to further finance operations through additional equity or debt financing arrangements, and/or third party collaboration funding; however, if the Company is unable to raise additional funding to meet its working capital needs, it will be forced to delay or reduce the scope of its research programs and/or limit or cease its operations. The negative cash flows and lack of financial resources of the Company raise substantial doubt as to the Company's ability to continue as a going concern, and that substantial doubt has not been alleviated.
New Investigational Drug Application Resubmission Announcement
On December 17, 2020 we filed two investigational new drug applications with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”). The first application was for a Phase 1 clinical trial of intravenously administered allogenic CAR-T for epithelial ovarian carcinoma (“EOC”) and malignant pleural mesothelioma (“MPM”). The second application was for a Phase 1 clinical trial of an intrapleural/intraperitoneal administered allogenic CAR-T for EOC and MPM.
Since filing the original applications in December 2020, we have had communications with the FDA, and numerous consults with scientific board and clinical advisors regarding resubmission. On March 9, 2021, we announced that we planned to resubmit the two investigational new drug applications. The revised applications will be for first in-human dosing of our Off-the-Shelf, Allogenic Gamma-Delta T cell therapy for metastatic and progressive locally advanced solid malignancies.
Principal Factors Affecting Our Financial Performance
Our operating results are primarily affected by the following factors:
·
slow or delayed IND applications;
·
slow or delayed clinical trial enrollment;
·
patent reinforcement and prosecution; and
·
changes in laws or the regulatory environment affecting our company.
Emerging Growth Company
We qualify as an "emerging growth company" under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). As a result, we are permitted to, and intend to, rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements. For so long as we are an emerging growth company, we will not be required to:
·
have an auditor report on our internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
·
comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor's report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (i.e., Critical Audit Matters);
·
submit certain executive compensation matters to stockholder advisory votes, such as "say-on-pay" and "say-on-frequency;" and
·
disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer's compensation to median employee compensation.
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
We will remain an emerging growth company for up to five years, or until the earliest of (i) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our total annual gross revenues exceed $1.07 billion, (ii) the date that we become a "large accelerated filer" as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), which would occur if the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter or (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three year period.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales in the foreseeable future. We will record revenue from collaboration agreements, including amounts related to upfront payments, annual fees for licenses of our intellectual property and research and development funding. However, none of those agreements have been executed as of the issuance date of this report.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our discovery efforts and the development of our product candidates. These include the following:
·
salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, for personnel engaged in research and development functions;
·
expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including contract research organizations and other third parties that conduct preclinical research and development activities and clinical trials on our behalf;
·
costs of developing and scaling our manufacturing process and manufacturing drug products for use in our preclinical studies and future clinical trials, including the costs of contract manufacturing organizations, that will manufacture our clinical trial material for use in our preclinical studies and potential future clinical trials;
·
costs of outside consultants, including their fees and related travel expenses;
·
costs of laboratory supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing preclinical study and clinical trial materials;
·
license payments made for intellectual property used in research and development activities; and
·
facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs if specifically, identifiable to research activities.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase substantially for the foreseeable future and will comprise a larger percentage of our total expenses as we initiate a Phase 1/2a clinical trial for our ALEXIS-PRO-1 and ALEXIS-ISO-1 product candidates and continue to discover and develop additional product candidates.
We cannot determine with certainty the duration and costs of future clinical trials of our ALEXIS-PRO-1 and ALEXIS-ISO-1 product candidates, or any other product candidate we may develop or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any product candidate for which we obtain marketing approval. We may never succeed in obtaining marketing approval for any product candidate. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our ALEXIS-PRO-1 and ALEXIS-ISO-1 product candidates and any other our product candidate we may develop will depend on a variety of factors, including:
·
the scope, rate of progress, expense and results of clinical trials of our ALEXIS-PRO-1 and ALEXIS-ISO-1 product candidates, as well as of any future clinical trials of other product candidates and other research and development activities that we may conduct;
·
uncertainties in clinical trial design and patient enrollment rates;
·
the actual probability of success for our product candidates, including their safety and efficacy, early clinical data, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability;
·
significant and changing government regulation and regulatory guidance;
·
the timing and receipt of any marketing approvals; and
·
the expense of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in our clinical trials due to slower than expected patient enrollment or other reasons, we would be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance, business development, operations and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services; insurance costs; travel expenses; and facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs that are not specifically attributable to research activities.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our personnel headcount to support our continued research activities and development of product candidates. We also expect to incur increased expenses associated with being a public company, including costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq and SEC requirements; director and officer insurance costs; and investor and public relations costs.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth key components of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Research and development expenses. Our research and development expenses increased by $3,851,200, or 320.48%, to $5,052,900 for the year December 31, 2020 from $1,201,700 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by product candidate or development program:
As illustrated above, the increase in research and development expenses resulted from (i) a $2,247,400 increase in employee related costs, which primarily included a $1,020,900 increase in wages, benefits and payroll taxes and a $1,183,800 increase in stock compensation expenses attributable to research and development employees; (ii) a $166,900 increase in laboratory supplies in services, which primarily included a $109,800 increase in spending on disposables and consumables for in-vitro testing and validation of pipeline candidates, with the remaining balance driven by supplies spending; (iii) a $304,000 increase in facility-related costs, primarily driven by a $181,200 increase in allocated rent net of granting agency reimbursements, and a $113,200 increase in allocated depreciation expenses with the remaining amount attributed to repairs, maintenance, and utilities; (iv) a $205,700 increase in intellectual property expenses, which was driven by legal expenses and intellectual property filings for new patents; (v) a $40,400 increase in laboratory equipment and maintenance, driven entirely by new non-capitalizable equipment purchases and maintenance to support in-vitro testing and validation by our research and development scientists; and (vi) a $478,700 increase in
outsourced research and development costs driven by a $197,400 increase in research studies and other consulting fees with the remaining balance driven by increased stock based compensation expenses attributed to non-employees.
These cost increases were primarily incurred to support in-vitro testing and validation of our product candidates. This required increases to our headcount, square footage at our Houston Facility, experimentation costs, and intellectual property families to protect our findings. In addition, we incurred costs related to the following:
1.
Augmented our research and development team: In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our average headcount increased to 9 employees from 2 employees allocable to research and development and clinical trials preparation.
2.
Amended lease agreements: We amended our Houston facility lease agreement to expand the leased property by 4,100 square feet.
3.
In-vitro experimentation costs: $584,000 in disposable and consumable spending during the year ended December 31, 2020 for validation experiments and other services related to our ALEXIS-ISO-1 and ALEXIS-PRO-1 candidates, and ABBIE.
4.
Intellectual property augmentation: Longwood University (“Longwood”), granted us the exclusive right to negotiate a worldwide, exclusive license for certain patent rights. The patent rights pertain to "T-cells expressing a chimeric -PD l-CD3zeta receptor reduce tumor burden in multiple murine syngeneic models of solid cancer." As compensation for this right, we agreed to pay Longwood an upfront fee of $15,000. We also agreed to reimburse Longwood for fees and expenses incurred for the preparation, filing, prosecution and maintenance of such patent rights. We also filed two utility patent applications and four provisional patent applications to protect intellectual property associated with our other value drivers.
The cost increases were also partially due to the difference in grant reimbursements in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. In August 2018, the National Institute of Health (NIH), the primary agency of the United States government responsible for biomedical and public health research, awarded a Phase I/II grant in the amount of $2,235,000 for the development and non-clinical testing of a new anti-arteriosclerosis gene therapy delivered by engineered adeno-associated viral vectors. Phase I of the grant approved amounts of $851,000 and which covers the period September 2018 through August 2019, entitles us to reimbursement for certain salaries and wages, materials and supplies, facilities and administrative costs, and fixed fees. The Company did not complete Phase I by August 2019, but was granted an extension to complete Phase I by the NIH through August 2021. Starting after Phase I completion in 2021, Phase II of the grant covers reimbursements for certain salaries and wages, materials and supplies, facilities and administrative costs, and fixed fees of $1,384,000. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $142,400 and $298,000, respectively, as reductions to research and development expense within the statements of operations pursuant to the grant from the NIH.
General and administrative expenses. Our general and administrative expenses increased by $11,640,300, or 464.92%, to $14,144,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $2,503,700 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the increase primarily resulted from an increase in stock compensation expenses of $11,257,900, an increase in wages and salaries totaling $606,800, offset by reduced professional services expenses of $411,500.
The increase in stock compensation expense was primarily driven by common stock issuances of 725,536 shares to our Chief Financial Officer and Chief Operating Officer (“CFO and COO”), Chief Strategy and Innovation Officer (“CSIO”), Chief Medical Officer (“CMO”), and another employee in exchange for services rendered totaling $9,432,000. In addition, stock option grant modification allocated to general and administrative expense increased stock compensation expense by $1,791,200.
Wages and salaries were impacted by increases to headcount, and employee salary rates. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the headcount for employees allocated to general and administrative purposes increased to
4.5 employees from three employees, respectively. In addition, the Chief Executive Officer's salary increased to an annual rate of $504,000 from $280,000 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Furthermore, the CSIO and CFO and COO transitioned from consulting agreements to employment agreements after the IPO was completed. The salary rates for each of those executives is $300,000 annually.
Interest expense. Interest expense decreased by $19,200, to $3,300 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $22,500 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is driven by the variance in the balance of convertible promissory notes during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Total interest expense accrued on the notes in the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $22,500. On August 15, 2019, each holder of convertible promissory notes issued during 2019 agreed to voluntarily convert the amounts of principal and interest then outstanding into shares of Series A-1 Preferred Stock.
Total interest expense accrued in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by $3,100 of cash paid for interest on the Note payable. The Note payable is attributed to the Director and Officer’s insurance policy. The total amount financed was approximately $540,500 with an annual interest rate of 4.59%, to be paid over a period of nine months.
Net loss. As a result of the cumulative effect of the factors described above, our net loss increased to $19,200,200 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3,727,900 during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $10,150,500. As of December 31, 2019 we had cash and cash equivalents of $1,929,100. We do not currently have any approved products and have never generated any revenue from product sales. To date, we have financed our operations primarily with proceeds from the sale of our convertible promissory notes, preferred stock, and common stock.
Following our recent offering of Series B Preferred Stock discussed below and increased expenditures related to our ongoing research and development efforts as well as the completion of an initial public offering on October 15, 2020, we determined that our current levels of cash will not be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for our operations through March 31, 2022. We have incurred significant operating losses since inception, and we expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we advance the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative costs will increase, including in connection with conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials for our product candidates, contracting with contract manufacturing organizations and building out internal capacity to have product manufactured to support preclinical studies and clinical trials, expanding our intellectual property portfolio and providing general and administrative support for our operations. As a result, these conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
We are seeking significant additional capital funding to develop our platform, additional hiring of scientific professionals, hiring other general and administrative employees, and clinical trials. However, there can be no assurance that such efforts will be successful or that, in the event that they are successful, the terms and conditions of such financing will be favorable. In consideration of our plans, substantial doubt cannot be alleviated with respect to our continued operations through March 31, 2022. Management's plans, of which the raising additional capital is not within management's control and cannot be assured, do not alleviate such substantial doubt through March 31, 2022.
Summary of Cash Flow
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented:
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $6,126,600 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $2,913,900 for year ended December 31, 2019. In the year ended December 31, 2020, net loss of $19,200,200 and outflows from prepaid expenses and other current assets in the amount of $499,700 were the cash drivers. These cash outflows were offset by non-cash stock compensation expenses from common stock issuances in the amount of $9,432,000, stock compensation expenses from stock options and restricted stock units of $3,813,700, and accrued expenses in the amount of $112,900.
Net cash used in operating activities increased by a total of $3,212,700 year-over-year. The main driver for the increase is the $15,428,100 increase in net loss offset by non-cash inflows from increased stock compensation expenses in the amount of $12,722,800. We primarily used cash to augment our research and development team, expand our leased property, expand our intellectual property portfolio, and pay for corporate development costs related to obtaining additional financing. See "Results of Operations" above for further details.
Cash flows from investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $1,457,600 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $302,700 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our net cash used in investing activities consisted entirely of purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities increased by a total of $1,154,900 in the year ended December 31, 2020 from December 31, 2019. This was primarily driven by equipment additions and leasehold improvements attributed to our Clean Room and Vivarium current good manufacturing practices facilities located in our Houston office.
Cash flows from financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $15,805,600 during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $4,761,400 for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the net cash provided by financing activities primarily consisted of net proceeds from the initial public offering of $12,332,700 and proceeds from preferred stock issuance in the amount of $3,000,000. In addition, there were proceeds from a note payable of $362,400 net of repayments, and loan payable of $105,600, net of repayments. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the net cash provided by financing activities consisted of proceeds from the sale of convertible promissory notes for $250,000, proceeds from preferred stock issuance in the amount of $4,500,000, and exercise of stock options to purchase common stock for $11,400.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements for any of the periods presented.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) requires our management to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported, including the notes thereto, and related disclosures of commitments and contingencies, if any. We have identified certain accounting policies that are significant to the preparation of our financial statements. These accounting policies are important for an understanding of our financial condition and results of operation. Critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require management's difficult, subjective, or complex judgment, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Certain accounting estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting the estimate may differ significantly from management's current judgments. We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Fair Value Measurements-The carrying value of our cash and cash equivalents, unbilled receivables from the granting agency, prepaid expenses and other assets, accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities approximate their fair value due to their short-term nature.
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In estimating the fair value of an asset or a liability, we take into account the characteristics of the asset or liability if market participants would take those characteristics into account when pricing the asset or liability at the measurement date.
We account for financial instruments in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures. ASC 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy under ASC 820 are described below:
Level 1-Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities.
Level 2-Quoted prices in non-active markets or in active markets for similar assets or liabilities, observable inputs other than quoted prices, and inputs that are not directly observable but are corroborated by observable market data.
Level 3-Prices or valuations that require inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable.
There were no changes in the fair value hierarchy leveling during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Stock-Based Compensation-We record stock compensation expense related to our 2017 Equity Incentive Plan in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. We measure and recognize stock compensation expense for all stock-based awards, including stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”).
Stock compensation expense for RSUs is estimated based on the number of units that vest multiplied by the fair value of the Company’s common stock on the vesting date. Stock compensation expense for stock options is based on estimated fair values recognized using the straight-line method over the requisite service period. The fair value of stock options is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-valuation model. The calculation of stock-based compensation expense requires that we make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the Black- Scholes option-valuation model, including the fair value of our common stock, expected term, expected volatility of the underlying common stock, and risk-free interest rate. Forfeitures are accounted for when they occur.
We estimate the grant-date fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option-valuation model. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, all equity grants under the 2017 Equity Incentive Plan were granted when we were a non-public company. The assumptions used to value such stock options were determined as follows:
Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that our stock options are expected to be outstanding. Equity grants during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 had limitations on the sale or transfer of our common stock as a privately held company. Prior to becoming publicly traded, we did not believe our historical exercise pattern was indicative of future exercise patterns. We have consequently used the SAB No. 110, simplified method to calculate the expected term, which is the average of the contractual term and vesting period. We do not plan to continue to use the SAB 110 simplified method after we have sufficient trading history as a publicly traded company.
Risk-Free Interest Rate. We base the risk-free interest rate used in the Black-Scholes option-valuation model on the implied yield available on US Treasury zero-coupon issues with a term equivalent to that of the expected term of the stock options for each stock option group.
Volatility. We determine the price volatility based on the historical volatilities of industry peers as we have limited trading history for our common stock price. We intend to continue to consistently apply this process using the same or a similar peer group of public companies, until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own common stock price becomes available, or unless circumstances change such that the identified peer companies are no longer similar, in which case other suitable peer companies whose common stock prices are publicly available would be utilized in the calculation.
Dividend Yield. The expected dividend assumption is based on our current expectations about our anticipated dividend policy. To date, we have not declared any dividends and, therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Common Stock Valuations. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the fair value of the common stock underlying our stock-based compensation grants was determined by our board of directors, with input from management and third-party valuations. We believe that the board of directors had the relevant experience and expertise to determine the fair value of our common stock. Given the absence of a public trading market of our common stock, and in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately- Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, the board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock at each grant date. These factors include:
·
valuations of the common stock performed by third-party specialists;
·
the prices, rights, preferences, and privileges of our Series A-1 Preferred Stock and Series B Preferred Stock relative to those of our common stock;
·
lack of marketability of the common stock;
·
current business conditions and projections;
·
hiring of key personnel and the experience of management;
·
our stage of development;
·
likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, a merger or acquisition of our company given prevailing market conditions, or other liquidation event;
·
the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and
·
the U.S. and global capital market conditions.
In valuing our common stock, the board of directors determined the equity value of our business using various valuation methods including combinations of income and market approaches. The income approach estimates value based on the expectation of future cash flows that a company will generate. These future cash flows are discounted to their present values using a discount rate derived from an analysis of the cost of capital of comparable publicly traded companies in our industry or similar business operations as of each valuation date and is adjusted to reflect the risks inherent in our cash flows. The market approach references actual transactions involving (i) the subject being valued, or (ii) similar assets and/or enterprises.
For each valuation, the equity value determined by the income and market approaches was then allocated to the common stock using either the option pricing method, or OPM, or probability-weighted expected return model, or PWERM.
The option pricing method is based on the Black Scholes option valuation model, which allows for the identification of a range of possible future outcomes, each with an associated probability. The OPM is appropriate to use when the range of possible future outcomes is difficult to predict and thus creates highly speculative forecasts. In general, while simple in its application, management did not use the OPM approach when considering allocation techniques for the valuation of equity interests in early stage, privately held life science companies. Management determined that applying the OPM would violate the major assumptions of the Black Scholes option valuation model approach. Additionally, the simulation approach can generally be reasonably approximated by a scenario-based approach like the PWERM as described below.
PWERM involves a forward-looking analysis of the possible future outcomes of the enterprise. This method is particularly useful when discrete future outcomes can be predicted at a relatively high confidence level with a probability distribution. Discrete future outcomes considered under the PWERM include an initial public offering, as well as non- initial public offering market-based outcomes. Determining the fair value of the enterprise using the PWERM requires us to develop assumptions and estimates for both the probability of an initial public offering liquidity event and stay private outcomes, as well as the values we expect those outcomes could yield. Since in February 2018, we have valued our common stock based on a PWERM.
Application of our approach involves the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding expected future revenue, expenses, and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies, and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impact valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
For valuations going forward, the board of directors will determine the fair value of each share of underlying common stock based on the closing price of the common stock as reported on the date of grant. Future expense amounts for any particular period could be affected by changes in assumptions or market conditions.
Warrants Underlying Shares IPO common stock-We record warrants to purchase shares of common stock underlying our shares of IPO common stock in accordance with ASC 470, Debt with conversion and other options. The fair value of the warrants was estimated on the IPO date using the Black-Scholes option- valuation model. The calculation of warrants requires that we make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the Black-Scholes option-valuation model, including the fair value of our common stock, expected term, expected volatility of the underlying common stock, risk-free interest rate, and exercise price.
We estimate the fair value of warrants using the Black-Scholes option-valuation model and the assumptions used to value such warrants are determined as follows:
Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that our warrants are expected to be outstanding. The expected term was calculated by taking the average of the vesting period and contract period.
Risk-Free Interest Rate. We base the risk-free interest rate used in the Black-Scholes option-valuation model on the implied yield available on US Treasury zero-coupon issues with a term equivalent to that of the expected term of the warrants.
Volatility. We determine the price volatility based on the historical volatilities of industry peers as we had one day of trading history as of the initial public offering date. We intend to continue to consistently apply this process using the same or a similar peer group of public companies, until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own common stock price becomes available, or unless circumstances change such that the identified peer companies are no longer similar, in which case other suitable peer companies whose common stock prices are publicly available would be utilized in the calculation.
Dividend Yield. The expected dividend assumption is based on our current expectations about our anticipated dividend policy. To date, we have not declared any dividends and, therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Common Stock Valuations. The fair value of our common stock when the warrants were issued is equal to the IPO common stock issuance price of $12.00 per share.
Exercise Price. The representative warrants’ exercise price to purchase common stock is $15.00 per share.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) or other standard setting bodies and adopted by the Company as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material impact on the Company’s financial position, results of operations, or cash flows upon adoption.
In February 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), which requires lessees to recognize the following for all leases (with the exception of short-term leases) at the commencement date: a lease liability, which is a lessee’s obligation to make lease payments arising from a lease, measured on a discounted basis; and a right-of-use asset, which is an asset that represents the lessee’s right to use, or control the use of, a specified asset for the lease term. In July 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-11 to amend certain aspects of Topic 842. These amendments provide entities with an additional (and optional) transition method to adopt Topic 842. Under this transition method, an entity initially applies the transition requirements in Topic 842 at that Topic’s effective date with the effects of initially applying Topic 842 recognized as a cumulative effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings (or other components of equity or net assets, as appropriate) in the period of adoption. On April 8, 2020, the FASB changed the effective date of this standard applicable to the Company as an emerging growth company to January 1, 2022. The Company is currently evaluating the potential impact of this standard on its financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
In June 2016, FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326). The amendments in ASU 2016-13 affect entities holding financial assets and net investment in leases that are not accounted for at fair value through net income. The amendments affect loans, debt securities, trade receivables, net investments in leases, off-balance-sheet credit exposures, reinsurance receivables, and any other financial assets not excluded from the scope that have the contractual right to receive cash. The amendments in ASU 2016-13 require a financial asset (or a group of financial assets) measured at amortized cost basis to be presented at the net amount expected to be collected. The allowance for credit losses is a valuation account that is deducted from the amortized cost basis of the financial asset(s) to present the net carrying value at the amount expected to be collected on the financial asset. On April 8, 2020, the FASB has changed the effective date of this standard applicable to the Company as an emerging growth company to
January 1, 2023. The Company is currently evaluating the potential impact of this standard on its financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASU 2016-15 (Topic 230), Classification of Certain Cash Receipts and Payments, a new standard providing guidance on statement of cash flow classification on specific issues. The standard is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal periods beginning after December 15, 2018. It is required to be applied on a retrospective approach. The Company determined that this standard had no impact on its financial position, results of operations, and cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.