ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included under ITEM 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements about our business and operations. Our actual results may differ materially from those we currently anticipate as a result of many factors, including those described under Part I - FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
OVERVIEW
The Company designs, manufactures and markets proprietary portable and innovative medical devices primarily for the ambulatory infusion market as governed by the United States Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”) quality and regulatory system and international standards for quality system management.
The Company had several significant accomplishments in 2020 including (i) record net sales; (ii) entering into an agreement with Command Medical Products, Inc. (“Command”) to manufacture and supply the Company’s subassemblies, needle sets and tubing products for supply continuity and cost savings; (iii) a non-cash no fault litigation settlement, which eliminates the associated distraction and litigation expenses related to that litigation going forward and (iv) the completion of a capital raise of net $26.6 million.
The Company remains committed to growth over the long-term, as we make short-term investments to execute on our strategic initiatives. In February 2019, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a strategic plan through 2022, including certain financial goals. While those financial goals have not changed, given the results of the past year, the likely timing of attaining those goals has been pushed out. The Board plans to revisit the strategic plan with the Company’s new Chief Executive Officer, to align the plan with her growth strategies and will update shareholders accordingly. Any strategic plan and related financial goals should not be relied upon as a predictor of future results. The Company’s primary areas of focus for 2021 are expected to include (i) continued focus on improving the customer experience; (ii) continued research and development efforts to introduce compelling products into the markets we serve; (iii) expansion of sales into other drug therapies, both existing and new and expanded presence in international markets; (iv) the implementation of secondary sourcing of our needle and tubing sets to Command and (v) completion of our search for a new manufacturing facility and corporate headquarters.
- 26 -
KORU Medical continues to monitor its operations and government recommendations and has made modifications to its normal operations because of the COVID-19 pandemic, including requiring most of its non-production related team members to work remotely or on a staggered work shift. The Company has continued to maintain a manufacturing operational capacity at its manufacturing facility located in Chester, New York, and has instituted heightened cleaning and sanitization standards and several health and safety protocols and procedures to safeguard its team members who do continue to report in person. Until the duration of the pandemic is known, we cannot predict the effects the pandemic may have on our business, in particular with respect to demand for our products, our strategy, and our prospects, the effects on our customers, or the impact on our financial results. For example, our future net sales growth may continue to be impacted due to fewer new prescriptions for individuals with Primary Immune Deficiency Disease (“PIDD”) and Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy (“CIDP”) as a result of patients not seeking care during the pandemic.
Our revenues derive from three business sources: (i) domestic core, (ii) international core, and (iii) novel therapies. Our core revenues include sales of our products for the delivery of SCIg to treat PIDD, CIDP, and other disease states that are not included in novel therapies. Novel therapies currently include revenues from clinical trials.
Total net sales increased $1.0 million or 4.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year period. The increase was due principally to an increase in domestic core product sales volume, as well as higher domestic novel therapies of $0.8 million. We believe the increase in domestic core product sales volume reflects growth in diagnosis of PIDD and CIDP (pre any COVID-19 impact to patient starts). Offsetting the favorable impact on net sales from the domestic core product sales volume increases in 2020 were higher allowances, which include (i) rebates resulting from the net impact of pricing increases at our largest distributor in the second half of 2019, and (ii) pricing decreases and growth rebates to secure our contractual position with several large customers in 2020. Further increasing allowances were payment discounts and distribution fees at our largest distributor under new contract terms entered into in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Our inventory position grew from $2.4 million at December 31, 2019 to $6.8 million at December 31, 2020 mostly to ensure timely order fulfillment as we transition manufacturing of our needle sets and tubing products for supply continuity to Command. As transition is completed, this inventory is expected to convert to a source of cash in the future.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Sales
The following table summarizes our net sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Total net sales increased $1.0 million or 4.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year period. The increase was due principally to an increase in domestic core product sales volume, as well as higher domestic novel therapies of $0.8 million. We believe the increase in domestic core product sales volume reflects growth in diagnosis of PIDD and CIDP (pre any COVID-19 impact to patient starts). Offsetting the favorable impact on net sales from the domestic core product sales volume increases in 2020 were higher allowances, which include (i) rebates resulting from the net impact of pricing increases at our largest distributor in the second half of 2019, and (ii) pricing decreases and growth rebates to secure our contractual position with several large customers in 2020. Further increasing allowances were payment discounts and distribution fees at our largest distributor under new contract terms entered into in the fourth quarter of 2019.
- 27 -
Gross Profit
Our gross profit for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
Gross profit increased $0.1 million or 0.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period last year reflecting net sales growth described above as well as favorable production variances. Gross profit percentage of 61.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 was negatively impacted by higher allowances as described above, overtime costs related to COVID-19 absenteeism and an obsolescence reserve resulting from a discontinued product line, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 of 64.1%.
Selling, general and administrative, Litigation, and Research and development
Our selling, general and administrative, litigation and research and development costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $2.3 million, or 23.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period last year, due to an increase of $1.2 million of higher salary and related benefits, and recruiting fees. Also contributing to the increase were consulting fees of $0.8 million related to marketing, regulatory and strategic initiatives, as well as increased director fees and higher insurance premiums related to our directors’ and officers’ insurance policy of $0.5 million and other miscellaneous expenses of $0.3 million. Offsetting the increase were lower trade show and travel expenses of $0.5 million as a result of COVID-19 related travel restrictions.
Litigation fees decreased approximately $1.0 million compared to the same period last year due primarily to the negotiation of and entry into a litigation settlement agreement reached with EMED Technologies Corporation (“EMED”) in May 2020 resulting in a non-cash expense of $2.2 million.
Research and development expenses increased $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the same period last year mostly due to increased salary and related benefits due to higher headcount and additional testing as we continue our development initiatives.
Depreciation and amortization
For the year ended December 31, 2020, depreciation and amortization expense increased approximately $0.1 million, or 23.0%, to $0.4 million compared with the same period last year. We continued to invest in capital assets, mostly related to manufacturing and computer equipment.
Net (Loss)/Income
Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.2 million, as compared to net income of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by the EMED settlement charge of $2.2 million and higher selling, general and administrative expenses of $2.3 million.
- 28 -
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Management of the Company believes that investors’ understanding of the Company’s performance is enhanced by disclosing non-GAAP financial measures as a reasonable basis for comparison of the Company’s ongoing results of operations. These non-GAAP measures should not be considered a substitute for GAAP-basis measures and results. Our non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to non-GAAP measures of other companies. The table below provides a disclosure of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most closely analogous measure determined in accordance with GAAP.
Non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. They are limited in value because they exclude charges that have a material effect on our reported results and, therefore, should not be relied upon as the sole financial measures to evaluate our financial results. The non-GAAP financial measures are meant to supplement, and to be viewed in conjunction with, GAAP financial results.
We disclose and discuss Adjusted EBITDA as a non-GAAP financial measure in our public releases, including quarterly earnings releases, and other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. We define Adjusted EBITDA as earnings (net (loss)/ income) before interest, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization, discontinued product expense, reorganization charges, litigation expenses including stock-based settlement expense, manufacturing initiative and stock-based compensation expenses. Prior to January 1, 2020, discontinued product expense and manufacturing initiative expenses were not included in our definition of Adjusted EBITDA. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is used by investors and other users of our financial statements as a supplemental financial measure that, when viewed with our GAAP results and the accompanying reconciliation, we believe provides additional information that is useful to gain an understanding of the factors and trends affecting our business. We also believe the disclosure of Adjusted EBITDA helps investors meaningfully evaluate and compare our cash flow generating capacity from quarter to quarter and year to year. Adjusted EBITDA is used by management as a supplemental internal measure for planning and forecasting overall expectations and for evaluating actual results against such expectations. Because management uses Adjusted EBITDA for such purposes, the Company uses Adjusted EBITDA as a significant criterion for determining the amount of annual cash incentive compensation paid to our executive officers and employees. We have historically found that Adjusted EBITDA is superior to other metrics for our company-wide cash incentive program, as it is more easily explained and understood by our typical employee.
A reconciliation of our non-GAAP measures is below:
Reorganization Charges. We have excluded the effect of reorganization charges in calculating our non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA measure. We incurred significant expenses in connection with the termination and replacement of C-suite executives, senior management and changes to the Board of Directors which we would not otherwise incur in periods presented as part of our continuing operations. Reorganization charges include costs related to the replacement of C-suite executives including a transition bonus and recruiting fees, prior to March 31, 2019.
Discontinued Product Expense. We have excluded the effect of expenses related to a discontinued product line in calculating our non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA measure. We expected to retire our Res-Q-Vac product line towards the end of 2020, but due to the failure of equipment used to manufacture the product, the discontinuation and resulting expense was accelerated into the first quarter of 2020 which we would not otherwise incur in periods presented as part of our continuing operations. Subsequently, in the rest of 2020, we sold off a portion of the discontinued inventory previously reserved. We do not expect to incur any significant related expenses in the future.
- 29 -
Litigation. We have excluded litigation expenses in calculating our non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA measure. Litigation expenses include stock-based litigation settlement expense of $2.2 million related to the settlement agreement entered into with EMED on May 20, 2020. We continue to evaluate our business performance excluding litigation fees; however, expenses related to the EMED litigation have discontinued as a result of the settlement.
Manufacturing Initiative Expenses. We have excluded the effect of expenses related to the implementation of those portions of our strategic plan related to creating manufacturing efficiencies, in calculating our non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA measure. We incurred expenses in connection with executing on these initiatives which we would not otherwise incur in periods presented as part of our continuing operations. We expect to incur related expenses for the next twelve to eighteen months.
Stock-based Compensation Expense. We have excluded the effect of stock-based compensation expense in calculating our non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA measure. We record non-cash compensation expense related to grants of options for executives, employees and consultants, and grants of restricted shares to our board. Depending upon the size, timing and the terms of the grants, the non-cash compensation expense may vary significantly but will recur in future periods.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our principal source of liquidity is our cash of $27.3 million as of December 31, 2020, which includes the net proceeds from the 2020 capital raise totaling $26.6 million. In response to concerns about the potential impact of COVID-19, the Company elected to draw $3.5 million during the three months ended June 30, 2020, the full amount available on its line of credit, and paid it back during the three months ended September 30, 2020. Our principal source of operating cash inflows is from sales of our products to customers. Our principal cash outflows relate to the purchase and production of inventory, related costs, selling, general and administrative expenses. In 2020, the Company also purchased 683,271 shares of its common stock outstanding for $3.5 million under its stock repurchase program, pursuant to which the Company may purchase up to $10.0 million of its outstanding common stock through December 31, 2021.
Our inventory position grew from $2.4 million at December 31, 2019 to $6.8 million at December 31, 2020 mostly to ensure timely order fulfillment as we transition manufacturing of our needle sets and tubing products for supply continuity to Command. As transition is completed, this inventory is expected to convert to a source of cash in the future.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was mostly attributable to non-cash charges for stock-based compensation and litigation settlement expense of $2.9 million, and an increase in accrued expenses and accrued payroll of $1.4 million, driven by the litigation settlement with EMED and customer rebates. Further adding to the increase was an increase in depreciation and amortization of $0.4 million and a decrease in accounts receivable of $0.7 million due to timing of collections. Offsetting these were primarily working capital changes which include an increase in inventory of $4.4 million as we built inventory to keep pace with sales growth and to ensure timely order fulfillment as we transition manufacturing to Command, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $0.4 million relating to increased insurance premiums, and a decrease in accrued tax liability of $0.2 million resulting from book to tax differences related to stock option expense.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted from non-cash charges for stock-based compensation of $1.2 million, depreciation and amortization of long-lived tangible and intangible assets of $0.3 million, as well as increases in accrued expenses of $0.6 million primarily due to bonus, rebate and legal accruals and an increase in accrued taxes of $0.2 million. Partially offsetting these were higher accounts receivable of $1.8 million, increased inventory of $0.3 million as we build stock to keep pace with sales growth, as well as severance payments paid this year against last year’s accrual and increases in prepaids of $0.1 million related to directors’ and officers’ insurance.
- 30 -
Investing Activities
Our net cash used in investing activities of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily for capital expenditures for research and development and strategic initiatives. Our net cash provided by investing activities of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, was mostly the result of the maturation of a certificate of deposit for $1.5 million and the sale of the house the Company owned for $0.2 million, offset by capital expenditures of $0.2 million and patent applications and maintenance of existing applications of $0.2 million.
Financing Activities
The $23.2 million provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 is from the $26.6 million capital raise, net of expenses, and $0.1 million from options exercised, offset against the repurchase of the Company’s common stock outstanding of $3.5 million. The $0.5 million provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was a result of warrants and options exercised during the period.
See “NOTE 11 - DEBT OBLIGATIONS” for further detail regarding the promissory note and loan agreement, and “NOTE 12 - EQUITY” regarding the equity offering in the accompanying “Notes to Financial Statements” appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Also, see “NOTE 5 - STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION” for further detail regarding the EMED settlement.
We believe that as of December 31, 2020, cash on hand and cash expected to be generated from future operating activities will be sufficient to fund our operations, including further research and development and capital expenditures, for the next 12 months.
Debt and Borrowing Capacity
Refer to “NOTE 11 - DEBT OBLIGATIONS” in the accompanying “Notes to Financial Statements” appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details regarding debt.
COMMITMENTS AND CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
Lease Commitments
We currently rent a masonry and steel frame building erected on 3.27 acres of land located at 24 Carpenter Road, Chester, New York 10918. This facility is used as our headquarters and for our general operations.
On February 28, 2019, we completed year twenty of a twenty-year lease. On November 14, 2017, we executed a lease extension, which calls for six-month extensions beginning March 1, 2019 with the option to renew six times. The Company has exercised four of the six additional renewal options through August 31, 2021. In January 2021, the Company exercised the remaining two renewal options, extending the lease through August 31, 2022.
We believe our current facilities are suitable and adequate for our current business operations. We continue to seek another location with more square footage to provide us room for growth. In addition to the increased costs of occupying a larger space, we expect to incur additional costs in connection with construction and FDA compliance with respect to the new location.
Refer to “NOTE 6 - LEASES” in the accompanying “Notes to Financial Statements” appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details regarding our operating and finance leases.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles of the United States (“GAAP”) requires estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent liabilities in the financial statements and accompanying notes. The SEC has defined a company’s critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of the company’s financial condition and results of operations, and which require the company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. Based on this definition, we have identified some of our more critical accounting estimates below. We also have other key accounting policies, which involve the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that are significant to understanding our results. For additional information, see “NOTE 1 - NATURE OF OPERATIONS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES” in the accompanying “Notes to Financial Statements” appearing in this
- 31 -
Annual Report on Form 10-K. Although we believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgments are reasonable, they are based upon information presently available. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions, judgments, or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which provides a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers. We adopted this ASU effective January 1, 2018 on a full retrospective basis. Adoption of this standard did not result in significant changes to our accounting policies, business processes, systems or controls, or have a material impact on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows or related disclosures. As such, prior period financial statements were not recast.
The Company’s revenues result from the sale of assembled products. We recognize revenues when shipment occurs, and at which point the customer obtains control and ownership of the goods. Shipping costs generally are billed to customers and are included in sales.
The Company generally does not accept return of goods shipped unless it is a Company error. The only credits provided to customers are for defective merchandise. The Company warrants the syringe driver from defects in materials and workmanship under normal use and the warranty does not include a performance obligation. The costs under the warranty are expensed as incurred.
Provisions for distributor pricing and annual customer growth rebates are variable consideration and are recorded as a reduction of revenue in the same period the related sales are recorded or when it is probable the annual growth target will be achieved. Rebates are provided to distributors for the difference in selling price to distributor and pricing specified to select customers.
The Company established an allowance for charging off uncollectible trade accounts receivable that have both of the following characteristics: (a) They have a contractual maturity of one year or less, (b) They arose from the sale of goods or services.
Inventory
Inventories of raw materials are stated at the lower of standard cost, which approximates average cost, or market value including allocable overhead. Work-in-process and finished goods are stated at the lower of standard cost or market value and include direct labor and allocable overhead.
We maintain reserves for excess and obsolete inventory resulting from the potential inability to sell certain products at prices in excess of current carrying costs. We make estimates regarding the future recoverability of the costs of these products and record provisions based on historical experience, expiration of sterilization dates and expected future trends. If actual product life cycles, product demand or acceptance of new product introductions are less favorable than projected by management, additional inventory write downs may be required, which could unfavorably affect future operating results.
ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS RECENTLY ADOPTED
Refer to “NOTE 1 - NATURE OF OPERATIONS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES” in the accompanying “Notes to Financial Statements” appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS NOT YET ADOPTED
Refer to “NOTE 1 - NATURE OF OPERATIONS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES” in the accompanying “Notes to Financial Statements” appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.