ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs and involve numerous risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to those described in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. You should carefully read “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company dedicated to the discovery and development of novel cancer therapeutics designed to transform patient outcomes through a precision medicine strategy by targeting dysregulated transcription. Our proprietary product engine focuses on dysregulated transcription factors and the transcriptional regulatory networks (TRNs) that drive their oncogenic activity.
Our lead product candidate, entospletinib (ENTO), which we acquired from Gilead Sciences in July 2020, is an orally administered, selective SYK inhibitor that has been tested in more than 200 AML patients. Our expertise in TRN biology allowed us to recognize SYK as a critical node in the HOX/MEIS TRN, and this acquisition accelerated our pipeline to late clinical stage. Based on clinical results in a biomarker-defined subset of patients and based on the discussion and guidance from our recent End-of-Phase 2 meeting with the FDA, we intend to proceed as planned with our registrational Phase 3 clinical trial of ENTO using measurable residual disease (MRD) negative complete response (CR) as the primary endpoint. We plan to initiate such Phase 3 clinical trial in mid-2021, with MRD negative CR data expected in the second half of 2023. We plan to have similar discussions regarding use of this surrogate primary endpoint with the European Medicines Agency later in 2021. In addition, we are developing KB-0742, which is designed to be an orally bioavailable inhibitor of CDK9 with a differentiated selectivity profile, for the treatment of MYC-amplified solid tumors. The FDA cleared our IND for KB-0742 in December 2020. In February 2021, the first patient was dosed in our Phase 1/2 clinical trial of KB-0742 in patients with advanced solid tumors. We plan to report initial data from this trial in the fourth quarter of 2021, with a data read-out from the expansion cohorts of the trial anticipated in 2022. In addition, we are leveraging our product engine to drive multiple oncology discovery programs targeting dysregulated transcription factors and their associated TRNs.
The following chart summarizes the current stages of our development programs, including our lead product candidate, ENTO, as well as KB-0742, and our next anticipated milestones.
We also are executing on robust discovery programs across multiple TRNs, which focus on four cancer types where dysregulated transcription plays a central role: hematologic malignancies, prostate cancer, MYC-driven cancers, and small cell/neuroendocrine cancers. We anticipate submitting an IND for a drug candidate arising from one of these programs in 2022, although we may not be successful in identifying product candidates that can selectively modulate the specific oncogenic TRNs associated with such programs.
In October 2020, we completed the initial public offering (IPO) of our common stock. In the IPO, we issued and sold 15,131,579 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $19.00 per share, inclusive of the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares. We received approximately $263.7 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses. In August 2020, we raised approximately $151.3 million through a private financing of the sale of
$155.2 million principal amount of convertible notes (2020 Notes). Upon closing of the IPO, the 2020 Notes automatically converted into a total of 9,610,713 shares of our common stock. Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures and, to a lesser extent, general and administrative expenditures.
The current COVID-19 pandemic has presented substantial public health and economic challenges around the world. We cannot at this time predict the specific extent, duration or impact that COVID-19 will have on our financial condition and operations, including ongoing research activities, ongoing and planned clinical trials and our financial results. While we are currently conducting a Phase 1/2 clinical trial for KB-0742 and are preparing to initiate clinical trials in 2021, COVID-19 precautions may directly or indirectly impact their timelines and interrupt clinical enrollment.
Since our formation in June 2017, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, identifying, acquiring and developing our product candidates, building our product engine, establishing our intellectual property portfolio, and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We have principally financed our operations to date through private placements of preferred stock and convertible debt, and our IPO.
Since our formation, we have incurred significant operating losses, primarily from costs incurred in connection with research and development activities and general and administrative costs associated with our operations. Our net losses were $88.4 million, $16.1 million, and $6.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had an accumulated deficit of $111.9 million and $23.5 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $462.1 million and $96.9 million of cash, cash equivalents and investments, respectively. We expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect our research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, and capital expenditures will continue to increase.
Strategic Agreements
Gilead Asset Purchase Agreement
In July 2020, we entered into the Gilead Asset Purchase Agreement, pursuant to which we acquired certain assets from Gilead related to ENTO and LANRA, and patents and other intellectual property covering or related to the development, manufacture and commercialization of ENTO and LANRA.
In consideration for such assets, on the date of the Gilead Asset Purchase Agreement, we made a $3.0 million upfront cash payment and issued a $3.0 million principal amount convertible promissory note to Gilead (Gilead Note). We also made a $0.7 million payment to reimburse Gilead for certain liabilities we assumed pursuant to the Gilead Asset Purchase Agreement. In addition, we are required to make milestone payments upon successful achievement of certain regulatory and sales milestones for ENTO, LANRA and other SYK inhibitor compounds covered by the patent rights acquired pursuant to the Gilead Asset Purchase Agreement and developed by us as a back-up to ENTO or LANRA (Other Compounds). Upon initiation of our planned registrational Phase 3 clinical trial of ENTO in combination with IC in AML patients with NPM1 mutations, we will be required to pay a milestone to Gilead of $29.0 million, and upon successful completion of certain other regulatory milestones in the United States, European Union and United Kingdom for ENTO, LANRA and any Other Compounds, across up to two distinct indications, we will be required to pay to Gilead an aggregate total of $51.3 million. Upon achieving certain thresholds for the aggregate annual net sales of ENTO, LANRA and any Other Compounds combined, we would owe to Gilead potential milestone payments totaling $115.0 million.
Gilead is also eligible to receive (i) tiered marginal royalties ranging from the very low-teens to high-teens on annual worldwide net sales of ENTO, (ii) tiered marginal royalties ranging from high-single digits to the mid-teens on annual worldwide net sales of LANRA and (iii) tiered marginal royalties ranging from the low single digits to mid-single digits on annual worldwide net sales of any Other Compounds. The royalties in the foregoing clauses are subject to reduction, on a country-by-country basis, for products not covered by certain claims within the assigned patents, for generic entry and, in the case of ENTO and LANRA, for any royalties paid for future licenses of third party intellectual property required to develop or commercialize ENTO or LANRA. Our royalty obligation with respect to a given product in a given country begins upon the first commercial sale of such product in such country and ends on the latest of (i) expiration of the last claim of a defined set of the assigned patent rights covering such product in such country; (ii) loss of exclusive data or marketing rights to such product in such country; or (iii) 10 years from the first commercial sale of such product in such country.
Under the Gilead Asset Purchase Agreement, we are required to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop, obtain regulatory approval for and commercialize either ENTO or LANRA.
Harvard License Agreement
In January 2018, we entered into a license agreement with President and Fellows of Harvard College (Harvard), pursuant to which Harvard granted us a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free license to certain intellectual property for the purpose of commercializing products relating to our SMM platform. We paid a one-time license fee in the amount of $10,000 on the date of the agreement, an annual license maintenance fee of $20,000 on each of the first two anniversaries and an annual license fee of $25,000 on each subsequent anniversary until the last to expire of any valid claim included in the licensed patents.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consisted of research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of direct and indirect costs incurred in connection with our therapeutic discovery efforts and the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, as well as the development of our product engine.
Direct costs include:
•expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations (CROs) and other vendors that conduct our clinical trials and preclinical activities;
•costs of outside consultants, including their fees, stock-based compensation and related travel expenses;
•costs of acquiring, developing, and manufacturing clinical trial materials and lab supplies; and
•payments made under third-party strategic agreements.
Indirect costs include:
•personnel costs, which include salaries, benefits, and other employee related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel engaged in research and development functions;
•costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
•facilities costs, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies.
We expense research and development costs as the services are performed or the goods are received. We recognize costs for certain development activities based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information provided to us by our vendors and our internal management. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual agreements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in our financial statements as prepaid or accrued research and development expenses.
Because we are working on multiple research and development programs at any one time, we intend to track our direct costs by the stage of program, clinical or preclinical. However, our internal costs, employees and infrastructure are not directly tied to any one program and are deployed across multiple programs. As such, we do not track indirect costs on a specific program basis.
Our research and development expenses may vary significantly based on a variety of factors, such as:
•the scope, rate of progress, expense and results of our preclinical development activities;
•per patient trial costs;
•the number of trials required for approval; the number of sites included in the trials;
•the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•uncertainties in clinical trial design and patient enrollment or drop out or discontinuation rates, particularly in light of the current COVID-19 pandemic environment;
•potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
•the safety and efficacy of our product candidates;
•the timing, receipt, and terms of any approvals from applicable regulatory authorities including the FDA and non-U.S. regulators;
•significant and changing government regulation and regulatory guidance;
•potential additional trials requested by regulatory agencies;
•establishing clinical and commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers in order to ensure that we or our third-party manufacturers are able to make product successfully;
•the extent to which we establish additional strategic collaborations or other arrangements;
•the impact of any business interruptions to our operations or to those of the third parties with whom we work, particularly in light of the current COVID-19 pandemic environment;
•the expense of filing, prosecuting, defending, and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights; and
•maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile of our product candidates following approval, if any, of our product candidates.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to identify and develop additional product candidates and as more of our product candidates move into later stages of clinical development, which typically have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
The process of conducting the necessary preclinical and clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. The actual probability of success for our product candidates may be affected by a variety of factors. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. Further, a number of factors, including those outside of our control, could adversely impact the timing and duration of our product candidates’ development, which could increase our research and development expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, which include salaries, benefits and other employee related costs, such as stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance, corporate and business development, and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services; insurance costs; recruiting costs; travel expenses; and facilities-related costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to increase our general and administrative personnel headcount to support personnel in research and development, and to support our operations generally as we increase our research and development activities and activities related to the potential commercialization of our product candidates. We also expect to incur increased expenses associated with operating as a public company, including costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance costs, and investor and public relations costs.
Change in Fair Value of Convertible Notes Payable
We elected on issuance to account for our convertible notes payable (2020 Notes and Gilead Note) at fair value until their settlement. The change in fair value of our convertible notes payable was recognized through the statement of operations and comprehensive loss. The 2020 Notes and the Gilead Note settled on the closing of our IPO in October 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of debt issuance costs we incurred to issue the 2020 Notes. The debt issuance costs were expensed on issuance because we elected to record the 2020 Notes at fair value.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest and other income, net primarily consists of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Research and development expenses were $43.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $29.8 million was primarily due to $6.6 million in acquisition costs for our SYK portfolio related to the Gilead Asset Purchase Agreement (See Note 13), an increase of $9.9 million in outside and consulting research expenses, and an increase of $8.7 million in personnel costs primarily attributable to increased research and development personnel headcount, including an increase in stock-based compensation of $1.3 million. Also contributing to this increase in research and development expenses is an increase of $3.4 million in facilities, depreciation and other expenses primarily attributable to the commencement of the lease for our new Cambridge facility (as described below) in March 2020, and an increase of $1.2 million in lab supplies related to increased development activity in connection with our preclinical product candidates.
Research and development expenses were $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $8.4 million was primarily due to an increase of $3.5 million in outside and consulting research expenses and an increase of $0.7 million in lab supplies related to increased development activity in connection with our preclinical product candidates, an increase of $1.9 million in personnel costs primarily attributable to increased research and development personnel headcount, including $0.1 million of additional stock-based compensation, and an increase of $2.3 million in facilities, depreciation and other expenses primarily attributable to our lab facilities move which took place in December 2018.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $11.4 million was primarily due to an increase of $2.2 million in personnel costs, primarily attributable to increased general and administrative personnel headcount to support the growth of our research and development organization, a $3.9 million increase in professional fees primarily attributable to legal, insurance, and outside consultant costs, and a $3.0 million increase in other expenses primarily attributable to facility costs, employee onboarding costs, and taxes and filing fees. Also contributing to this increase in general and administrative expenses is an increase in stock-based compensation of $2.3 million attributable to both the increases in personnel costs and outside consulting services.
General and administrative expenses were $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $1.8 million was primarily due to an increase of $0.8 million in personnel costs primarily attributable to increased general and administrative personnel headcount to support the growth of our research and development organization, an increase of $0.6 million in professional fees primarily attributable to legal and outside consultant costs, and an increase of $0.2 million in facilities costs related to our office space lease that commenced in August 2018.
Change in Fair Value of Convertible Notes Payable
The change in fair value of convertible notes payable of $27.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was directly attributable to the Company’s issuance and settlement of the 2020 Notes and the Gilead Note. There were no similar transactions in the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Interest Expense
Interest expense of $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consists of debt issuance costs that were expensed on issuance of the 2020 Notes. There were no similar material transactions in the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest and other income, net was $0.9 million and $0.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $0.2 million increase was due to interest earned on our cash equivalents and investments as our combined cash, cash equivalents and investments interest earning balance was higher during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The Company did not have interest earning assets in the year ended December 31, 2018.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Plan of Operations
Sources of Liquidity
To date, we have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations. We have not yet commercialized any products and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates for several years, if ever. Prior to our IPO, our operations were financed primarily by net proceeds from the sale and issuance of our convertible preferred stock and the 2020 Notes, totaling aggregate gross proceeds of $278.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $462.1 million.
Upon completion of our IPO on October 14, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 15,131,579 shares of our common stock including 1,973,684 shares of common stock sold pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares at a price to the public of $19.00 per share and received approximately $263.7 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
Future Funding Requirements
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures related to ENTO, LANRA and KB-0742, and our other research efforts, and to a lesser extent, general and administrative expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Our product candidates are still in the early stages of clinical and preclinical development, and the outcomes of these efforts are uncertain. Accordingly, we cannot estimate the actual amounts necessary to successfully complete the development and commercialization of our product candidates or whether, or when, we may achieve profitability. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity or debt financings and collaboration agreements. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our existing stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we are unable to raise capital when needed, we will need to delay, reduce or terminate planned activities to reduce costs. Doing so will likely harm our ability to execute our business plans.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $37.9 million, which was primarily attributable to our net loss of $88.4 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $44.1 million and cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $6.5 million. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $6.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of an increase of accounts payable and accrued expenses $6.0 million and an increase of $4.7 million in other liabilities, partially offset by an increase of $5.2 million in prepaid and other current assets. The increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses was largely due to increases in accrued compensation and external research and development costs and the increase in other liabilities was primarily the result of an increase in the unvested early exercised share liability. The increase in prepaid and other current assets was primarily due to increases in prepaid insurance and external research and development and outside services.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $15.1 million, which was primarily attributable to our net loss of $16.1 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $0.8 million and cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.3 million. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of an increase of $1.3 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses as well as a decrease of $0.2 million related to other long-term assets, partially offset by an increase of $0.6 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a decrease of $0.2 million in other liabilities. The increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses was largely due to an increase in external research and development costs. The increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets was due to interest earned on available-for-sale securities.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, cash used in operating activities was $6.4 million, which was primarily attributable to our net loss of $6.7 million, partially offset by $0.1 million of cash provided by changes in our operating assets and non-cash charges of $0.2 million. Net cash provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2018 consisted of an increase in other long-term assets of $0.2 million, offset by an increase in other liabilities of $0.2 million and an increase of $0.2 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses. The increase in other long-term assets and other liabilities was primarily due to recognition of the right-of-use operating lease for our office space.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was $160.2 million, consisting of $78.7 million in cash received from investment maturities, offset by $229.3 million of net investment purchases and $9.6 million for the purchase of property and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in investing activities was $67.6 million, consisting of $64.6 million of net investment purchases and $2.9 million for the purchase of property and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, cash used in investing activities was $1.1 million, consisting of purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $415.6 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds from the IPO of $263.7 million, net proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes (2020 Notes) of $151.3 million and proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $0.6 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $105.0 million, consisting of net proceeds of $104.9 million from our sales of shares of our Series A convertible preferred stock and proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $0.1 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, cash provided by financing activities was $16.2 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds from our sales of Series Seed convertible preferred stock.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Represents minimum operating lease payments under operating leases for facilities in San Mateo, California and Cambridge, Massachusetts.
In 2020, we entered into additional lease agreements to expand our office and lab spaces. On February 28, 2020, we entered into an 11-year lease agreement to move our research and development operations to a 40,514 square-foot facility at 301 Binney Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts (new Cambridge facility). The initial annual base rent is approximately $4.1 million and such amount will increase by 3% annually on each anniversary of the rent commencement date, which was October 2020.
In May 2020, we amended our agreement to extend the lease for our office space in San Mateo, California through April 2025. The initial annual base rent was approximately $0.3 million, and such amount increases by 3.0% annually on each anniversary of the commencement date. In July 2020, we expanded to an adjacent suite for an additional lease through April 2025 with similar economic terms and an additional initial annual base rent of $0.2 million. In February 2021, we entered into a new lease agreement to substitute our office space in San Mateo, California for a larger space within the same property. Refer to Note 17 included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further detail.
Pursuant to the Gilead Asset Purchase Agreement we entered into in July 2020, we are obligated to make milestone payments upon the achievement of specified regulatory and clinical milestones as well as royalty payments. We have not included future payments under this agreement in the table above since the payment obligations under this agreement are contingent upon future events, such as our achievement of specified milestones or generating product sales. We are currently unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving these milestones or generating future product sales. See the subsection titled “-Strategic Agreements-Gilead Asset Purchase Agreement” above.
We enter into contracts in the ordinary course of business with CROs for clinical trials, preclinical and clinical research studies and testing, manufacturing and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts do not contain any minimum purchase commitments and are generally terminable by us upon prior notice and, as a result, are not included in the table of contractual obligations above. Payments due upon termination generally consist only of payments for services provided and expenses incurred up to the date of termination.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, costs and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development and manufacturing expenses. This process involves reviewing open contract and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advanced payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•CROs in connection with performing research activities on our behalf and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf;
•investigative sites or other service providers in connection with clinical trials;
•vendors in connection with preclinical and clinical development activities; and
•vendors related to product manufacturing and development and distribution of preclinical and clinical supplies.
We base our expenses related to preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation and vary from contract to contract, which may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the completion of scientific milestones. In accruing fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or amount of prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock options and other stock-based awards granted to employees, directors, and non-employees based on their fair value on the date of grant and recognize stock-based compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We recognize the impact of forfeitures on stock-based compensation expense as forfeitures occur. We apply the straight-line method of expense recognition to all awards with only service-based vesting conditions.
We estimate the fair value of each stock option grant on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. This model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions to determine the fair value of stock-based awards, including:
•Fair Value of Common Stock-For grants before the completion of our IPO in October 2020 when we were a privately held company with no public market for our common stock, the fair value of our common stock underlying share-based awards was estimated on each grant date by our Board of Directors. In order to determine the fair value of our common stock underlying option grants, our Board of Directors considered, among other things, valuations of our common stock prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accounts Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. For all grants subsequent to our IPO in October 2020, the fair value of common stock was determined by taking the closing price per share of common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
•Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We use the simplified method to determine the expected term, which is based on the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options.
•Expected Volatility-The expected volatility for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 is estimated based on the average historical volatilities of common stock of comparable publicly traded entities over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies are chosen based on their size, stage in the product development cycle or area of specialty. The Company will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant for zero-coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximately equal to the expected term of the awards.
•Expected Dividend-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
See Note 10 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report to Form 10-K for information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options granted in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Stock-based compensation expense was $3.8 million, $0.1 million and $30,000 during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $36.3 million, $17.1 million, and $0.5 million of total unrecognized stock-based compensation costs for stock options, restricted stock units, and restricted stock awards, respectively, which we expect to recognize over a weighted-average period of 3.70, 2.94, and 3.58 years, respectively.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in the JOBS Act, and we may remain an emerging growth company for up to five years following the completion of our IPO.
Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of some accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards, and therefore we will not be subject to the same requirements to adopt new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is provided in Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.