ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis is intended to help the reader understand our business, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and capital resources and should be read together with “Item 6. Selected Financial Data” and “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on the views and beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions and estimates made by our management. Such views, beliefs, assumptions and estimates may, and often do, vary from actual results and the differences can be material. Actual results could differ materially from such forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those that may not be in the control of our management. We do not undertake any obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements except as otherwise required by applicable law. For further information on items that could impact our future operating performance or financial condition, please read the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a Delaware limited partnership formed in 2015 to own and acquire mineral and royalty interests in oil and natural gas properties throughout the United States. Effective as of September 24, 2018, we have elected to be taxed as a corporation for United States federal income tax purposes. As an owner of mineral and royalty interests, we are entitled to a portion of the revenues received from the production of oil, natural gas and associated NGLs from the acreage underlying our interests, net of post-production expenses and taxes. We are not obligated to fund drilling and completion costs, lease operating expenses or plugging and abandonment costs at the end of a well’s productive life. Our primary business objective is to provide increasing cash distributions to unitholders resulting from acquisitions from third parties, our Sponsors and the Contributing Parties and from organic growth through the continued development by working interest owners of the properties in which we own an interest.
As of December 31, 2020, we owned mineral and royalty interests in approximately 9.1 million gross acres and overriding royalty interests in approximately 4.6 million gross acres, with approximately 60% of our aggregate acres located in the Permian Basin, Mid-Continent and Bakken/Williston Basin. As of December 31, 2020, over 98% of the acreage subject to our mineral and royalty interests was leased to working interest owners, including 100% of our overriding royalty interests, and substantially all of those leases were held by production. Our mineral and royalty interests are located in 28 states and in every major onshore basin across the continental United States and include ownership in over 97,000 gross wells, including over 41,000 wells in the Permian Basin.
Recent Developments
2020 Equity Offering
In January 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 5,000,000 common units for net proceeds of approximately $73.6 million (the “2020 Equity Offering”). We used the net proceeds from the 2020 Equity Offering to purchase OpCo common units. The Operating Company in turn used the net proceeds to repay approximately $70.0 million of the outstanding borrowings under our secured revolving credit facility. In connection with the 2020 Equity Offering, certain selling unitholders sold 750,000 common units pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional common units. We did not receive any proceeds from the sale of the common units by the selling unitholders.
2020 Partial Redemption of Preferred Units
On February 12, 2020, we completed the redemption of 55,000 Series A preferred units, representing 50% of the then-outstanding Series A preferred units. The Series A preferred units were redeemed at a price of $1,110.72 per Series A preferred unit for an aggregate redemption price of $61.1 million.
Acquisitions
On April 17, 2020, we completed the Springbok Acquisition. The aggregate consideration for the Springbok Acquisition consisted of (i) approximately $95.0 million in cash, (ii) the issuance of 2,224,358 common units and (iii) the
issuance of 2,497,134 OpCo common units and an equal number of Class B units. At the time of the Springbok Acquisition, the acreage acquired had over 90 operators on 2,160 net royalty acres across core areas of the Delaware Basin, DJ Basin, Haynesville, STACK, Eagle Ford and other leading basins.
Joint Venture
In connection with the joint venture (the “Joint Venture”) with Springbok SKR Capital Company, LLC and Rivercrest Capital Partners, LP, we paid capital contributions of $2.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Rate Swaps
On January 27, 2021, we entered into an interest rate swap with Citibank, N.A. (“Citi”), which fixed the interest rate on $150.0 million of notional, or approximately 87% of our outstanding balance on our secured revolving credit facility, at approximately 3.9% for a period ending on January 29, 2024.
Fourth Quarter Distributions
On February 3, 2021, we paid a quarterly cash distribution on the Series A preferred units of $1.0 million for the quarter ended December 31, 2020.
On February 4, 2021, we paid a quarterly cash distribution to each Class B unitholder equal to 2.0% of such unitholder’s respective Class B Contribution, resulting in a total quarterly distribution of approximately $20,780 for the quarter ended December 31, 2020.
On January 22, 2021, the Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash distribution of $0.19 per common unit for the quarter ended December 31, 2020. The distribution was paid on February 8, 2021 to common unitholders and OpCo common unitholders of record as of the close of business on February 1, 2021.
Business Environment
COVID-19 Pandemic and Impact on Global Demand for Oil and Natural Gas
The global spread of COVID-19 created significant volatility, uncertainty, and economic disruption during 2020. On March 11, 2020, the WHO declared the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. The pandemic has reached more than 200 countries and has resulted in widespread adverse impacts on the global economy, our oil, natural gas, and NGL operators and other parties with whom we have business relations, including a significant reduction in the global demand for oil and natural gas. This significant decline in demand accelerated following the announcement of price reductions and production increases in March 2020 by members of OPEC and other foreign, oil-exporting countries, raising concerns about global storage capacity. The resulting supply and demand imbalance has led to a significantly weaker outlook for oil and gas producers and continues to have a disruptive impact on the oil and natural gas industry. Globally, these conditions led to significant economic contraction during 2020.
Our first priority in our response to this crisis has been and will continue to be the health and safety of our employees, the employees of our business counterparties and the community in which we operate. To address these concerns, we have modified certain business practices (including those related to employee travel, employee work locations, and physical participation in meetings, events and conferences) to conform to government restrictions and best practices encouraged by the CDC, the WHO and other governmental and regulatory authorities. In mid-March, we restricted access to our offices to only essential employees, and directed the remainder of our employees to work from home to the extent possible. Beginning in mid-May, we opened our offices to employees on a voluntary basis, with employees having the option to work from home. These restrictions have had minimal impact on our operations to date and have allowed us to maintain the engagement and connectivity of our personnel, as well as minimize the number of employees in the office.
There is considerable uncertainty regarding the extent to which COVID-19 will continue to spread and the extent and duration of governmental and other measures implemented to try to slow the spread of the virus, such as large-scale travel bans and restrictions, border closures, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and business and government shutdowns.
While shelter-in-place restrictions subsided in the second half of 2020, the possibility of future restrictions remains. One of the largest impacts of the pandemic has been a significant reduction in global demand for oil and, to a lesser extent, natural gas. This significant decline in demand has been met with a sharp decline in oil prices which has been exacerbated by the announcement of price reductions and production increases in March 2020 by members of OPEC and other foreign, oil-exporting countries. Although OPEC agreed in April 2020 to cut oil production and has extended such production cuts through March 2021, crude oil prices remained depressed through December 31, 2020 as a result of an increasingly utilized global storage network and the decrease in crude oil demand due to COVID-19. The resulting supply and demand imbalance is having disruptive impacts on the oil and natural gas exploration and production industry and on other related industries. These industry conditions, coupled with those resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, have led to significant global economic contraction generally and in our industry in particular.
Oil and natural gas prices have historically been volatile; however, the volatility in the prices for these commodities has substantially increased as a result of COVID-19, the OPEC announcements mentioned above and ongoing storage capacity concerns. Oil prices declined sharply in April 2020 and remained low continuing through year end 2020. Although strip pricing for natural gas has increased meaningfully, the impact of these recent developments on our business and the oil and gas industry is unpredictable. We derived approximately 34% of our revenues and 59% of our production on a Boe/d basis (6:1) from natural gas for the fourth quarter of 2020, which we believe presented some downside protection against depressed oil prices.
In April 2020, we received notices from two operators regarding well shut-ins and curtailments of production on properties in which we own an interest. The properties were primarily located in the Eagle Ford Shale, and the production attributable to such properties on a Boe/d basis (6:1) represented approximately one percent of our total production for the first quarter of 2020. We received subsequent notice that the curtailment on all Eagle Ford Shale production had ceased and production resumed, effective June 1, 2020. We also received notifications of well shut-ins and curtailment in the second quarter of 2020 from additional operators and the production attributable to such properties on a Boe/d basis (6:1) accounted for less than one percent of our total production for the second quarter of 2020. We did not receive any additional notifications of well shut-ins or curtailments in the second half of 2020. While we currently do not expect we will receive additional notices, we cannot predict whether additional shut-ins and curtailments of production from our operators will occur if depressed oil and natural gas prices, reductions in global demand and storage capacity issues continue or worsen. We expect that as the supply and demand imbalance resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak and the OPEC announcements mentioned above continues, and as oil storage facilities reach capacity and/or purchasers of crude products cancel previous orders, more of our operators may adjust or reduce their drilling activities, which could have an adverse effect on our business, cash flows, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations in the first quarter of 2021.
The ultimate impacts of COVID-19 and the volatility in the oil and natural gas markets on our business, cash flows, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations will depend on future developments, including, among others, the ultimate severity of the virus, the consequences of governmental and other measures designed to prevent the spread of the virus, the development, availability and administration of effective treatments and vaccines, the duration of the pandemic, actions taken by members of OPEC and other foreign, oil-exporting countries, governmental authorities and other third parties, workforce availability, and the timing and extent of any return to normal economic and operating conditions. For additional discussion regarding the risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, see Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this report.
Commodity Prices and Demand
Oil and natural gas prices have been historically volatile and may continue to be volatile in the future. As noted above, the supply and demand imbalance resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak and various OPEC announcements have created increased volatility in oil and natural gas prices. The table below demonstrates such volatility for the periods presented as reported by the EIA.
On February 19, 2021, the WTI posted price for crude oil was $59.12 per Bbl and the Henry Hub spot market price of natural gas was $4.96 per MMBtu.
The following table, as reported by the EIA, sets forth the average prices for oil and natural gas.
Rig Count
Drilling on our acreage is dependent upon the exploration and production companies that lease our acreage. As such, we monitor rig counts in an effort to identify existing and future leasing and drilling activity on our acreage.
The Baker Hughes United States Rotary Rig count was 332 active land rigs at December 31, 2020, a 57% decrease from 781 active land rigs at December 31, 2019. The 781 active rig count at December 31, 2019 decreased 26% from 1,056 active land rigs at December 31, 2018.
According to the Baker Hughes United States Rotary Rig count, rig activity in the 28 states in which we own mineral and royalty interests decreased 57% from 773 active land rigs at December 31, 2019 to 330 active land rigs at December 31, 2020. The 773 active land rig count at December 31, 2019 decreased 26% from 1,049 active land rigs at December 31, 2018. The decrease in rig count in 2020 is primarily related to the COVID-19 outbreak and international supply and demand imbalances. See Business Environment - COVID-19 Pandemic and Impact on Global Demand for Oil and Natural Gas for further discussion.
The following table summarizes the number of active rigs operating on our acreage by United States basins and producing regions for the periods indicated.
Sources of Our Revenue
Our revenues are derived from royalty payments we receive from our operators based on the sale of oil, natural gas and NGL production, as well as the sale of NGLs that are extracted from natural gas during processing. Our revenues may vary significantly from period to period as a result of changes in volumes of production sold or changes in commodity prices.
The following table presents the breakdown of our operating income for the following periods:
In order to reduce the impact of fluctuations in oil and natural gas prices on our revenues, we entered into commodity derivative agreements with Frost Bank beginning January 1, 2018. Our commodity derivative agreements with Frost Bank extend through December 2022 and establish, in advance, a price for the sale of a portion of the oil, natural gas and NGLs produced from our mineral and royalty interests. For further discussion on our commodity derivative agreements, see “Note 4-Derivatives.”
Reserves and Pricing
The tables below identify our proved reserves at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, in each case based on the reserve report prepared by Ryder Scott. The prices used to estimate proved reserves for the respective periods were held constant throughout the life of the properties and have been adjusted for quality, transportation fees, geographical differentials, marketing bonuses or deductions and other factors affecting the price received at the wellhead.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results
Our historical financial condition and results of operations may not be comparable, either from period to period or going forward, to our future financial condition and results of operations, for the reasons described below:
Ongoing Acquisition Opportunities
Acquisitions are an important part of our growth strategy, and we expect to pursue acquisitions of mineral and royalty interests from third parties, affiliates of our Sponsors and the Contributing Parties. As a part of these efforts, we often engage in discussions with potential sellers or other parties regarding the possible purchase of or investment in mineral and royalty interests, including in connection with a dropdown of assets from affiliates of our Sponsors and the Contributing Parties. Such efforts may involve participation by us in processes that have been made public and involve a number of potential buyers or investors, commonly referred to as “auction” processes, as well as situations in which we believe we are the only party or one of a limited number of parties who are in negotiations with the potential seller or other party. These acquisition and investment efforts often involve assets which, if acquired or constructed, could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Material acquisitions that would impact the comparability of our results for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 include the Springbok Acquisition, the Phillips Acquisition, the Buckhorn Acquisition, the Haymaker Acquisition and the Dropdown.
Further, the affiliates of our Sponsors and Contributing Parties have no obligation to sell any assets to us or to accept any offer that we may make for such assets, and we may decide not to acquire such assets even if such parties offer
them to us. We may decide to fund any acquisition, including any potential dropdowns, with cash, common units, other equity securities, proceeds from borrowings under our secured revolving credit facility or the issuance of debt securities, or any combination thereof. In addition to acquisitions, we also consider from time to time divestitures that may benefit us and our unitholders.
We typically do not announce a transaction until after we have executed a definitive agreement. Past experience has demonstrated that discussions and negotiations regarding a potential transaction can advance or terminate in a short period of time. Moreover, the closing of any transaction for which we have entered into a definitive agreement may be subject to customary and other closing conditions, which may not ultimately be satisfied or waived. Accordingly, we can give no assurance that our current or future acquisition or investment efforts will be successful or that our strategic asset divestitures will be completed. Although we expect the acquisitions and investments we make to be accretive in the long term, we can provide no assurance that our expectations will ultimately be realized. We will not know the immediate results of any acquisition until after the acquisition closes, and we will not know the long term results for some time thereafter.
Impairment of Oil and Natural Gas Properties
Accounting rules require that we periodically review the carrying value of our properties for possible impairment. Based on specific market factors and circumstances at the time of prospective impairment reviews, and the continuing evaluation of development plans, production data, economics and other factors, we may be required to write down the carrying value of our properties. The net capitalized costs of proved oil and natural gas properties are subject to a full cost ceiling limitation for which the costs are not allowed to exceed their related estimated future net revenues discounted at 10%. To the extent capitalized costs of evaluated oil and natural gas properties, net of accumulated depreciation, depletion, amortization and impairment, exceed estimated discounted future net revenues of proved oil and natural gas reserves, the excess capitalized costs are charged to expense. The risk that we will be required to recognize impairments of our oil and natural gas properties increases during periods of low commodity prices. In addition, impairments would occur if we were to experience sufficient downward adjustments to our estimated proved reserves or the present value of estimated future net revenues. An impairment recognized in one period may not be reversed in a subsequent period even if higher oil and natural gas prices increase the cost center ceiling applicable to the subsequent period.
After evaluating certain external factors in the first quarter of 2020, including the significant decline in oil and natural gas prices related to reduced demand for oil and natural gas as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the announcement of price reductions and production increases in March 2020 by members of OPEC and other foreign, oil-exporting countries and other supply factors, as well as longer-term commodity price outlooks, we determined that significant drilling uncertainty existed regarding our PUD reserves that were included in our total estimated proved reserves as of December 31, 2019, as well as our unevaluated oil and natural gas properties. Specifically, with respect to our PUD reserves (which accounted for approximately 6.1% of total estimated proved reserves as of December 31, 2019), we determined that we did not have reasonable certainty as to the timing of the development of the PUD reserves and, therefore, recorded an impairment on such properties for the three months ended March 31, 2020. We similarly recorded an impairment on the value of our unevaluated oil and natural gas properties for the three months ended March 31, 2020, which primarily were acquired in various acquisitions since our IPO. There were no additional impairments to unevaluated properties in the remainder of 2020.
As a result of our full cost ceiling analysis, we recorded an impairment on our oil and natural gas properties of $251.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The impairment can primarily be attributed to the decline in the 12-month average price of oil and natural gas as a result of the continued impact of the external factors mentioned above. As of December 31, 2020, the 12-month average prices of oil and natural gas were $39.57 per Bbl of oil and $1.99 per Mcf of natural gas. These prices represent a 28.9% and 22.9% decrease, respectively, from the 12-month average prices of oil and natural gas as of December 31, 2019, which were $55.69 per Bbl of oil and $2.58 per Mcf of natural gas.
We recorded an impairment on our oil and natural gas properties of $169.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The impairment can primarily be attributed to our quarterly full cost ceiling analysis and a decline in the 12-month average price of oil and natural gas. As of December 31, 2019, the 12-month average prices of oil and natural gas were $55.69 per Bbl of oil and $2.58 per Mcf of natural gas. These prices represent a 15.1% and 16.8% decrease, respectively, from the 12-month average prices of oil and natural gas as of December 31, 2018, which were $65.56 per
Bbl of oil and $3.10 per Mcf of natural gas. We also recorded an impairment expense on our oil and natural gas properties of $67.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. Of this amount, an impairment expense of $54.8 million was recorded as a result of our quarterly full-cost ceiling analysis for the three months ended March 31, 2018 and an impairment expense of $12.6 million was recorded for the three months ended December 31, 2018 as a result of the Dropdown purchase price exceeding the value of the proved developed reserves added to the full-cost ceiling.
Because we do not intend to book PUD reserves going forward, additional impairment charges could be recorded in connection with future acquisitions. Further, if the price of oil, natural gas and NGLs decreases in future periods, we may be required to record additional impairments as a result of the full-cost ceiling limitation.
Principal Components of Our Cost Structure
As an owner of mineral and royalty interests, we are not obligated to fund drilling and completion costs, lease operating expenses or plugging and abandonment costs at the end of a well’s productive life.
Production and Ad Valorem Taxes
Production taxes are paid on produced oil, natural gas and NGLs based on a percentage of revenues from products sold at fixed rates established by federal, state or local taxing authorities. Where available, we benefit from tax credits and exemptions in our various taxing jurisdictions. We are also subject to ad valorem taxes in the counties where our production is located. Ad valorem taxes are jurisdictional taxes levied on the value of oil, natural gas and NGLs minerals and reserves. Rates, methods of calculating property values, and timing of payments vary between taxing authorities.
Depreciation and Depletion
We follow the full cost method of accounting for costs related to our oil, natural gas and NGL mineral and royalty properties. Under this method, all such costs are capitalized and amortized on an aggregate basis over the estimated lives of the properties using the unit-of-production method. The capitalized costs are subject to a ceiling test, which limits such pooled costs to the aggregate of the present value of future net revenues attributable to proved oil, natural gas and NGL reserves discounted at 10%, including the effect of income taxes. The full cost ceiling is evaluated at the end of each fiscal quarter and additionally when events indicate possible impairment. Costs associated with unevaluated properties are excluded from the full-cost pool until a determination as to the existence of proved reserves is able to be made. The inclusion of our unevaluated costs into the amortization base is expected to be completed within five years.
Marketing and Other Deductions
Marketing and other deductions include product marketing expense, which is a post-production expense. Generally, the terms of the lease governing the development of our properties permit the operator to pass through these expenses to us by deducting a pro rata portion of such expenses from our production revenues.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses are costs not directly associated with the production of oil, natural gas and NGLs and include the cost of executives and employees and related benefits, office expenses and fees for professional services. We have entered into a management services agreement with Kimbell Operating, which in turn has entered into separate services agreements with entities controlled by affiliates of certain of our Sponsors and certain Contributing Parties, pursuant to which they and Kimbell Operating provide management, administrative and operational services to us. In addition, under each of their respective services agreements, affiliates of our Sponsors will identify, evaluate and recommend to us acquisition opportunities and negotiate the terms of such acquisitions.
Interest Expense
We finance a portion of our capital requirements and acquisitions with borrowings under our secured revolving credit facility. As a result, we incur interest expense, which is included in our accompanying consolidated statements of operations. Please read “Liquidity and Capital Resources-Indebtedness” for further discussion of our secured revolving credit facility.
Income Tax Expense
On September 24, 2018, we elected to change our federal income tax status from that of a pass-through partnership to that of a taxable entity via a “check the box” election (the “Tax Election”). As a result of the Tax Election, we are subject to federal income tax on our taxable income at the United States corporate tax rate, which is currently 21.0%.
Texas imposes a franchise tax, commonly referred to as the Texas margin tax, which is considered an income tax, at a rate of 0.75% on gross revenues less certain deductions, as specifically set forth in the Texas margin tax statute. A significant portion of our mineral and royalty interests are located in Texas basins and producing regions.
Results of Operations
The table below summarizes our revenue and expenses and production data for the periods indicated.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019 and the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Oil, Natural Gas and NGL Revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our oil, natural gas and NGL revenues were $92.6 million, a decrease of $14.9 million from $107.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The significant decrease in oil, natural gas and NGL revenues was directly related to the decrease in the average prices we received for oil, natural gas and NGL production for the year ended December 31, 2020 as discussed below. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in production associated with various acquisitions throughout the 2019 and 2020 periods.
Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $41.8 million, from $65.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in revenues was primarily attributable to the revenues associated with the Haymaker Acquisition and the Phillips Acquisition, which represented approximately $20.2 million and $16.3 million, respectively, of the overall increase in oil, natural gas and NGL revenues, and, to a lesser extent, the revenues associated with the Dropdown, which contributed $11.1 million to the overall increase. Partially offsetting the increase in oil, natural gas and NGL revenues, was a decrease in the average prices we received for oil and NGL production.
Our revenues are a function of oil, natural gas, and NGL production volumes sold and average prices received for those volumes. The production volumes were 5,072,635 Boe or 13,860 Boe/d, for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 556,768 Boe or 1,529 Boe/d, from 4,515,867 Boe or 12,331 Boe/d, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in production for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to production associated with the Springbok Acquisition, which accounted for 568,424 Boe.
Our production volumes for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by 2,302,152 Boe or 2,333 Boe/d, from 2,213,715 Boe or 9,998 Boe/d, for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in production was primarily attributable to the Haymaker Acquisition, which represented 1,341,075 Boe, and to a lesser extent, production associated with the Phillips Acquisition and the Dropdown, which together accounted for 968,102 Boe.
Our operators received an average of $36.98 per Bbl of oil, $1.79 per Mcf of natural gas and $12.39 per Bbl of NGL for the volumes sold during the year ended December 31, 2020 and $54.66 per Bbl of oil, $2.21 per Mcf of natural gas and $15.96 per Bbl of NGL for the volumes sold during the year ended December 31, 2019. The year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 32.3% or $17.68 per Bbl of oil and 19.0% or $0.42 per Mcf of natural gas compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This change is consistent with prices experienced in the market, specifically when compared to the EIA average price decrease of 31.3% or $17.82 per Bbl of oil and 20.7% or $0.53 per Mcf of natural gas for the comparable periods.
Average prices received by our operators during the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased 9.2% or $5.51 per Bbl of oil and 22.2% or $0.63 per Mcf of natural gas compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, which our operators received an average of $60.17 per Bbl of oil, $2.84 per Mcf of natural gas and $25.14 per Bbl of NGL. This change is consistent with prices experienced in the market, specifically when compared to the EIA average price decrease of 12.6% or $8.25 per Bbl of oil and 18.7% or $0.59 per Mcf of natural gas for the comparable periods.
Lease Bonus and Other Income
Lease bonus and other income was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $2.2 million from $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in lease bonus and other income is primarily due to the current volatility and uncertainty in the oil and gas market, which has discouraged operators from drilling new wells.
Our lease bonus and other income for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $1.3 million, from $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
(Loss) Gain on Commodity Derivative Instruments
Loss on commodity derivative instruments for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $7.1 million of mark-to-market losses and $4.6 million of gains on the settlement of commodity derivative instruments compared to $3.4 million
of mark-to-market losses and $1.7 million of gains on the settlement of commodity derivative instruments for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gain on commodity derivative instruments for the year ended December 31, 2018 included $4.5 million of mark-to-market gains and $1.2 million of losses on the settlement of commodity derivative instruments.
Production and Ad Valorem Taxes
Production and ad valorem taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $6.4 million, a decrease of $1.3 million from $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in production and ad valorem taxes was primarily related to the significant decrease in the average prices we received for oil, natural gas and NGL production for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, production and ad valorem taxes increased by $3.3 million from $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to the Haymaker Acquisition, which accounted for $1.6 million of the increase in production and ad valorem taxes and, to the lesser extent, the Phillips Acquisition and the Dropdown, which contributed $0.8 million and $0.6 million, respectively, to the increase.
Depreciation and Depletion Expense
Depreciation and depletion expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $48.0 million, a decrease of $4.1 million from $52.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in depreciation and depletion expense was due to the impairment that was recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which significantly reduced our net capitalized oil and natural gas properties. The decrease in the depreciation and depletion expense was partially offset by the Springbok Acquisition, which added approximately $115.4 million of depletable costs to the full-cost pool.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, depreciation and depletion expense increased by $26.9 million from $25.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in the depreciation and depletion expense was primarily attributable to the multiple acquisitions throughout the 2018 and 2019 period, which together added approximately $470.8 million of depletable costs to the full-cost pool.
Depletion is the amount of cost basis of oil and natural gas properties at the beginning of a period attributable to the volume of hydrocarbons extracted during such period, calculated on a unit-of-production basis. Estimates of proved developed producing reserves are a major component in the calculation of depletion. Our average depletion rate per barrel was $9.39 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $2.00 per barrel from the $11.39 average depletion rate per barrel for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in depletion rate was due to the impairment that was recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which significantly reduced our net capitalized oil and natural gas properties.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, our average depletion rate per barrel remained relatively flat compared to $11.33 average depletion rate per barrel for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Impairment of Oil, Natural Gas and NGL Expense
We recorded an impairment expense on our oil and natural gas properties of $251.6 million, $169.2 million and $67.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The impairment recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 included an impairment due to the reduction in our PUD reserves, impairment of our unevaluated oil and natural gas properties in the first quarter of 2020 and impairments on our oil and natural gas properties as the result of the continued decline in the 12-month average price of oil and natural gas, in each case as further described under “-Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results to Our Historical Results-Impairment of Oil and Natural Gas Properties.”
Marketing and Other Deductions
Our marketing and other deductions include product marketing expense, which is a post-production expense. Marketing and other deductions for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $9.4 million, an increase of $1.3 million from $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in marketing and other deductions was primarily attributable to the Springbok Acquisition.
Marketing and other deductions for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $3.4 million from $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in marketing and other deductions was primarily attributable to the Haymaker Acquisition and the Phillips Acquisition, which represents $1.7 million and $1.1 million respectively, of the overall increase, and to a lesser extent, the Dropdown, which contributed $0.6 million to the increase.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $25.9 million, an increase of $3.2 million from $22.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Included within general and administrative expenses are non-cash expenses for unit-based compensation as a result of the amortization of restricted units that have been issued by us over various periods. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to a $2.0 million increase in unit-based compensation expense and cash general and administrative expenses resulting from increases in salaries and wages and our costs associated with company growth.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $5.9 million from $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to the $4.3 million increase in unit-based compensation expense. The remainder of the increase was primarily attributable to cash general and administrative expenses resulting from the Haymaker Acquisition, the Dropdown and the Phillips Acquisition.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.4 million as compared to interest expense of $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in interest expense was primarily due to debt incurred to fund the partial redemption of the Series A preferred units and the Springbok Acquisition, which was partially offset by the repayment of $91.2 million in debt during the year ended December 31, 2020 and the decline in the weighted average interest rate from 4.58% during the year ended December 31, 2019 to 3.31% during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $1.7 million as compared to interest expense of $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was due to debt incurred to fund acquisitions in 2018 and 2019, including the Haymaker Acquisition, acquisitions by the Joint Venture and the acquisition of various mineral and royalty interests in Oklahoma.
(Benefit from) Provision for Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an income tax benefit of $0.9 million, resulting in an effective tax rate of 0.34%, compared to an income tax expense of $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, resulting in an effective tax rate of 0.57%. The overall change in our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31,
2020 is due to a change in estimate as a result of filing our 2019 income tax return, as well as the impact of the U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act carryback provisions.
Additionally, we assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe that recovery is more likely than not, do not establish a valuation allowance. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets. As a result, we did not recognize a benefit from our net operating losses for the respective periods. See Note 13-Income Taxes for further discussion.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations and equity and debt financings and our primary uses of cash are distributions to our unitholders and for growth capital expenditures, including the acquisition of mineral and royalty interests in oil and natural gas properties. On December 8, 2020, we entered into Amendment No. 2 (the “Second Credit Agreement Amendment”) to the 2018 Amended Credit Agreement (as defined below), increasing commitments under the secured revolving credit facility from $225.0 million to $265.0 million, with an elected commitment amount feature permitting aggregate commitments under the secured revolving credit facility to be increased up to $500.0 million (subject to the limitations of our borrowing base, which is currently $265.0 million, and the satisfaction of certain conditions and the election of existing lenders to increase commitments or the procurement of additional commitments from new lenders), to be used for general partnership purposes, including working capital and acquisitions, among other things. As of February 19, 2021, we had an outstanding balance of $171.6 million under our secured revolving credit facility.
Cash Distribution Policy
The limited liability company agreement of the Operating Company requires it to distribute all of its cash on hand at the end of each quarter in an amount equal to its available cash for such quarter. In turn, our partnership agreement requires us to distribute all of our cash on hand at the end of each quarter in an amount equal to our available cash for such quarter. Available cash for each quarter will be determined by the Board of Directors following the end of such quarter. “Available cash,” as used in this context, is defined in our partnership agreement and in the limited liability company agreement of the Operating Company, and in “Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Unitholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities-Definition of Available Cash.” We expect that the Operating Company’s available cash for each quarter will generally equal its Adjusted EBITDA for the quarter, less cash needed for debt service and other contractual obligations and fixed charges and reserves for future operating or capital needs that the Board of Directors may determine is appropriate, and we expect that our available cash for each quarter will generally equal our Adjusted EBITDA for the quarter (and will be our proportional share of the available cash distributed by the Operating Company for that quarter), less cash needs for debt service and other contractual obligations, tax obligations, fixed charges and reserves for future operating or capital needs that the Board of Directors may determine is appropriate.
In light of the unprecedented global economic impact resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, the related impact to the United States oil and natural gas markets and the potential for further curtailments of production, the Board of Directors approved the allocation of 25% of our cash available for distribution on common units for the fourth quarter of 2020 for the repayment of $3.9 million in outstanding borrowings under our secured revolving credit facility during its determination of “available cash” for the fourth quarter of 2020. With respect to future quarters, the Board of Directors intends to continue to allocate a portion of our cash available for distribution on common units to the repayment of outstanding borrowings under our secured revolving credit facility and may allocate such cash in other manners in which the Board of Directors determines to be appropriate at the time. The Board of Directors may further change its policy with respect to cash distributions in the future.
We do not currently maintain a material reserve of cash for the purpose of maintaining stability or growth in our quarterly distribution, nor do we intend to incur debt to pay quarterly distributions, although the Board of Directors may change this policy.
It is our intent, subject to market conditions, to finance acquisitions of mineral and royalty interests that increase our asset base largely through external sources, such as borrowings under our secured revolving credit facility and the issuance of equity and debt securities. For example, we issued 2,224,358 common units and 2,497,134 OpCo common units and an equal number of Class B units as partial consideration in connection with the Springbok Acquisition. The Board of Directors may choose to reserve a portion of cash generated from operations to finance such acquisitions as well. We do not currently intend to (i) maintain excess distribution coverage for the purpose of maintaining stability or growth in our quarterly distribution, (ii) otherwise reserve cash for distributions or (iii) incur debt to pay quarterly distributions, although the Board of Directors may do so if they believe it is warranted.
On February 3, 2021, we paid a quarterly cash distribution on the Series A preferred units of $1.0 million for the quarter ended December 31, 2020.
On February 4, 2021, we paid a quarterly cash distribution to each Class B unitholder equal to 2.0% of such unitholder’s respective Class B Contribution, resulting in a total quarterly distribution of approximately $20,780 for the quarter ended December 31, 2020.
On January 22, 2021, the Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash distribution of $0.19 per common unit for the quarter ended December 31, 2020. The distribution was paid on February 8, 2021 to common unitholders and OpCo common unitholders of record as of the close of business on February 1, 2021.
Cash Flows
The following table presents our cash flows for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
Operating cash flow is impacted by many variables, the most significant of which are the changes in oil, natural gas and NGL production volumes due to acquisitions or other external factors and changes in prices for oil, natural gas and NGLs. Prices for these commodities are determined primarily by prevailing market conditions. Regional and worldwide economic activity, weather and other substantially variable factors influence market conditions for these products. These factors are beyond our control and are difficult to predict. Cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $62.2 million, a decrease of $18.5 million compared to $80.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cash flows provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to the decrease in the average prices we received for oil, natural gas and NGL production for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $47.5 million compared to $33.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in cash flows provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to the Haymaker Acquisition and Dropdown in the third and fourth quarters of 2018, respectively, and to the Phillips Acquisition and Buckhorn Acquisition in the first and fourth quarters of 2019, respectively.
Investing Activities
Cash flows used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $75.2 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $87.6 million primarily to fund the Springbok Acquisition, $2.2 million to fund the capital commitments of the Joint Venture and $1.0 million to fund the remodel of office space. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $3.0 million to fund capital commitments paid to the Joint Venture, $1.2 million to fund the Phillips Acquisition, $9.9 million to fund the acquisition of various
mineral and royalty interests in Oklahoma, $0.5 million in connection with the Buckhorn Acquisition and $1.0 million to fund the remodel of office space.
Cash flows used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $185.3 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. For the year ended December 31, 2018, we used $211.1 million primarily to fund the Haymaker Acquisition and $0.4 million to fund the remodel of office space, partially offset by $10.6 million in proceeds received from the sale of oil and natural gas properties.
Financing Activities
Cash flows provided by financing activities were $24.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $66.7 million in cash flows used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consists of $162.6 million of additional borrowings under our secured revolving credit facility and $73.6 million in proceeds from the 2020 Equity Offering. Cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 were partially offset by $91.2 million used to repay borrowings under our secured revolving credit facility, $61.1 million to fund the redemption of Series A preferred units, $54.9 million of distributions paid to holders of common units and OpCo common units, Series A preferred units and Class B units, $4.5 million paid in connection with amending our secured revolving credit facility and $0.4 million paid in connection with the redemption of Class B units. Cash flows used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consist of $78.8 million of distributions paid to holders of common units and OpCo common units, Series A preferred units and Class B units, $0.7 million of issuance costs paid on Series A preferred units and $0.3 million paid in connection with the redemption of Class B units, partially offset by $12.8 million of additional borrowings under our secured revolving credit facility and $0.5 million in contributions from our Class B unitholders.
Cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 were $177.9 million. Cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 consists of $124.4 million of additional borrowings under our secured revolving credit facility, $103.4 million in net proceeds from the 2018 preferred offering, $61.8 million in net proceeds from the 2018 equity offering and $1.0 million in contributions from our Class B unitholders, partially offset by $41.0 million of distributions paid to holders of common units, Series A preferred units and Class B units, $67.9 million of repayments on our secured revolving credit facility and $3.4 million paid in loan origination costs.
Capital Expenditures
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid approximately $87.6 million primarily in connection with the Springbok Acquisition. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we paid approximately $1.2 million in connection with the Phillips Acquisition, $9.9 million in connection with the acquisition of various mineral and royalty interests in Oklahoma and $0.5 million in connection with the Buckhorn Acquisition. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we paid approximately $211.1 million for the acquisition of oil and gas mineral and royalty properties, primarily in connection with the Haymaker Acquisition.
Indebtedness
On January 11, 2017, we entered into a credit agreement (the “2017 Credit Agreement”) with Frost Bank, as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto. On July 12, 2018, in connection with the closing of the Haymaker Acquisition, we entered into an amendment (the “First Credit Agreement Amendment”) to the 2017 Credit Agreement (the 2017 Credit Agreement as amended by the First Credit Agreement Amendment, the “2018 Amended Credit Agreement”), with certain of our subsidiaries, as guarantors, Frost Bank, as administrative agent, and the other lenders party thereto. On December 8, 2020, we entered into the Second Credit Agreement Amendment to the 2018 Amended Credit Agreement (the 2018 Amended Credit Agreement as amended by the Second Credit Agreement Amendment, the “Amended Credit Agreement”). Under the Amended Credit Agreement, availability under our secured revolving credit facility will continue to equal the lesser of the aggregate maximum elected commitments of the lenders, which may be increased up to $500.0 million, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions and the election of existing lenders to increase commitments or the procurement of additional commitments from new lenders, and the borrowing base. The Second Credit Agreement Amendment amended the 2018 Amended Credit Agreement to extend the maturity date thereunder from February 8, 2022 to June 7, 2024.
The Second Credit Agreement Amendment increased aggregate commitments under the 2018 Amended Credit Agreement from $225.0 million to $265.0 million providing for maximum availability of $265.0 million. The Amended Credit Agreement permits aggregate commitments under the secured revolving credit facility to be increased up to $500.0 million, subject to the limitations of our borrowing base and satisfaction of certain conditions, including the election of existing lenders to increase commitments or the procurement of additional commitments from new lenders and the borrowing base. In connection with our entry into the Second Credit Agreement Amendment, the borrowing base was set at $265.0 million. The borrowing base will be redetermined semiannually on May 1 and November 1 of each year, beginning May 1, 2021, based on the value of our oil and natural gas properties and the oil and natural gas properties of our wholly owned subsidiaries.
The Amended Credit Agreement contains various affirmative, negative and financial maintenance covenants. These covenants limit our ability to, among other things, incur or guarantee additional debt, make distributions on, or redeem or repurchase, common units and OpCo common units, make certain investments and acquisitions, incur certain liens or permit them to exist, enter into certain types of transactions with affiliates, merge or consolidate with another company and transfer, sell or otherwise dispose of assets. The Amended Credit Agreement also contains covenants requiring us to maintain the following financial ratios or to reduce our indebtedness if we are unable to comply with such ratios: (i) a Debt to EBITDAX Ratio (as more fully defined in the secured revolving credit facility) of not more than 3.5 to 1.0; and (ii) a ratio of current assets to current liabilities of not less than 1.0 to 1.0. The Amended Credit Agreement also contains customary events of default, including non-payment, breach of covenants, materially incorrect representations, cross default, bankruptcy and change of control. As of December 31, 2020, we had outstanding borrowings of $171.6 million under the secured revolving credit facility and $93.4 million of available capacity.
For additional information on our Amended Credit Agreement, please read Note 8-Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Tax Matters
Even though we are organized as a limited partnership under state law, we are treated as a corporation for United States federal income tax purposes. Accordingly, we are subject to United States federal income tax at regular corporate rates on our net taxable income. We currently expect that (i) we will pay no material federal income taxes through 2021 (no more than approximately 5% of estimated pre-tax distributable cash flow), and (ii) substantially all distributions (more than 95%) paid to our common unitholders will not be taxable dividend income through 2023.
Distributions in excess of the amount taxable as dividend income will reduce a common unitholder's tax basis in its common units or produce capital gain to the extent they exceed a common unitholder's tax basis. Any reduced tax basis will increase a common unitholder's capital gain when it sells its common units. The estimates described above are the result of certain non-cash expenses (principally depletion) substantially offsetting our taxable income and tax "earnings and profits." Our estimates of the tax treatment of earnings and distributions are based upon assumptions regarding the capital structure and earnings of the Operating Company, our capital structure and the amount of the earnings of the Operating Company allocated to us. Many factors may impact these estimates, including changes in drilling and production activity, commodity prices, future acquisitions or changes in the business, economic, regulatory, legislative, competitive or political environment in which we operate. These estimates are based on current tax law and tax reporting positions that we have adopted and with which the Internal Revenue Service could disagree. These estimates are not fact and should not be relied upon as being necessarily indicative of future results, and no assurances can be made regarding these estimates. You are encouraged to consult with your tax advisor on this matter. Please read “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Tax Risks” elsewhere in this Annual Report.
New and Revised Financial Accounting Standards
The effects of new accounting pronouncements are discussed in Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies within the financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. Certain of our accounting policies involve judgments and uncertainties to such an extent that there is a reasonable likelihood that materially different amounts would have been reported under different conditions, or if different assumptions had been used. Below, we have provided expanded discussion of our more significant accounting estimates.
See the Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our financial statements for a summary of our significant accounting policies.
Method of Accounting for Oil and Natural Gas Properties
We account for oil, natural gas and NGL producing activities using the full cost method of accounting. Accordingly, all costs incurred in the acquisition, exploration and development of proved oil, natural gas and NGL
properties, including the costs of abandoned properties, dry holes, geophysical costs and annual lease rentals are capitalized. Sales or other dispositions of oil, natural gas and NGL properties are accounted for as adjustments to capitalized costs, with no gain or loss recorded unless the ratio of cost to proved reserves would significantly change.
Depletion of evaluated oil, natural gas and NGL properties is computed on the units of production method, whereby capitalized costs are amortized over total proved reserves. Oil, natural gas and NGL reserve quantities are used as the basis to calculate unit-of-production depreciation. Depreciation is calculated by taking the ratio of asset costs to total proved reserves applied to actual production. The volumes produced and asset costs are known, while proved reserves are based on estimates that are subject to some variability.
Unevaluated Properties
Costs associated with unevaluated properties are excluded from the full cost pool until we have made a determination as to the existence of proved reserves. We assess all items classified as unevaluated property on a periodic basis for possible impairment. We assess properties on an individual basis or as a group if properties are individually insignificant. The assessment includes consideration of the following factors, among others: the operators’ intent to drill; remaining lease term; geological and geophysical evaluations; the operators’ drilling results and activity; the assignment of proved reserves; and the economic viability of operator development if proved reserves are assigned. During any period in which these factors indicate an impairment, the cumulative drilling costs incurred to date for such property and all or a portion of the associated leasehold costs are transferred to the full cost pool and are then subject to amortization or potential impairment.
Oil, Natural Gas and NGL Reserve Quantities
Our independent engineers prepare our estimates of oil, natural gas and NGL reserves and associated future net revenues. The SEC has defined proved reserves as the estimated quantities of oil and gas which geological and engineering data demonstrate with reasonable certainty to be recoverable in future years from known reservoirs under existing economic and operating conditions. The process of estimating oil, natural gas and NGL reserves is complex, requiring significant decisions in the evaluation of available geological, geophysical, engineering and economic data. The data for a given property may also change substantially over time as a result of numerous factors, including additional development activity, evolving production history and a continual reassessment of the viability of production under changing economic conditions. As a result, material revisions to existing reserve estimates occur from time to time. Although every reasonable effort is made to ensure that reserve estimates reported represent the most accurate assessments possible, the subjective decisions and variances in available data for various properties increase the likelihood of significant changes in these estimates. If such changes are material, they could significantly affect future amortization of capitalized costs and result in impairment of assets that may be material.
There are numerous uncertainties inherent in estimating quantities of proved oil, natural gas and NGL reserves. Oil, natural gas and NGL reserve engineering is a subjective process of estimating underground accumulations of oil, natural gas and NGLs that cannot be precisely measured and the accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the quality of available data and of engineering and geological interpretation and judgment. Results of drilling, testing and production subsequent to the date of the estimate may justify revision of such estimate. Accordingly, reserve estimates are often different from the quantities of oil, natural gas and NGLs that are ultimately recovered. Additionally, we do not intend to book PUD reserves going forward.
Revenue Recognition
Mineral and royalty interests represent the right to receive revenues from the sale of oil, natural gas and NGLs, less production and ad valorem taxes and post-production expenses. The pricing of oil, natural gas and NGLs from the properties in which we own a mineral or royalty interest is primarily determined by supply and demand in the marketplace and can fluctuate considerably. As an owner of mineral and royalty interests, we have no involvement or operational control over the volumes and method of sale of the oil, natural gas and NGLs produced and sold from the property. We have no rights or obligations to explore, develop or operate the property and do not incur any of the costs of exploration, development and operation of the property. Oil, natural gas and NGL revenues from our mineral and royalty interests are recognized at the point control of the product is transferred to the purchaser. The price and volumes of certain sales are
based on estimates that are sometimes not available until the next period. In such cases, estimated realizations are accrued when the sale is recognized and are finalized when the price and volume is available. Such adjustments to revenue from performance obligations satisfied in previous periods are not significant.
Full Cost Ceiling Impairment
The net capitalized costs of proved oil, natural gas and NGL properties are subject to a full cost ceiling limitation in which the costs are not allowed to exceed their related estimated future net revenues discounted at 10%. Estimated future net revenues are calculated as estimated future revenues from oil, natural gas and NGL properties less production taxes, ad valorem taxes and gas marketing expenses. To the extent capitalized costs of evaluated oil, natural gas and NGL properties, net of accumulated depreciation, depletion, amortization, impairment and deferred income taxes exceed the discounted future net revenues of proved oil, natural gas and NGL reserves, less any related income tax effects, the excess capitalized costs are charged to expense. In calculating future net revenues, prices are calculated as the average oil, natural gas and NGL prices during the preceding 12-month period prior to the end of the current reporting period, determined as the unweighted arithmetic average first-day-of-the-month prices for the prior 12-month period and costs used are those as of the end of the reporting period.