Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following information should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this report contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties which may cause our actual results to differ materially from plans and results discussed in forward-looking statements. We encourage you to review the risks and uncertainties discussed in the sections entitled Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” included at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The risks and uncertainties can cause actual results to differ significantly from those forecast in forward-looking statements or implied in historical results and trends. We caution readers not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements made by us, which speak only as of the date they are made. We disclaim any obligation, except as specifically required by law and the rules of the SEC, to publicly update or revise any such statements to reflect any change in our expectations or in events, conditions or circumstances on which any such statements may be based, or that may affect the likelihood that actual results will differ from those set forth in the forward-looking statements.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 of the Company. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biotechnology company leading the field of redosable gene therapy for the treatment serious rare diseases. Using our patented platform that is based on engineered HSV-1, we create vectors that efficiently deliver therapeutic transgenes to cells of interest in multiple organ systems. The cell’s own machinery then transcribes and translates the encoded effector to treat or prevent disease. We formulate our vectors for non-invasive or minimally invasive routes of administration at a doctor’s office or potentially in the patient’s home. Our goal is to develop easy to use, redosable gene therapies to dramatically improve the lives of patients living with rare diseases. Our innovative technology platform is supported by in-house, commercial scale cGMP manufacturing capabilities. Refer to Part I, Item 1 - Business for more information about our clinical development pipeline and research programs and the status of our product candidates.
Pipeline Highlights:
•B-VEC is a topical gel containing our novel vector designed to deliver two copies of the COL7A1 transgene for the treatment of DEB, a serious rare skin disease caused by missing or mutated COL7. The randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled GEM-3 pivotal study is ongoing, with top line data anticipated in 4Q21. Details of the pivotal study can be found at www.clinicaltrails.gov under NCT identifier NCT04491604. Nothing included on these websites shall be deemed incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•KB105 is a topical gel containing our novel vector designed to deliver two copies of the TGM1 transgene for the treatment of TGM1-ARCI, a serious rare skin disorder caused by missing or mutated TGM1 protein. A randomized, placebo-controlled Phase 1/2 study is ongoing. Details of the Phase 1/2 study can be found at www.clinicaltrials.gov under NCT identifier NCT04047732. Nothing included on these websites shall be deemed incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•KB407 is an inhaled (nebulized) formulation of our novel vector designed to deliver two copies of the full-length CFTR transgene for the treatment of cystic fibrosis, a serious rare lung disease caused by missing or mutated CFTR protein. We expect to initiate clinical testing in 1H21.
•KB104 is a topical gel formulation of our novel vector designed to deliver two copies of the SPINK5 transgene for the treatment of Netherton Syndrome, a debilitating autosomal recessive skin disorder caused by missing or mutated SPINK5 protein. We expect to file an IND in 2H21.
We have several other product candidates in various stages of preclinical development.
We are also leveraging the ability of our platform to deliver proteins of interest to cells in the skin in the context of aesthetic medicine via our wholly-owned subsidiary Jeune, Inc. A Summary description of Jeune’s key product candidate and its status is as follows:
•KB301 is a solution for intradermal injection designed to deliver two copies of the COL3A1 transgene to address signs of aging or damaged skin caused by declining levels of, or damaged proteins within the extracellular matrix, including type III collagen. A Phase 1 safety study is currently ongoing. Details of the Phase 1 study can be found at www.clinicaltrials.gov under NCT identifier NCT04540900. Nothing included on these websites shall be deemed incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K
Jeune has several other aesthetic medicine product candidates in various stages of preclinical development.
Business Highlights:
•On May 21, 2020, the Company completed a public offering of 2,275,000 shares of its common stock to the public at $55.00 per share. Net proceeds to the Company from the offering were $117.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $7.5 million, and other offering expenses payable by the Company of approximately $463 thousand.
•On December 31, 2020, the Company entered into a sales agreement (the "Sales Agreement") with Cowen and Company, LLC ("Cowen") with respect to an at-the-market equity offering program ("ATM Program"), under which Cowen will act as the Company's agent and/or principal and may issue and sell from time to time, during the term of the Sales Agreement, shares of its common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, having an aggregate offering price up to $150.0 million ("Placement Shares"). In 2021, 262,500 shares of common stock have been issued pursuant to the ATM Program for net proceeds of $16.9 million, resulting in a remaining $132.5 million available for issuance under the ATM Program.
•On January 29, 2021, the Company entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement ("PSA") for ASTRA with Northfield related to the purchase option exercised by the Company on October 15, 2020 for a purchase price of $9.4 million. The transaction is expected to close in early March 2021 subject to customary closing conditions.
•On February 1, 2021, the Company completed a public offering of 2,211,538 shares of its common stock, including 288,461 shares purchased by the underwriters, at $65.00 per share. Net proceeds to the Company from the offering were $135.0 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $8.6 million, and other estimated offering expenses payable by the Company of approximately $193 thousand.
COVID-19
In December 2019, COVID-19 was first reported in Wuhan, China and in March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization. In an effort to slow the spread of the virus, certain governments, including the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania where the Company’s primary offices, laboratory and manufacturing spaces are located, enacted stay-at-home orders, and sweeping restrictions to travel were initiated by corporations and governments. Although these restrictions have been lifted in some areas, it is not known at this time whether they will be reestablished or the extent to which the Company will be impacted. The degree of COVID-19’s effect on the Company’s clinical, operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including additional protective measures that may be implemented by governmental authorities or the Company to protect its employees, or by investigators, caregivers or patients to minimize exposure, all of which are uncertain and difficult to predict. While to date the impact of COVID-19 on our business and clinical trials has been minimal, we will continue to assess the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations, including our supply chain and preclinical and clinical trial activities. For additional information regarding the impact of the coronavirus pandemic, please see "Risk Factor - Business interruptions resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak or similar public health crises could cause a disruption of the development efforts.of our product candidates and adversely impact our business."
Financial Overview
Revenue
We currently have no approved products for commercial marketing or sale and have not generated any revenue from the sale of products or other sources to date. In the future, we may generate revenue from product sales, royalties on product sales, or license fees, milestones, or other upfront payments if we enter into any collaborations or license agreements. We expect that our future revenue will fluctuate from quarter to quarter for many reasons, including the uncertain timing and amount of any such payments and sales.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred to advance our preclinical and clinical candidates, which include:
•expenses incurred under agreements with contract manufacturing organizations, consultants and other vendors that conduct our preclinical activities;
•costs of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical trial materials and lab supplies;
•facility costs, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other supplies; and
•payroll related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense.
We expense internal research and development costs to operations as incurred. We expense third party costs for research and development activities, such as the manufacturing of preclinical and clinical materials, based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks such as manufacturing of drug substance, fill/finish and stability testing, which is provided to us by our vendors.
We expect our research and development expenses will increase as we continue the manufacturing of preclinical and clinical materials and manage the clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidates and expand our product portfolio. In the near term, we expect that our research and development expenses will increase as we continue our ongoing GEM-3 pivotal study for B-VEC, our Phase 1/2 clinical trial for KB105, our Phase 1 safety study for KB301, and incur preclinical expenses for our other product candidates. Due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we cannot determine with certainty the duration, costs and timing of this clinical trial, and, as a result, the actual costs to complete this planned clinical trial may exceed the expected costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, commercial, business development and other administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters, professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services, insurance costs, travel, facility related expenses and other operating costs.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support the continued research and development of our product candidates and to operate as a public company. These increases will likely include increased costs for insurance, costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and payments to outside consultants, lawyers and accountants, among other expenses. Additionally, if and when we believe a regulatory approval of our first product candidate appears likely, we anticipate that we will increase our salary and personnel costs and other expenses as a result of our preparation for commercial operations
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of income earned from our cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial position and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimates which include, but are not limited to, estimates related to clinical trial and contract manufacturing prepayments and accruals, stock-based compensation expense, construction-in-progress, and reported amounts of related expenses during the period. We base our estimates on historical experience and other market-specific or other relevant assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from those estimates or assumptions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses, current assets and other current liabilities. This process involves reviewing open contracts and commitments, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed for us and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued research and development expenses, current assets and other current liabilities as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that
time. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses, prepaid assets and other current liabilities include fees paid to contract manufacturers made in connection with the manufacturing of preclinical and clinical trials materials.
We base our expenses related to clinical manufacturing on our estimates of the services performed pursuant to contracts with the entities producing clinical materials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under these types of contracts depend heavily upon the successful completion of many separate tasks involved in the manufacturing of drug product. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed, and the actual services performed in each period. If our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differs from the actual status and timing of services performed we may report amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences from our estimates to the amount actually incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have applied the fair value recognition provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation ("ASC 718"), to account for stock-based compensation for employees and ASC 718 and ASC 505, Equity ("ASC 505"), for non-employees for 2018. We recognize compensation costs related to stock options granted to employees based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. Stock compensation related to non-employee awards is re-measured in 2018 at each reporting period until the awards are vested. Described below is the methodology we have utilized in measuring stock-based compensation expense.
Determining the amount of stock-based compensation to be recorded requires us to develop estimates of the fair value of stock-based awards as of their measurement date. We recognize stock-based compensation expense over the requisite service period, which is the vesting period of the award. Calculating the fair value of stock-based awards requires that we make highly subjective assumptions. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value our stock option awards. Use of this valuation methodology requires that we make assumptions as to the volatility of our common stock, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock options and our expected dividend yield. Because we are a company with a limited operating history, we utilize data from a representative group of publicly traded companies to estimate expected stock price volatility. We selected representative companies from the biopharmaceutical industry with characteristics similar to us. We use the simplified method as prescribed by the SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment as we do not have sufficient historical stock option activity data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term of stock options granted to employees. For non-employee grants, we use an expected term equal to the remaining contractual term of the award in 2018. We utilize a dividend yield of zero based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and have no current intention of paying cash dividends. The risk-free interest rate used for each grant is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for instruments with a similar expected life.
Under ASC 718, we elected to estimate the level of forfeitures expected to occur and record stock-based compensation expense only for those awards that we ultimately expect will vest. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our estimated annual forfeiture rate was 14.74% and 10.00%, respectively.
Leases
We adopted FASB ASC Topic 842, Lease ("ASC 842") on January 1, 2019, with no restatement of prior periods or cumulative adjustment to retained earnings. Upon adoption, the Company took advantage of the transition package of practical expedients permitted within ASC 842, which allowed the Company not to reassess previous accounting conclusions around whether arrangements were, or contained leases, as well as to carry forward both the historical classification of leases and the treatment of initial direct costs for existing leases.
As the Company's lease agreements do not provide an implicit rate and as the Company does not have external borrowings, we use an estimated incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at lease commencement in determining the present value of lease payments. The incremental borrowing rate is the rate of interest that the Company would expect to borrow on a collateralized and fully amortizing basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment.
For lease arrangements where it has been determined that the Company has control over an asset that is under construction and is thus considered the accounting owner of the asset during the construction period, the Company records a construction-in-progress asset ("CIP") and corresponding financial obligation on the consolidated balance sheet. Once the construction is complete, an assessment will be performed to determine whether the lease meets certain "sale-leaseback" criteria. If the sale-leaseback criteria are determined to be met, the Company will remove the asset and related financial
obligation from the balance sheet and treat the building lease as either an operating or finance lease based on our assessment of the guidance. If, upon completion of construction, the project does not meet the "sale-leaseback" criteria, the lease will be treated as a financing obligation and the Company will depreciate the asset over its estimated useful life for financial reporting purposes.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, will be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Higher research and development expenses were due to increases in lab supplies of $142 thousand, payroll related expenses of approximately $2.0 million which is primarily driven by an increase in headcount to support overall growth and includes a $417 thousand increase in stock-based compensation, and other research and development expenses of $757 thousand, with a decrease in outsourcing research and development activities of $560 thousand.
Research and development expenses increased $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Higher research and development expenses were due to increases in professional services related to outsourced manufacturing, in-vivo and clinical studies of $2.3 million, payroll, employee benefits and stock-based compensation of $1.9 million due to an increase in headcount as we scaled up our research and development efforts for our 2 leading product candidates, B-VEC and KB105, lab supplies of $2.2 million, and other research and development expenses of $1.5 million.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Higher general and administrative spending was due largely to increased payroll related expenses of approximately $4.0 million which is primarily driven by an increase in headcount to support overall growth and includes an approximate $1.6 million increase in stock-based compensation, market research related expenses of approximately $2.0 million, legal and professional fees of approximately $1.6 million, insurance expense of $693 thousand and other administrative expenses of $295 thousand.
General and administrative expenses increased $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Higher general and administrative spending was due largely to increases in legal and professional services of $184 thousand, payroll, employee benefits and stock-based compensation costs of $1.5 million, insurance expenses of $242 thousand, and other administrative costs of $434 thousand.
Interest and Other Income
Interest and other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $832 thousand and $3.0 million, respectively, and consisted of interest and dividend income earned from our cash, cash equivalents and investments. This decrease was driven by a decline in market interest rates.
Interest and other income for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $3.0 million and $1.0 million, respectively, and consisted of interest and dividend income earned from our cash, cash equivalents and investments. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in our cash position in 2019 as compared to 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
At December 31, 2020, our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments balance was approximately $271.3 million. Since operations began, we have incurred operating losses. Our net losses were $32.2 million and $19.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $71.2 million. With the net proceeds raised from our public and private securities offerings, including the public offering completed on May 21, 2020, the ATM Program and the public offering completed on February 1, 2021, the Company believes that its cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to allow us to fund our operations for at least 12 months from the filing date of this Form 10-K.
As the Company continues to incur losses, a transition to profitability is dependent upon the successful development, approval and commercialization of our product candidates and the achievement of a level of revenues adequate to support the Company’s cost structure. The Company may never achieve profitability, and unless and until it does, the Company will continue to need to raise additional capital.
Costs related to clinical trials can be unpredictable and therefore there can be no guarantee that we will have sufficient capital to fund our continued clinical studies of B-VEC, KB105, KB301 or our planned preclinical studies for our other product candidates, or our operations. Further, we do not expect to generate any product revenues until 2022, at the earliest, assuming we receive marketing approval for B-VEC on the schedule we currently contemplate. While we are in the process of building out our internal vector manufacturing capacity, some of our manufacturing activities will be contracted out to third parties. Additionally, we currently utilize third-party contract research organizations to carry out our clinical development activities. As we seek to obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses as we prepare for product sales, marketing, manufacturing, and distribution. Our funds may not be sufficient to enable us to conduct pivotal clinical trials for, seek marketing approval for or commercially launch B-VEC, KB105, KB301 or any other product candidate. Accordingly, to obtain marketing approval for and to commercialize this or any other product candidates, we may be required to obtain further funding through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaboration and licensing arrangements or other sources. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, if at all. Our failure to raise capital when needed could have a negative effect on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy.
Operating Capital Requirements
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be for the near future, compensation and related expenses, manufacturing costs for preclinical and clinical materials, third party clinical trial research and development services, laboratory and related supplies, clinical costs, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs. In order to complete the process of obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates and to build the sales, manufacturing, marketing and distribution infrastructure that we believe will be necessary to commercialize our product candidates, if approved, we will require substantial additional funding.
We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all of our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the timeline and costs of our pivotal Phase 3 clinical trial for B-VEC;
•the progress, timing and costs of our ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trials for KB105;
•the progress, results and costs of our Phase 1 clinical trials for KB301;
•the progress, timing, and costs of manufacturing of B-VEC for our pivotal Phase 3 clinical trials;
•the continued development and the filing on an IND application for future product candidates;
•the initiation, scope, progress, timing, costs and results of drug discovery, laboratory testing, manufacturing, preclinical studies and clinical trials for any other product candidates that we may pursue in the future, if any;
•the costs of maintaining our own commercial-scale cGMP manufacturing facilities;
•the outcome, timing and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
•the costs associated with the manufacturing process development and evaluation of third-party manufacturers;
•the costs of future activities, including product sales, medical affairs, marketing, manufacturing and distribution, in the event we receive marketing approval for our current and future product candidates;
•the extent to which the costs of our product candidates, if approved, will be paid by health maintenance, managed care, pharmacy benefit and similar healthcare management organizations, or will be reimbursed by government authorities, private health coverage insurers and other third-party payors;
•the costs of commercialization activities for our current and future product candidates if we receive marketing approval for such product candidates we may develop, including the costs and timing of establishing product sales, medical affairs, marketing, distribution and manufacturing capabilities;
•subject to receipt of marketing approval, if any, revenue received from commercial sale of our current and future product candidates;
•the terms and timing of any future collaborations, licensing, consulting or other arrangements that we may establish;
•the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, maintenance, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights, including milestone and royalty payments and patent prosecution fees that we are obligated to pay pursuant to our license agreements;
•our current license agreements remaining in effect and our achievement of milestones under those agreements;
•our ability to establish and maintain collaborations and licenses on favorable terms, if at all; and
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies.
We expect that we will need to obtain substantial additional funding in order to receive regulatory approval and to commercialize our product candidates. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of common stock, convertible securities or other equity securities, the ownership interests of our existing stockholders may be materially diluted and the terms of these securities could include liquidation or other preferences that could adversely affect the rights of our existing stockholders. In addition, debt financing, if available, would result in increased fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, that could adversely affect our ability to conduct our business. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we could be forced to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or commercialization of our product candidates, seek collaborators at an earlier stage than otherwise would be desirable or on terms that are less favorable than might otherwise be available, and relinquish or license, potentially on unfavorable terms, our rights to our product candidates that we otherwise would seek to develop or commercialize ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year December 31, 2020 was $26.1 million and consisted primarily of a net loss of $32.2 million adjusted for non-cash items of $5.2 million primarily made up of depreciation and amortization of $1.9 million and stock-based compensation expense of $3.3 million, and cash used by decreases in net operating liabilities of approximately $928 thousand.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $18.7 million and consisted primarily of a net loss of $19.1 million adjusted for non-cash items of depreciation of $748 thousand, stock-based compensation expense of $1.2 million, loss on disposals of fixed assets of $67 thousand, amortization of right-of-use assets of $226 thousand, and cash used by decreases in net operating assets and liabilities of $1.9 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $11.2 million and consisted primarily of purchases of $3.2 million of short-term available-for-sale investment securities, and expenditures of $14.8 million on the build-out of our ASTRA facility, leasehold improvement of new office space, and purchases of computer and laboratory equipment, partially offset by proceeds of $6.9 million from maturities of short-term investments.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $5.0 million and consisted primarily of purchases of $8.6 million of short-term available-for-sale investment securities, proceeds of $10.5 million from maturities of short-term investments, purchases of $497 thousand of long-term investments, expenditures of $6.4 million for the build-out of our GMP facility and purchases of computer and laboratory equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $118.0 million and was primarily from proceeds from our public offering on May 21, 2020 of 2,275,000 shares of our common stock to the public at $55.00 per share. Net proceeds to the Company from the offering were $117.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $7.5 million and other offering expenses of approximately $463 thousand.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $107.5 million and was primarily from net proceeds of $107.1 million after underwriter discounts and other offering expenses payable by the Company from a follow-on public offering of 2,853,946 shares of common stock at a price of $40.00 per share, which includes the sale of 353,946 shares of the Company’s common stock pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise of their option to purchase additional shares.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our outstanding contractual obligations as of payment due date by period at December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)We lease approximately 29,000 square feet of office and laboratory space at 2100 Wharton St., Suite 701, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The lease expires February 2027.
(2)On December 26, 2019, we entered into a lease agreement for our second commercial gene therapy facility in the Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania area ("ASTRA lease"). The 150,000 square foot facility is under construction and is expected to be completed and validated in 2022. The lease will commence when the space is delivered by Landlord as substantially complete and available for access, which is anticipated to be in 1H 2021, and has an initial term that expires on October 31, 2035. The ASTRA lease contains an option ("Purchase Option") to purchase the building, related improvements and take corresponding assignment of the Landlord's rights under its existing Ground Lease (the "Ground Lease"). On October 15, 2020, the Company gave the Landlord notice
of its intent to purchase ASTRA subject to the parties entering into a commercially reasonable purchase and sale agreement.
(3)On October 5, 2020, the Company became the accounting owner of the Ground Lease due to obtaining control over ASTRA and recorded the applicable right-of-use asset and corresponding lease liability as of October 5, 2020. The lease expires in April 2071.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13 - Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820) (“ASU 2018-13”) which removes, modifies and adds disclosure requirements on fair value measurements. ASU 2018-13 removes disclosure requirements for transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 measurements and valuation processes for Level 3 measurements but adds new disclosure requirements including changes in unrealized gains/losses in other comprehensive income related to recurring Level 3 measurements. The amended guidance was effective for us commencing in the first quarter of 2020. Certain aspects may be applied prospectively while other aspects may be applied retrospectively upon the effective date. The adoption of the guidance resulted in us disclosing the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities by significant investment category as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.