Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations provide information that the Company’s management believes necessary to achieve an understanding of its financial condition and results of operations. To the extent that such analysis contains statements which are not of a historical nature, such statements are forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. These risks include, but are not limited to, changes in the competitive environment for the Company’s products and services; general economic factors in markets where the Company’s products and services are sold; and other factors including, but not limited to: cost of goods, consumer disposable income, consumer debt levels and buying patterns, consumer credit availability, interest rates, customer preferences, unemployment, labor costs, inflation, fuel and energy prices, weather patterns, climate change, catastrophic events, competitive pressures and insurance costs discussed in the Company’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
FYE Transaction
On February 20, 2020, the Company consummated the sale of substantially all of the assets and certain of the liabilities relating to fye to a subsidiary of Sunrise Records pursuant to an Asset Purchase Agreement dated January 23, 2020, by and among the Company, Record Town, Inc., Record Town USA LLC, Record Town Utah LLC, Trans World FL LLC, Trans World New York, LLC, 2428392 Inc., and Sunrise Records.
Following the FYE Transaction, Kaspien is the Company’s only operating segment.
Impact of COVID-19
To date, as a direct result of COVID-19, most of our employees are working remotely. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, including expenses, reserves and allowances, and employee-related amounts, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions taken to contain or treat it, as well as the economic impact on local, regional, national and international customers and markets, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. Management is actively monitoring this situation and the possible effects on its financial condition, liquidity, operations, industry, and workforce. Given the daily evolution of the COVID-19 outbreak and the response to curb its spread, currently we are not able to estimate the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak to our results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity.
In response to the rapidly evolving COVID-19 pandemic, we activated our business continuity program, led by our Executive Team in conjunction with Human Resources, to help us manage the situation. In mid-March of 2020, we transitioned our corporate office staff to work 100% remotely. This process was aided through the implementation of a flexible work from home policy rolled out to the organization in fiscal 2019, having a companywide communication platform for instant messaging and video conferencing, and cloud-based critical business applications. However, while our business is not dependent on physical office locations nor travel, having a 100% remote workforce does present increased operational risk. Our leadership team believes we have the necessary controls in place to mitigate these impacts and allow the team to continue to operate effectively remotely as long as required by State guidelines.
While e-commerce has largely benefited from the closure of brick-and-mortar locations as consumer spending has been pushed online to marketplaces such as Amazon and Walmart, the industry nor our organization has been immune to the impact to our supply chains. For instance, in March 2020, Amazon reduced replenishment in their fulfillment centers to essential items which limited a significant percentage of SKUs carried by Kaspien and a number of Kaspien’ partners shut their warehouses or suffered limited processing capacity due to COVID-19. While Amazon has since lifted restrictions and the leadership team executed contingency plans to mitigate the adverse impact from these restrictions, this highlights the fluid nature of COVID-19 across supply chains.
Additionally, since the beginning of the pandemic, tens of millions of Americans have lost their jobs, significantly increasing the risk of near-term economic contraction in the United States that may affect e-commerce sales. The risk of another wave or increased numbers of positive COVID-19 cases also presents further risk to supply chains. Leadership is actively monitoring the situation and potential impacts on its financial condition, liquidity, operations and workforce but the full extent of the impact is still highly uncertain.
Key Performance Indicators
Management monitors a number of key performance indicators to evaluate its performance, including:
Net Revenue: The Company measures total year over year sales growth. Net sales performance is measured through several key performance indicators including number of partners and active product listings and sales per listing.
Cost of Sales and Gross Profit: Gross profit is calculated based on the cost of product in relation to its retail selling value. Changes in gross profit are impacted primarily by net sales levels, mix of products sold, obsolescence and distribution costs. Distribution expenses include those costs associated with receiving, inspecting & warehousing merchandise, Amazon fulfillment fees, and costs associated with product returns to vendors.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses: Included in SG&A expenses are payroll and related costs, general operating and overhead expenses and depreciation charges. SG&A expenses also include miscellaneous income and expense items, other than interest.
Balance Sheet and Ratios: The Company views cash, merchandise inventory, accounts payable leverage, and working capital as key indicators of its financial position. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for further discussion of these items.
Gross Merchandise Value (“GMV”): The total value of merchandise sold over a given time period through a customer-to-customer exchange site. It is the measurement of merchandise value sold across all channels and partners within our platform.
Fiscal Year Ended January 30, 2021 (“fiscal 2020”)
Compared to Fiscal Year Ended February 1, 2020 (“fiscal 2019”)
The Company’s fiscal year is a 52 or 53-week period ending the Saturday nearest to January 31. Fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 ended January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020, respectively. Both fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 had 52 weeks.
Net Revenue. Net revenue increased 18.8% to $158.3 million compared to $133.2 million in fiscal 2019. The primary source of revenue is the Retail as a Service (“RaaS”) model, which represented 99% of net revenue. As part of the Company’s diversification strategic initiative, net revenue from non-Amazon US marketplaces increased to 5.4% of net revenue from 3.4% of net revenue in the comparable period from the prior year. The increase was attributable to Amazon International, Walmart and Other Marketplaces. Subscriptions and Other share of net revenue increased to 0.8% of net revenue from 0.4% of net revenue in the comparable period from the prior year. The increase was attributable an increase in the number of partners and higher gross merchandise value (“GMV”) of partner revenue flowing through the platform Amazon Marketplace. The following table sets forth net revenue by marketplace as a percentage of total net revenue:
The Company generates revenue across a broad array of product lines primarily through the Amazon Marketplace. Categories include apparel, baby, beauty, electronics, health & personal care, home/kitchen/grocery, pets, sporting goods, toys & art.
Annual platform GMV for fiscal year 2020 was $246 million. Fourth quarter 2020 GMV increased 86% to $73.9 million, compared to $39.7 million in the comparable year-ago period. Subscription GMV increased 886% to $26.9 million (36.3% of total GMV), compared to $2.7 million (6.9%% of total GMV) in the same year-ago period.
Gross Profit. Gross profit as a percentage of revenue was 10.3% in fiscal 2020 as compared to 8.1% in fiscal 2019. The increase in the gross profit rate was primarily due to an increase in merchandise margin to 46.4% in fiscal 2020 as compared to 46.1% in fiscal 2019 and the leveraging of fulfillment fees and commissions and warehousing and freight expenses on the higher sales. The following table sets forth a year-over-year comparison of the Company’s gross profit:
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. The following table sets forth a year-over-year comparison of the Company’s SG&A expenses:
SG&A expenses decreased $3.1 million, or 12.2%, primarily due to a 36% reduction in in Corporate SG&A expenses. SG&A expenses for Kaspien increased $49,000.
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net revenue decreased to 13.9% as compared to 18.8% in fiscal 2019. The decrease in the rate as a percentage of net revenue was primarily due to the decline in Corporate SG&A expenses and the leveraging of Kaspien SG&A expenses on the higher sales.
Depreciation and amortization expense. Consolidated depreciation and amortization expense increased $0.3 million.
Asset Impairment Charges. During fiscal 2019, the Company fully impaired its vendor relationships, and the Company recognized an impairment loss of $0.8 million.
Interest Expense. Interest expense in fiscal 2020 was $1.7 million, compared to interest income of $0.7 million in fiscal 2019.
Income Tax (Benefit) expense. The following table sets forth a year-over-year comparison of the Company’s income tax expense:
During fiscal 2020, based on the Company’s evaluation of new information that occurred in the current financial reporting period, the Company recorded an income tax benefit of $3.5 million related to the recognition of previously unrecognized income tax benefits pursuant to ASC 740-10-25, Accounting for Income Taxes - Recognition. Prior to the current financial reporting period, the Company had accrued the liabilities for unrecognized income tax benefits, including accrued interest and penalties related to tax positions created by the fye business. As a result of the FYE Transaction and a reorganization of the Company’s corporate structure, the Company will not utilize the tax attributes attributable to the tax positions and the corporate entities associated with the tax positions have been liquidated.
The fiscal 2019 income tax expense includes state taxes and the accrual of interest on the reserve for uncertain tax positions.
Loss From Discontinued Operations. For fiscal 2019, the Company recognized a loss from discontinued operations of $44.4 million related to the FYE Transaction.
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the loss from discontinued operations.
Net Loss. The following table sets forth a year-over-year comparison of the Company’s net loss:
Net loss was $3.9 million for fiscal 2020, compared to $58.7 million for fiscal 2019. Included in the results for fiscal 2019 is a loss from the fye business of $44.4 million. The decrease in net loss was primarily due to improved loss from operations and the elimination of the loss from fye business.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity and Cash Flows:
The consolidated financial statements for the year ended January 30, 2021 were prepared on the basis of a going concern which contemplates that the Company will be able to realize assets and satisfy liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. The ability of the Company to meet its liabilities and to continue as a going concern is dependent on improved profitability, the continued implementation of the strategic initiative to reposition the Company as a platform of software and services, the availability of future funding and overcoming the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The audited consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of these uncertainties.
The Company incurred net losses of $3.9 million and $58.7 million for the fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively, and has an accumulated deficit of $112.9 million as of January 30, 2021. In addition, net cash used in operating activities during fiscal 2020 was $13.6 million. Net cash used in operating activities during fiscal 2019 was $15.8 million.
During the third quarter of fiscal 2019, in response to recurring losses from operations, the expectation of continuing operating losses, and uncertainty with respect to any available future funding, the Company pursued several strategic initiatives towards its strategy of shifting its focus solely to the operation of Kaspien, improving profitability and meeting future liquidity needs and capital requirements. Initiatives completed during the first quarter of fiscal 2020 include:
•
The sale of the For Your Entertainment (fye) business;
•
The establishment of a new secured $25 million revolving credit facility with Encina:
•
The execution of a separate subordinated loan agreement for Kaspien, Inc. (the “Subordinated Loan”); and
•
The receipt by Kaspien, Inc. of loan proceeds pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Plan under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act.
There can be no assurance that we will be successful in further implementing our business strategy or that the strategy, including the completed initiatives, will be successful in sustaining acceptable levels of sales growth and profitability. In addition, the proceeds from the PPP Loan are subject to audit and there is a risk of repayment.
The Company’s primary sources of liquidity are its borrowing capacity under its New Credit Facility, available cash and cash equivalents, and to a lesser extent, cash generated from operations. Our cash requirements relate primarily to working capital needed to operate Kaspien, including funding operating expenses, the purchase of inventory and capital expenditures. Our ability to achieve profitability and meet future liquidity needs and capital requirements will depend upon numerous factors, including the timing and amount of our revenue; the timing and amount of our operating expenses; the timing and costs of working capital needs; successful implementation of our strategy and planned activities; and our ability to overcome the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
On March 18, 2021, the Company closed an underwritten offering of 416,600 shares of common stock of the Company, at a price to the public of $32.50 per share. The gross proceeds of the offering were approximately $13.5 million, prior to deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses. The Company intends to use the net proceeds from the offering for general corporate purposes, including working capital to implement its strategic plans focused on brand acquisition, investments in technology to enhance its scalable platform and its core retail business.
In addition to the aforementioned current sources of existing working capital, the Company is continuing its efforts to generate additional sales and increase margins. There can be no assurance that any of the initiatives or strategic alternatives will be implemented, successful or consummated.
The following table sets forth a two-year summary of key components of cash flow and working capital:
During fiscal 2020, cash used in operations was $13.4 million compared to $15.8 million in fiscal 2019. During 2020, cash used in operations consisted primarily of a net loss of $3.9 million, an increase of $6.7 million in inventory and the payment of $5.5 million in accounts payable partially offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses and accounts receivables. During 2019, cash used in operations consisted primarily of a net loss of $58.7 million offset by non-cash charges, including the $24.0 million impairment of long-lived assets, a $12.7 inventory net realizable adjustment and $11.5 million in depreciation and amortization and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $6.5 million. See the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for further detail.
The Company monitors various statistics to measure its management of inventory, including inventory turnover (annual cost of sales divided by average merchandise inventory balances), and accounts payable leverage (accounts payable divided by merchandise inventory). Inventory turnover measures the Company’s ability to sell merchandise and how many times it is replaced in a year. This ratio is important in determining the need for markdowns and planning future inventory levels and assessing customer response to our merchandise. Inventory turnover in fiscal 2020 and in fiscal 2019 was 4.0 and 3.3, respectively. Accounts payable leverage measures the percentage of inventory being funded by the Company’s product vendors. The percentage is important in determining the Company’s ability to fund its business. Accounts payable leverage on inventory for Kaspien was 36.3% as of January 30, 2021 compared with 29.2% as of February 1, 2020.
Cash provided by investing activities was $10.6 million in fiscal 2020, compared to cash used in investing activities of $2.7 million in fiscal 2019. During fiscal 2020, cash provided by investing activities consisted proceeds from the sale of the fye business of $11.8 million, partially offset by capital expenditures of $1.2 million. During fiscal 2019, cash used in investing activities consisted of $2.8 million in capital expenditures partially offset by a $127,000 capital distribution from a joint venture.
The Company has historically financed its capital expenditures through borrowings under its revolving credit facility and cash flow from operations. The Company anticipates capital spending of approximately $1.7 million in fiscal 2021.
Cash provided by financing activities was $505,000 in fiscal 2020, compared to $13.1 million in fiscal 2019. In fiscal 2020, cash provided by financing activities consisted of $6.3 million in proceeds from short term borrowings, $5.1 million in proceeds from long term borrowings, $2.0 million in proceeds from a PPP loan, partially offset by $13.1 million in payment of short-term borrowings. In fiscal 2019, cash provided by financing activities was primarily comprised of net short-term borrowings.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by Item 303 (a) (4) of Regulation S-K.
Related Party Transactions.
Directors Jonathan Marcus, Thomas Simpson, and Michael Reickert are the chief executive officer of Alimco Re Ltd. (“Alimco”), the managing member of Kick-Start III, LLC and Kick-Start IV, LLC (“Kick-Start”), and a trustee of the Robert J. Higgins TWMC Trust (the “Trust”), an affiliate of RJHDC, LLC (“RJHDC” and together with Alimco and Kick-Start, “Related Party Entities”), respectively. The Related Party Entities are parties to the following agreements with the Company entered into on March 30, 2020:
•
Subordinated Loan and Security Agreement, pursuant to which the Related Party Entities made a $5.2 million secured term loan ($2.7 million from Alimco, $0.5 million from Kick-Start, and $2.0 million from RJHDC) to Kaspien with a scheduled maturity date of May 22, 2023, interest accruing at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum and compounded on the last day of each calendar quarter by becoming a part of the principal amount, and secured by a second priority security interest in substantially all of the assets of the Company and Kaspien;
•
Common Stock Purchase Warrants (“Warrants”), pursuant to which the Company issued warrants to purchase up to 244,532 shares of Common Stock to the Related Party Entities (127,208 shares for Alimco, 23,401 shares for Kick-Start, and 93,923 shares for RJHDC), subject to adjustment in accordance with the terms of the Warrants, at an exercise price of $0.01 per share. As of April 15, 2021, 236,993 warrants were exercised by the Related Party Entities and 7,539 remained outstanding;
•
Contingent Value Rights Agreement (the “CVR Agreement”), pursuant to which the Related Party Entities received contingent value rights (“CVRs”) representing the contractual right to receive cash payments from the Company in an amount equal, in the aggregate, to 19.9% of the proceeds (10.35% for Alimco, 1.90% for Kick-Start, and 7.64% for RJHDC) received by the Company in respect of certain intercompany indebtedness owing to it by Kaspien and/or its equity interest in Kaspien; and
•
Voting Agreement (the “Voting Agreement”), pursuant to which the Related Party Entities, the Trust, Mr. Simpson and their respective related entities agreed to how their respective shares of the Company’s capital stock held by the parties will be voted with respect to the designation, election, removal, and replacement of members of the Board. Pursuant to the Voting Agreement, Messrs. Marcus and Simpson were appointed as directors of the Company, and Mr. Reickert, a trustee of the Trust, remained as a director of the Company. Mr. Subin was also granted board observer rights.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires that management apply accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect results of operations and the reported amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this report includes a summary of the significant accounting policies and methods used by the Company in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements. Management believes that of the Company’s significant accounting policies and estimates, the following involve a higher degree of judgment or complexity:
Merchandise Inventory and Return Costs. Merchandise inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value under the average cost method. Inventory valuation requires significant judgment and estimates, including obsolescence and any adjustments to net realizable value, if net realizable value is lower than cost. For all merchandise categories, the Company records obsolescence and any adjustments to net realizable value (if lower than cost) based on current and anticipated demand, customer preferences, and market conditions.
Long-Lived Assets other than Goodwill: Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to undiscounted future net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset over its remaining useful life. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Fair value is generally measured based on discounted estimated future cash flows. Assets to be disposed of would be separately presented in the Consolidated Balance Sheets and reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less disposition costs. As of January 30, 2020, for the purposes of the asset impairment test, the Company has one asset grouping.
During fiscal 2019, the Company concluded, based on continued operating losses for the Kaspien that a triggering event had occurred, and pursuant to FASB ASC 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment, an evaluation of the Kaspien fixed assets and intangible assets for impairment was required. For fiscal 2019, intangible assets related to vendor relationships were fully impaired resulting in the recognition of asset impairment charges of $0.8 million.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements.
The information set forth above may be found under Notes to Consolidated Statements, Note 4.