Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Executive Summary
As of January 30, 2021, we operated 1,162 Kohl's stores, a website (www.Kohls.com), and 12 FILA outlets. Our Kohl's stores and website sell moderately-priced private and national brand apparel, footwear, accessories, beauty, and home products. Our Kohl's stores generally carry a consistent merchandise assortment with some differences attributable to local preferences. Our website includes merchandise which is available in our stores, as well as merchandise that is available only online.
Key financial results for 2020 included:
•
Net sales decreased 20.4% to $15.0 billion reflecting the continued impact of COVID-19.
•
Gross margin as a percentage of net sales decreased 464 basis points due to the mix of the business, inventory actions taken in the first quarter, and higher shipping costs resulting from increased digital sales penetration partially offset by strong inventory management and pricing and promotional optimization.
•
Selling, general, and administrative expenses ("SG&A") as a percentage of total revenue increased 291 basis points. SG&A expenses decreased $684 million, or 12%, primarily driven by a reduction in store related expenses and lower marketing expenses.
•
Net loss on a GAAP basis was $163 million, or ($1.06) loss per share.
•
On an adjusted non-GAAP basis, our net loss was $186 million, or ($1.21) loss per share.
Recent Developments
As discussed in our 2019 Form 10-K, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a pandemic in March 2020. Subsequently, COVID-19 has continued to spread throughout the United States. As a result, the President of the United States declared a national emergency. Federal, state, and local governing bodies mandated various restrictions, including travel restrictions, restrictions on public gatherings, stay at home orders and advisories, and quarantining of people who may have been exposed to the virus. The response to the COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected the global economy, disrupted global supply chains, and created significant disruption in the financial and retail markets, including a decrease in consumer demand for our merchandise.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and will likely continue to have, significant adverse effects on our business including, but not limited to the following:
•
On March 20, 2020, the Company furloughed 85,000 store and distribution center associates, as well as some corporate office associates, as a result of temporarily closing all of our stores which limited our business to the digital channel.
•
Starting on May 4, 2020, we began reopening stores in locations where permitted, and had reopened all of our stores as of July 10, 2020, and furloughed store and distribution center associates have returned to work.
•
The Company experienced a significant decline in sales demand, and expects to continue to experience volatility in demand for its merchandise. We also experienced pressure in gross margin, and continue to expect pressures on gross margin as we expect digital penetration to remain elevated. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company experienced an impact to gross margin from freight surcharges related to increased digital penetration across the retail industry resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
•
Additionally, social distancing measures or changes in consumer spending behaviors due to COVID-19 may continue to impact store traffic which could result in a loss of sales and profit. As our stores reopened, we implemented numerous social distancing and safety measures which remain in place. These include providing personal protective equipment to our associates, implementing a more rigorous cleaning process,
including enhanced cleaning of high touch surfaces throughout the day, installing protective barriers at all registers, and requiring associates and customers to wear face coverings while inside our stores. To encourage social distancing, we installed social distancing signage and markers throughout the store, closed our fitting rooms, widened aisles by removing in-aisle fixtures, relocated Amazon returns to a separate area of the store, and are limiting occupancy in stores as appropriate. We also implemented a new process for handling merchandise returns, reduced store operating hours, and are providing dedicated shopping hours for at-risk individuals.
The chart below details costs that we believe are directly attributable to COVID-19:
In response to COVID-19, we took the following actions to preserve financial liquidity and flexibility during fiscal 2020:
•
Managed inventory receipts meaningfully lower,
•
Significantly reduced expenses across all areas of the business including marketing, technology, operations, and payroll,
•
Reduced capital expenditures 61%,
•
Suspended share repurchase program,
•
Suspended regular quarterly cash dividend beginning in the second quarter of 2020,
•
Replaced and upsized the unsecured $1.0 billion revolver with a $1.5 billion secured facility, of which all was fully available for utilization as of year-end,
•
Issued $600 million of 9.5% notes due 2025, and
•
Completed a sale leaseback for our San Bernardino E-commerce fulfillment and distribution center which generated net proceeds of $193 million after fees and resulted in a $127 million gain.
We cannot estimate with certainty the length or severity of this pandemic, or the extent to which the disruption may materially impact our Consolidated Financial Statements. For fiscal 2020, COVID-19 had a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
See "Results of Operations" and "Liquidity and Capital Resources" for additional details about our financial results.
Our Vision and Strategy
As part of our continued efforts to stay ahead in the rapidly changing retail environment, we introduced a new strategic framework in October 2020. The Company’s new vision is to be “the most trusted retailer of choice for the active and casual lifestyle.” This new strategy is designed to create long-term shareholder value and has four key focus areas: driving top line growth, expanding operating margin, maintaining disciplined capital management, and sustaining an agile, accountable, and inclusive culture.
Driving Top Line Growth
Our initiatives include expanding Kohl’s active and outdoor business to at least 30% of net sales, reigniting growth in the women’s business, building a sizable beauty business, driving category productivity and inventory turn, and capturing market share from the retail industry disruption. We have already taken significant steps in these areas, including forming a new major long-term strategic partnership with Sephora, the largest prestige beauty retailer in the world, where Sephora will become Kohl’s exclusive beauty partner. We plan for this partnership to bring the “Sephora at Kohl’s” experience to 200 stores and online beginning in Fall 2021, and to at least 850 locations by 2023. We expect this strategic partnership to drive incremental customer traffic, significantly grow the Company’s beauty business, and positively impact sales across other categories. Our loyalty and value efforts include simplifying the value delivered to our customers and maintaining our industry-leading loyalty program, which includes Kohl’s Rewards and the Kohl’s Card. We will also continue to offer a compelling and differentiated omnichannel experience through modernized stores and an enhanced digital platform.
Expanding Operating Margin
We have established a goal of expanding the Company’s operating margin with a multi-year plan of achieving 7% to 8%. To achieve that goal, we are focused on driving both gross margin improvement and selling, general, and administrative expense leverage. Our gross margin initiatives include disciplined inventory management and increased inventory turn, optimized pricing and promotion strategies, efficient sourcing, and a transformed end-to-end supply chain. Our initiatives to drive selling, general, and administrative expense efficiency are focused on store expenses, marketing, technology, and corporate expenses.
Maintaining Disciplined Capital Management
We are committed to prudent balance sheet management with the long-term objective of sustaining Kohl’s Investment Grade credit rating. The Company has a long history of strong cash flow generation, investing in the business, and returning significant capital to shareholders-all of which will remain important in the future.
Sustaining an Agile, Accountable, and Inclusive Culture
Fostering a diverse, equitable, and inclusive environment for Kohl’s associates, customers, and suppliers is an important focus of ours. We established a diversity and inclusion framework in 2020 that includes a number of key initiatives across three pillars: Our People, Our Customers, and Our Communities. In addition, we continue to build on the Company’s commitment to Environmental, Social, and Corporate Governance (“ESG”). We have established 2025 goals related to climate change, waste and recycling, and sustainable sourcing, and Kohl’s has earned many ESG-related awards.
2021 Outlook
Our current expectations for 2021 are as follows:
Results of Operations
Net Sales
Net sales includes revenue from the sale of merchandise, net of expected returns and shipping revenue.
Comparable sales is a measure that highlights the performance of our stores and digital channel by measuring the change in sales for a period over the comparable, prior-year period of equivalent length. Comparable sales includes all store and digital sales, except sales from stores open less than 12 months, stores that have been closed, and stores where square footage has changed by more than 10%. We measure the change in digital sales by including all sales initiated online or through mobile applications, including omnichannel transactions which are fulfilled through our stores.
As our stores were closed for a period during fiscal 2020, we have not included a discussion of 2020 comparable sales as we do not believe it is a meaningful metric over this period of time.
We measure digital penetration as digital sales over net sales. These amounts do not take into consideration fulfillment node, digital returns processed in stores, and coupon behaviors.
Comparable sales is a meaningful metric in evaluating our performance of ongoing operations period over period. Comparable sales and digital penetration measures vary across the retail industry. As a result, our comparable sales calculation and digital penetration may not be consistent with the similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
The following graph summarizes net sales dollars and comparable sales over the prior year:
2020 compared to 2019
Net sales decreased $3.9 billion, or 20.4%, to $15.0 billion for 2020.
•
The decrease reflects the continued impact of COVID-19 which includes the temporary nationwide closure of our stores on March 20, 2020 resulting in a decrease in transactions. All of our stores reopened during the second quarter of 2020.
•
Digital sales increased 29% for the year. Digital penetration represented 40% of net sales in 2020.
•
By line of business, Home and Children’s outperformed the Company average. Women’s, Men’s, Footwear, and Accessories underperformed the Company average.
•
Active continued to be a key strategic initiative for 2020 and outperformed the Company average.
2019 compared to 2018
Net sales decreased $282 million, or 1.5% to $18.9 billion for 2019.
•
The decrease was primarily due to a 1.3% decrease in comparable sales driven by a decrease in average transaction value.
•
Digital sales had a low double digits percentage increase in 2019. Digital penetration represented 24% of net sales in 2019.
•
By line of business, Children’s, Men’s, Accessories, and Footwear outperformed the Company average. Home and Women’s underperformed the Company average.
•
Active continued to be a key strategic initiative that contributed to our sales growth in 2019.
•
Geographically, the Midwest, Mid-Atlantic, and Northeast outperformed the Company average.
Other Revenue
Other revenue includes revenue from credit card operations, third-party advertising on our website, unused gift cards and merchandise return cards (breakage), and other non-merchandise revenue.
The following graph summarizes other revenue:
Other revenue decreased $165 million in 2020 and increased $27 million in 2019. The decrease in 2020 was due to lower credit card revenue due to lower accounts receivable balances associated with lower sales and a higher payment rate resulting in less interest, late fees, and write-off activity. The increase in 2019 was due to higher credit card revenue.
Cost of Merchandise Sold and Gross Margin
Cost of merchandise sold includes the total cost of products sold, including product development costs, net of vendor payments other than reimbursement of specific, incremental, and identifiable costs; inventory shrink; markdowns; freight expenses associated with moving merchandise from our vendors to our distribution centers; shipping expenses for digital sales; terms cash discount; and depreciation of product development facilities and equipment. Our cost of merchandise sold may not be comparable with that of other retailers because we include distribution center and buying costs in selling, general, and administrative expenses while other retailers may include these expenses in cost of merchandise sold.
The following graph summarizes cost of merchandise sold and gross margin as a percent of net sales:
Gross margin is calculated as net sales less cost of merchandise sold. Gross margin as a percent of net sales decreased 464 basis points in 2020 and 64 basis points in 2019. The decrease in 2020 was driven by approximately 195 bps due to the inventory actions taken in the first quarter of 2020, approximately 210 bps due to higher shipping costs resulting from increased digital sales penetration, and approximately 60 bps due to the mix of business partially offset by strong inventory management and pricing and promotion optimization. The decrease in 2019 was driven by higher shipping costs resulting from digital growth, an increase in promotional markdowns, and mix of business.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
SG&A includes compensation and benefit costs (including stores, corporate, buying, and distribution centers); occupancy and operating costs of our retail, distribution, and corporate facilities; freight expenses associated with moving merchandise from our distribution centers to our retail stores and among distribution and retail facilities other than expenses to fulfill digital sales; marketing expenses, offset by vendor payments for reimbursement of specific, incremental, and identifiable costs; expenses related to our credit card operations; and other administrative revenues and expenses. We do not include depreciation and amortization in SG&A. The classification of these expenses varies across the retail industry.
Many of our expenses, including store payroll and distribution costs, are variable in nature. These costs generally increase as sales increase, and decrease as sales decrease. We measure both the change in these variable expenses and the expense as a percent of revenue. If the expense as a percent of revenue decreased from the prior year, the expense "leveraged". If the expense as a percent of revenue increased over the prior year, the expense "deleveraged".
The following graph summarizes the decreases in SG&A by expense type between 2019 and 2020:
SG&A decreased $684 million, or 12%, to $5.0 billion for 2020. As a percentage of revenue, SG&A deleveraged by 291 basis points.
The decrease was primarily driven by a reduction in store expenses due to a reduction in sales and staffing model changes, lower marketing expense due to reductions in all working media channels, reduced capital spending in technology, and lower credit expenses due to lower payroll and operating costs. Corporate expenses decreased due to lower general corporate costs. Distribution costs, which exclude payroll related to online originated orders that were shipped from our stores, were $346 million for 2020 compared to $350 million for 2019. This decrease was driven by lower payroll and transportation costs as a result of lower volume due to COVID-19. Partially offsetting the decrease in SG&A expenses in 2020 were expenses related to the COVID-19 pandemic which primarily consisted of incremental employee compensation and benefits as well as cleaning and protective supplies. Included in these expenses was the retention credit benefit we were eligible for under The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act"). The CARES Act, enacted on March 27, 2020, provides eligible employers with an employee retention credit equal to 50% of qualified wages paid to employees who were not providing services to the Company due to the impact of COVID-19.
The following graph summarizes the increases and (decreases) in SG&A by expense type between 2018 and 2019:
SG&A increased $104 million, or 1.9%, to $5.7 billion for 2019. As a percentage of revenue, SG&A deleveraged by 88 basis points.
The increase in store expenses reflects higher rent expense, primarily due to the new lease accounting standard, costs related to brand launches, the Amazon returns program, and wage pressure. Distribution costs, which exclude payroll related to online originated orders that were shipped from our stores, were $350 million for 2019. This increased $38 million due to higher transportation and payroll costs at our E-Commerce fulfillment centers driven by growth in digital sales. Marketing costs reflect higher digital and broadcast spend. Technology costs increased as we continue to invest in our business. Expenses from our credit card operations decreased due to savings in payroll and operating costs. Corporate and other expenses decreased due to lower general corporate costs and incentives.
Other Expenses
Depreciation and amortization decreases were driven by maturity of our store portfolio and reduced capital spending in 2020.
Depreciation and amortization decreases in 2019 were driven by the maturing of our stores and the impact of the new lease accounting standard offset by higher amortization due to investments in technology.
Impairments, store closing, and other costs in 2020 included total asset impairments of $68 million, which consisted of $51 million related to capital reductions and strategy changes due to COVID-19 and $17 million related to impairments of corporate facilities and lease assets. It also included a $21 million corporate restructuring charge, $15 million in brand exit costs, and a $2 million contract termination fee due to COVID-19, offset by a $13 million gain on an investment previously impaired and $4 million gain on lease termination.
Impairments, store closing, and other costs in 2019 included $52 million of asset impairment charges related to the closure of four Kohl’s stores and four Off-Aisle clearance centers, $30 million in severance, which included our corporate restructuring effort along with the execution of a voluntary role reduction program, $10 million related to brand exits, and a $21 million impairment related to technology projects that no longer aligned with our strategic plans. Impairments, store closing, and other costs in 2018 included the following expenses related to closing four stores, consolidating call center locations which supported both Kohl’s charge and online customers, a voluntary retirement program, and the impairment of certain assets.
During fiscal 2020, we recognized a gain of $127 million from the sale leaseback transaction of our San Bernardino E-commerce fulfillment and distribution centers.
Net interest expense increased in 2020 as a result of higher interest expense due to the outstanding balance on the revolving credit facility which was fully paid in October 2020, and the $600 million of notes issued in April 2020. Net interest expense decreased in 2019 due primarily to the benefits of debt reductions in 2018 and adoption of the new lease accounting standard in the first quarter of 2019.
Gain on extinguishment of debt of $9 million in 2019 resulted from the purchase of leased equipment that was accounted for as a financing obligation.
Loss on the extinguishment of debt of $63 million in 2018 resulted from a $413 million make-whole call and a $500 million cash tender offer in 2018.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate in 2020 includes the full year benefit for the net operating loss carryback provision from the CARES Act enacted on March 27, 2020. This provision allows losses generated in 2020 to be carried back to the five preceding years, which include years in which the statutory tax rate was 35%. The effective tax rates in 2019 and 2018 reflect the federal statutory rate of 21%.
GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliation
We believe adjusted results are useful because they provide enhanced visibility into our ongoing results for the periods excluding the impact of certain items such as those included in the table above. However, these non-GAAP financial measures are not intended to replace GAAP measures.
Inflation
In addition to COVID-19, we expect that our operations will continue to be influenced by general economic conditions, including food, fuel, and energy prices, higher unemployment, and costs to source our merchandise, including tariffs. There can be no assurances that such factors will not impact our business in the future.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Financial liquidity and flexibility are a key focus of our response to COVID-19. As previously mentioned, we took various actions during 2020 to preserve our financial liquidity and flexibility.
The following table presents our primary uses and sources of cash:
Our working capital and inventory levels typically build throughout the fall, peaking during the November and December holiday selling season. Due to COVID-19, typical working capital and inventory patterns did not occur in 2020.
The following table includes cash balances and changes:
(a)
Non-GAAP financial measure
Operating Activities
Operating activities generated cash of $1.3 billion in 2020 compared to cash of $1.7 billion in 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to the decline in net income resulting from decreased sales due to the temporary nationwide store closures due to COVID-19 and changes in other current and long-term assets offset by the decrease in merchandise inventories.
Operating activities generated cash of $1.7 billion in 2019 compared to cash of $2.1 billion in 2018. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower net income and changes in accrued and other operating liabilities.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in Investing activities decreased $700 million to $137 million in 2020. The decrease was due to reductions in capital spending as part of our response to COVID-19 as well as the proceeds from the sale of real estate.
Net cash used in Investing activities increased $265 million to $837 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to the investments in our sixth E-commerce fulfillment center, store strategies that include new stores and capital improvements to existing stores, and technology investments.
The following chart summarizes capital expenditures by major category:
Financing Activities
Financing activities generated cash of $347 million in 2020 compared to $1.0 billion used in 2019.
In March 2020, we fully drew down our $1.0 billion senior unsecured revolver. In April 2020, we replaced and upsized the unsecured credit facility with a $1.5 billion senior secured, asset based revolving credit facility maturing in July 2024. In October 2020, we paid $1.0 billion to fully repay our revolver and have $1.5 billion available for utilization. No borrowings were outstanding on the credit facility as of January 30, 2021, February 1, 2020, or February 2, 2019.
In April 2020, we issued $600 million of 9.50% notes with semi-annual interest payments beginning in November 2020. The notes mature in May 2025. We used part of the net proceeds from this offering to repay $500 million of the borrowings under our senior secured, asset based revolving credit facility with the remainder for general corporate purposes.
As a result of the suspension of our share repurchase program in response to COVID-19, treasury stock purchases in 2020 were $8 million compared to $470 million in 2019. Share repurchases are discretionary in nature. The timing and amount of repurchases are based upon available cash balances, our stock price, and other factors.
Cash dividend payments were $108 million ($0.704 per share) in 2020 and $423 million ($2.68 per share) in 2019. In response to COVID-19, the dividend program was suspended beginning in the second quarter of 2020. The Company remains committed to paying a dividend and reinstated the dividend in the first quarter of 2021.
As of January 30, 2021, our credit ratings and outlook were as follows:
Free Cash Flow
We generated $908 million of free cash flow for 2020 compared to $700 million in 2019. The increase is primarily due to reductions in capital spending as part of our response to COVID-19, partially offset by a reduction in cash provided by operating activities. Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure which we define as net cash provided by operating activities and proceeds from financing obligations (which generally represent landlord reimbursements of construction costs) less capital expenditures and finance lease and financing obligation
payments. Free cash flow should be evaluated in addition to, and not considered a substitute for, other financial measures such as net income and net cash provided by operating activities. We believe that free cash flow represents our ability to generate additional cash flow from our business operations.
The following table reconciles net cash provided by operating activities (a GAAP measure) to free cash flow (a non-GAAP measure):
Key Financial Ratios
Key financial ratios that provide certain measures of our liquidity are as follows:
The increase in our working capital and current ratio are primarily due to higher cash balances as a result of debt issuances, lower capital expenditures, proceeds from the sale of real estate, cash provided by operating activities, lower dividend payment, and share repurchases, offset by a decrease in merchandise inventory.
Return on Investment Ratios
The following table provides additional non-GAAP financial measures of our return on investments:
Changes in earnings drove changes in our return on investment ratios. Additionally, the adoption of the new lease accounting standard impacted our return on investment ratios positively by approximately 60 bps in 2019 compared to 2018.
We believe that ROI is a useful financial measure in evaluating our operating performance. When analyzed in conjunction with our net earnings and total assets, it provides investors with a useful tool to evaluate our ongoing operations and our management of assets from period to period. ROI is a non-GAAP financial measure which we define as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, and rent (“EBITDAR”) divided by average gross investment. EBITDAR is a useful non-GAAP measure that excludes items that are non-operating in nature and focuses on items that are key to our operating performance. Our ROI calculation may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. ROI should be evaluated in addition to, and not considered a substitute for, other GAAP financial measures. Return on investment ratios that are adjusted for certain items are useful financial measures because they illustrate the impact of these items on each metric. See the key financial ratio calculations below for our ROI and Adjusted ROI calculations.
Capital Structure Ratio
The following table provides additional non-GAAP financial measures of our capital structure:
The increase in our Adjusted debt to adjusted EBITDAR ratio is primarily due to lower operating income.
Adjusted debt to adjusted EBITDAR is a non-GAAP financial measure which we define as our adjusted outstanding debt balance divided by adjusted EBITDAR. We believe that our debt levels are best analyzed using this measure. Our current goals are to maintain a ratio that demonstrates our commitment to an investment grade rating and allows us to operate with an efficient capital structure for our size, growth plans, and industry. Our adjusted debt to adjusted EBITDAR calculation may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures reported by other companies. Adjusted debt to adjusted EBITDAR should be evaluated in addition to, and not considered a substitute for, other GAAP financial measures. See the key financial ratio calculations section below for our adjusted debt to adjusted EBITDAR calculation.
Our senior secured, asset based revolving credit facility contains customary events of default and financial, affirmative and negative covenants, including but not limited to, a springing financial covenant relating to our fixed charge coverage ratio and restrictions on indebtedness, liens, investments, asset dispositions, and restricted payments. As of January 30, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants and expect to remain in compliance during 2021.
Key Financial Ratio Calculations
The following table includes our ROI calculation. All ratios are non-GAAP financial measures:
(a)
Represents average of five most recent quarter-end balances. For 2019, fourth quarter 2018 balances were adjusted to reflect the impact of the new lease accounting standard.
(b)
Represents excess cash not required for operations.
(c)
Represents ten times store rent and five times equipment/other rent. This is not applicable in 2020 and 2019 as operating leases are now recorded on the balance sheet due to the adoption of the new lease accounting standard.
(d)
EBITDAR or adjusted EBITDAR, as applicable, divided by gross investment.
The following table includes our adjusted debt to adjusted EBITDAR calculation:
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of January 30, 2021 were as follows:
(a)
Our leases typically require that we pay taxes, insurance and maintenance costs in addition to the minimum rental payments included in the table above. Such costs vary from period to period and totaled $183 million for 2020, $189 million for 2019, and $183 million for 2018. Additionally, the lease term includes cancelable option periods where failure to exercise such options would result in an economic penalty.
(b)
Other includes royalties, legally binding minimum lease and interest payments for stores opening in 2021 or later, as well as payments associated with technology and marketing agreements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not provided any financial guarantees as of year-end 2020.
We have not created, and are not party to, any special-purpose or off-balance sheet entities for the purpose of raising capital, incurring debt, or operating our business. We do not have any arrangements or relationships with entities that are not consolidated into the financial statements that are reasonably likely to materially affect our financial condition, liquidity, results of operations, or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts. Management has discussed the development, selection, and disclosure of these estimates and assumptions with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
Retail Inventory Method and Inventory Valuation
Merchandise inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market using the retail inventory method (“RIM”). Under RIM, the valuation of inventory at cost and the resulting gross margins are calculated by applying a cost-to-retail ratio to the retail value of inventory. RIM is an averaging method that has been widely used in the retail industry due to its practicality. The use of RIM will result in inventory being valued at the lower of cost or market since permanent markdowns are taken as a reduction of the retail value of inventories. A reserve is recorded if the future estimated selling price is less than cost.
RIM inherently requires management judgment and estimates, such as the amount and timing of permanent markdowns to clear unproductive or slow-moving inventory, which may impact the ending inventory valuation as well as gross margin. Factors considered in the determination of permanent markdowns include current and anticipated demand, customer preferences, age of the merchandise, fashion trends, and weather conditions.
Inventory shrinkage is estimated as a percent of sales for the period between the last physical inventory count and the balance sheet date. Shrink is the difference between the recorded amount of inventory and the physical inventory. We perform an annual physical inventory count at the majority of our stores, E-Commerce fulfillment centers, and distribution centers. The shrinkage rate from the most recent physical inventory, in combination with current events and historical experience, is used as the standard for the shrinkage accrual rate for the next inventory cycle. Historically, our actual physical inventory count results have shown our estimates to be reliable.
Vendor Allowances
We frequently receive allowances from our vendors for markdowns that we have taken in order to sell the vendor’s merchandise and/or to support gross margins earned on those sales. This markdown support generally relates to sold inventory or permanent markdowns and, accordingly, is reflected as a reduction to cost of merchandise sold. Markdown support related to merchandise that has not yet been sold is recorded in inventory.
We also receive support from vendors for marketing and other costs that we have incurred to sell the vendors’ merchandise. To the extent the reimbursements are for specific, incremental, and identifiable costs incurred to sell the vendor's products and do not exceed the costs incurred, they are recognized as a reduction of selling, general, and administrative expenses. If these criteria are not met, the support is recorded in inventory and reflected as a reduction of costs of merchandise sold when the related merchandise is sold.
Insurance Reserve Estimates
We are primarily self-insured for costs related to workers’ compensation, general liability, and employee-related health care benefits. We use a third-party actuary to estimate the liabilities associated with these risks. The actuary considers historical claims experience, demographic and severity factors, health care trends, and actuarial assumptions to estimate the liabilities associated with these risks. Historically, our actuarial estimates have not been materially different from actual results.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review our long-lived assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances, such as decisions to close a store or significant cash flow losses, indicate the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable. All long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment at least annually.
If our evaluations, which are performed on an undiscounted cash flow basis, indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable, the potential impairment is measured as the excess of carrying value over the fair value of the impaired asset.
Identifying impaired assets and quantifying the related impairment loss, if any, requires significant estimates by management. The most significant of these estimates is the cash flow expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset. When determining the stream of projected future cash flows associated with an individual store, management estimates future store performance including sales, gross margin, and controllable expenses, such as store payroll and occupancy expense. Projected cash flows must be estimated for future periods throughout the remaining life of the property, which may be as many as 40 years in the future. The accuracy of these estimates will be impacted by a number of factors including general economic conditions, changes in competitive landscape and our ability to effectively manage the operations of the store.
Income Taxes
We regularly evaluate the likelihood of realizing the benefit for income tax positions we have taken in various federal and state filings by considering all relevant facts, circumstances, and information available to us. If we believe it is more likely than not that our position will be sustained, we recognize a benefit at the largest amount which we believe is cumulatively greater than 50% likely to be realized.
Unrecognized tax benefits require significant management judgment regarding applicable statutes and their related interpretation, the status of various income tax audits, and our particular facts and circumstances. Also, as audits are completed or statutes of limitations lapse, it may be necessary to record adjustments to our taxes payable, deferred tax assets, tax reserves, or income tax expense. Although we believe we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different. Income taxes are further described in Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Leases
Accounting for leased properties requires compliance with technical accounting rules and significant judgment by management. Application of these accounting rules and assumptions made by management will determine if we are considered the owner for accounting purposes or whether the lease is accounted for as a finance or operating lease.
The following are significant estimates used by management in accounting for real estate and other leases:
•
Accounting lease term-Our accounting lease term includes all noncancelable periods and renewal periods that are reasonably assured of being exercised. Typically, renewal options are considered reasonably assured of being exercised if we have made significant leasehold improvements that would exceed the initial or renewal lease term and the cash flow performance of the store remains strong. The expected lease term is used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease.
•
Incremental borrowing rate-The incremental borrowing rate is the rate of interest that the lessee would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. The incremental borrowing rate is used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease.
•
Fair market value of leased asset-The fair market value of leased retail property is generally estimated based on comparable market data as provided by third-party appraisers or consideration received from the landlord. Fair market value is used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease.