ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis includes forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Special Note On Forward-Looking Statements” included in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Description of Business
Kontoor Brands, Inc. ("Kontoor," the "Company," "we," "us" or "our") is a global lifestyle apparel company headquartered in the United States ("U.S."). We completed a spin-off transaction from VF Corporation ("VF" or "former parent") on May 22, 2019 (the "Separation") and began to trade as a standalone public company (NYSE: KTB) on May 23, 2019.
The Company designs, manufactures, procures, markets and distributes apparel primarily under the brand names Wrangler® and Lee®. The Company's products are sold in the U.S. through mass merchants, specialty stores, mid-tier and traditional department stores, company-operated stores and online. The Company's products are also sold internationally, primarily in Europe and Asia, through department, specialty, company-operated, concession retail and independently operated partnership stores and online.
Fiscal Year
The Company operates and reports using a 52/53 week fiscal year ending on the Saturday closest to December 31 of each year. For presentation purposes herein, all references to periods ended December 2020, December 2019 and December 2018 correspond to the 53-week fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 and the 52-week fiscal years ended December 28, 2019 and December 29, 2018, respectively.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization categorized the novel coronavirus ("COVID-19") as a pandemic, and it continues to affect all parts of the world. The pandemic has resulted in a global economic slowdown which had a meaningful negative impact on our financial condition, cash flows and results of operations during 2020. Governments have taken various actions to slow and otherwise control the spread of COVID-19, including the issuance of stay-at-home orders and social distancing guidelines. Increased unemployment and economic uncertainty, along with temporary retail store closures and evolving government-imposed restrictions, have resulted in reduced retail store traffic and consumer spending, which has negatively impacted both our wholesale and direct-to-consumer channels.
Our top priority remains the health and safety of our employees and consumers. Actions taken to date include enacting global travel restrictions for all employees, enabling remote-work flexibility, implementing enhanced cleaning and sanitation protocols in all facilities, and closing of facilities, as appropriate. The Company’s offices have reopened where permitted by local restrictions and deemed appropriate by management, but many associates continue to work remotely. We continue to implement and monitor safety protocols and health and wellness precautions as we reopen and operate our facilities.
There have been limited disruptions in operations at various times during the year due to volume adjustments, social distancing requirements, and government mandated closures and stay-at-home orders, but the Company’s manufacturing plants and distribution centers around the world are operating and fulfilling wholesale and direct-to-consumer orders. In addition, a significant portion of the Company’s sourced finished products originate from various countries that have been impacted by the pandemic, and we continue to diligently monitor developments and work with these long-standing partners to prioritize production to best align with demand. Although we have not experienced significant service disruptions to customers, we have experienced some delays in product availability and continue to work to minimize any impact to our customers.
The Company took timely actions to strengthen our financial flexibility and preserve adequate liquidity during this uncertain economic situation. These actions included draws on the Revolving Credit Facility and an amendment to the Credit Agreement providing a temporary Relief Period (as discussed in Note 10 to the Company's financial statements), temporary suspension of the payment of a dividend, targeted reductions in operating expenses and capital expenditures, temporary reduction of certain fees for the Board of Directors, reduction of payroll costs through restructuring, furloughs and temporary salary reductions, and focused management of working capital, including reduction in finished goods received from owned manufacturing and sourced vendors. While we continue to navigate the uncertain COVID-19 environment, due to our improving financial performance and cash flows, we have been able to reverse certain of these actions, such as reinstating our quarterly dividend beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, paydown of amounts outstanding under our Revolving Credit Facility and the early termination of the temporary Relief Period in the amendment to the Credit Agreement.
Net revenues and profits across all our segments and geographies decreased significantly due to the impact of COVID-19, beginning late January 2020 in China and mid-March 2020 in the U.S. and Europe, as customer retail and owned door closures and governmental stay-at-home orders increased. These negative impacts on operating results continued into the second and third quarters of 2020. We began to see gradual improvement during the third quarter of 2020, reflecting positive trends in our digital wholesale business and owned e-commerce sites as consumer spending continued to shift towards digital shopping experiences due to the impact of COVID-19. We also saw positive trends in demand resulting from fewer customer store closures and increased retail
27 Kontoor Brands, Inc. 2020 Form 10-K
store traffic in the second half of the year. The ultimate health and economic impact of the pandemic remains fluid. The recent resurgence of COVID-19 cases in various parts of the world, including the United Kingdom and other countries in Europe, has caused the re-implementation of government restrictions, including the temporary closure of businesses deemed "non-essential," to prevent further spread of the virus. The widespread distribution and use of safe and effective vaccines may result in varied duration and severity of the COVID-19 impact. The Company anticipates, and continues to take necessary, proactive steps to accommodate, a prolonged COVID-19 operating environment.
Basis of Presentation
The Company’s financial statements from May 23, 2019 were consolidated financial statements based on the reported results of Kontoor Brands, Inc. as a standalone company. The Company's financial statements through the Separation date of May 22, 2019 were combined financial statements prepared on a "carve-out" basis of accounting, which reflected the business as historically managed within VF. The balance sheet and cash flows included only those assets and liabilities directly related to the Jeanswear and VF OutletTM businesses, and the statements of operations included the historically reported results of those businesses along with allocations of a portion of VF’s total corporate expenses. Refer to Note 1 to the Company's financial statements for additional information on the carve-out basis of accounting.
The basis of accounting differences before and after the Separation from VF results in a lack of comparability between periods in the statements of operations, primarily in selling, general and administrative expenses. Effective with the Separation, the Company also implemented business model changes, which included the exit of unprofitable markets in Europe and South America, the transition of our former Central and South America ("CASA") region to a licensed model and the discontinuation of certain transactions with VF. Accordingly, certain revenues and costs presented in the carve-out statement of operations did not continue after the Separation.
References to fiscal 2020 and 2019 foreign currency amounts herein reflect the impact of changes in foreign exchange rates from fiscal 2019 and 2018, respectively, and the corresponding impact on translating foreign currencies into U.S. dollars and on foreign currency-denominated transactions. The Company's most significant foreign currency translation exposure is typically driven by business conducted in the Mexican peso and euro-based countries. However, the Company conducts business in other developed and emerging markets around the world with exposure to other foreign currencies.
Amounts herein may not recalculate due to the use of unrounded numbers.
Business Overview
Since we became a standalone public company as of May 22, 2019, we have worked to stabilize, position and streamline our presence around the world, and our active, strategic brand management has positioned us favorably for long-term success. As part of a centralized approach to our global business, our management team is providing global oversight for their respective business functions, including supply chain, digital, direct-to-consumer and strategy, while seeking to ensure that we maintain our worldwide presence and regional approach.
We have undergone transformational change to improve operational performance, address internal and external factors and set the stage for long-term profitable growth. We have launched significant initiatives to refine a global go-to-market approach that will sustain our long-term commitment to total shareholder return, some of which were accelerated due to the COVID-19 environment. These global initiatives related to business model changes, restructuring programs and costs incurred to effect the Separation and establish ourselves as a standalone public company ("Separation costs"), which have and will continue to result in improved profitability. During 2019, these initiatives included the exit of unprofitable markets in Europe and South America, the exit of unprofitable points of distribution in India and the transition of our former CASA region to a licensed model. We also took actions to right-size supply chain operations including the closure of three owned manufacturing facilities in Mexico, streamline our global organizational structure including a redesign of our commercial organization in the U.S. and Asia, and relocate the Lee® brand’s North American headquarters to Greensboro, North Carolina.
During 2020, we have continued to implement proactive strategic programs to improve quality-of-sales, which have included transitioning our India business to a licensed model and performing a strategic review of the VF Outlet™ store fleet. Based on our assessment of store productivity, we chose to exit certain VF Outlet™ stores by not extending leases as they expired for the majority of closures in 2020 and by closing a select number of additional stores. We also decided to convert all remaining locations to Lee Wrangler outlets and clearance centers and to discontinue the sale of third-party branded merchandise. Our remaining stores will only carry Wrangler® and Lee® branded products.
The Company is focused on growing our three strategic channels, with higher rates of growth anticipated in our Non-U.S. Wholesale channel as we pursue a broader set of products, channels and geographic opportunities for the Wrangler® and Lee® brands, and in the digital platforms of our U.S. Wholesale and Branded Direct-to-Consumer channels. Additionally, we have made significant investments to support the design and implementation of a global enterprise resource planning ("ERP") implementation and information technology infrastructure build-out that will continue into 2021.
Focusing on our near- to medium-term business strategy, we are focused on optimizing our business and accelerating our performance in fundamental areas, including margin expansion and cash flow generation. Longer term, we are focused on accelerating revenue generation and additional strategic actions to fuel and sustain long-term performance and our competitive advantage around the world. We anticipate opportunities to further enhance our value-creation ability through investment in our core
28 Kontoor Brands, Inc 2020 Form 10-K
business. Our primary areas of financial focus during 2021 will be to (i) continue aggressive pay-down of debt; (ii) provide for a superior dividend payout; and (iii) implement technology solutions to enable global efficiency, including the Company's global ERP implementation and information technology infrastructure build-out.
HIGHLIGHTS OF THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 2020
•Net revenues decreased 18% to $2,097.8 million compared to the year ended December 2019, driven by decreases in all channels as discussed below. Net revenues in 2020 included an approximate 1% benefit due to sales attributable to the 53rd week.
•U.S. Wholesale revenues decreased 11% compared to the year ended December 2019, primarily due to the negative impact of COVID-19 and a major U.S. retailer bankruptcy in the second quarter of 2020. These declines were partially offset by growth in our U.S. digital wholesale business as well as new business growth. U.S. Wholesale revenues represented 68% of total revenues in the current year.
•Non-U.S. Wholesale revenues decreased 31% compared to the year ended December 2019, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19. The decrease was also impacted by planned proactive quality-of-sales programs. Non-U.S. wholesale revenues represented 17% of total revenues in the current year.
•Branded Direct-to-Consumer revenues decreased 10% on a global basis compared to the year ended December 2019, primarily driven by declines in our Company-operated retail stores due to temporary store closures and reduced retail store traffic resulting from COVID-19. These declines were partially offset by growth in the digital business through our owned e-commerce sites. Branded Direct-to-Consumer revenues included a 1% favorable impact from foreign currency and represented 12% of total revenues in the current year.
•Gross margin increased 180 basis points to 41.2% compared to the year ended December 2019, primarily due to lower restructuring and Separation costs as compared to the prior year and benefits from planned proactive quality-of-sales programs initiated in 2019. Increases were also driven by favorable channel mix and pricing. These improvements were partially offset by deleverage of fixed manufacturing costs resulting from reduced production and provisions for inventory losses resulting from COVID-19.
•Selling, general & administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues increased to 35.3% compared to 31.5% for the year ended December 2019, primarily due to increased costs related to the Company's global ERP implementation and information technology infrastructure build-out. The remaining increase as a percentage of net revenues was primarily driven by deleverage of fixed costs on lower revenues as well as higher bad debt expense. These increases were partially offset by lower other restructuring and Separation costs compared to the prior year and targeted reductions in operating expenses in response to COVID-19.
•Net income decreased 30% to $67.9 million compared to the year ended December 2019, primarily due to the business results discussed above. Additionally, during 2019, we recorded a $32.6 million ($25.2 million after-tax) non-cash impairment of the Rock & Republic® trademark intangible asset.
29 Kontoor Brands, Inc. 2020 Form 10-K
ANALYSIS OF RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations
The following table presents a summary of the changes in net revenues for the years ended December 2020 and December 2019:
2020 Compared to 2019
Net revenues decreased 18% due to declines in the Wrangler and Lee segments, as well as declines in the Other category. These declines were primarily due to the impact of COVID-19. The decrease was also impacted by planned proactive quality-of-sales programs initiated in 2019, the negative impact of a major U.S. retailer bankruptcy in the second quarter of 2020 and planned exits and reduced sales of certain lower margin lines of business. The planned proactive quality-of-sales programs initiated in 2019 included (i) the exit of unprofitable points of distribution in India and (ii) business model changes actioned by the Company which included the exit of unprofitable markets in Europe and South America, the transition of the CASA region to a licensed model and the discontinuation of certain transactions with VF. These declines were partially offset by growth in the U.S. digital wholesale business, new business and our owned e-commerce sites. Net revenues in 2020 included an approximate 1% benefit due to sales attributable to the 53rd week.
2019 Compared to 2018
Net revenues decreased 8% due to declines in the Wrangler and Lee segments, as well as declines in the Other category. These declines were primarily due to proactive quality-of-sales programs initiated in 2019, including business model changes and exits of select markets, programs and points of distribution, the negative impact of a major U.S. retailer bankruptcy in the fourth quarter of 2018, reduced sales of certain lower margin lines of business, the discontinuation of manufacturing for VF and a 1% unfavorable impact from foreign currency. The declines were partially offset by growth in our U.S. digital wholesale business and owned e-commerce sites.
Additional details on 2020, 2019 and 2018 revenues are provided in the section titled “information by business segment.”
The following table presents components of the Company's statements of operations as a percent of net revenues:
2020 Compared to 2019
Gross margin increased 180 basis points reflecting approximately 160 basis points of favorability attributable to lower restructuring and Separation costs as compared to the prior year as well as benefits from planned proactive quality-of-sales programs initiated in 2019. Favorable channel mix and pricing contributed to the remaining increase. These increases more than offset the unfavorable impact due to deleverage of fixed manufacturing costs resulting from reduced production and provisions for inventory losses resulting from COVID-19.
Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net revenues increased to 35.3% compared to 31.5% for the year ended December 2019, primarily driven a 300 basis point increase in costs related to the Company's global ERP implementation and information technology infrastructure build-out as compared to the prior year period. Increases were also due to deleverage of fixed costs on lower revenues, increased bad debt expense driven by the bankruptcy of a major U.S. retailer during the second
30 Kontoor Brands, Inc 2020 Form 10-K
quarter of 2020 and the impact of COVID-19. These increases were partially offset by lower other restructuring and Separation costs compared to the prior year and targeted reductions in operating expenses in response to COVID-19.
Non-cash impairment of intangible asset reflects a $32.6 million impairment of the Rock & Republic® trademark recorded during the third quarter of 2019. There were no trademark intangible asset impairments in 2020.
The effective income tax rate was 6.9% for the year ended December 2020 compared to 28.5% for the year ended December 2019. The 2020 effective income tax rate included a net discrete tax benefit of $12.3 million, comprised of $6.2 million of benefit recognized due to the enactment of Swiss tax reform in the canton of Ticino, $2.8 million of tax benefit related to adjustments to tax balances transferred from former parent at the Separation, $2.0 million of tax benefit related to stock compensation, $0.8 million of tax benefit primarily related to a decrease in unrecognized tax benefits and interest, and $0.5 million of net tax benefit related to the finalization of U.S. federal, state and foreign tax return filings. The $12.3 million of net discrete tax benefit in 2020 decreased the effective income tax rate by 16.8% compared to an increase of 2.8% for discrete items in 2019.
Without discrete items, the effective income tax rate for the year ended December 2020 decreased 2.0%, primarily due to changes in our jurisdictional mix of earnings. Our effective income tax rate for foreign operations was 12.5% and 20.1% for the years ended December 2020 and December 2019, respectively.
2019 Compared to 2018
Gross margin decreased 90 basis points. Business model changes, restructuring programs and Separation costs unfavorably impacted 2019 by approximately 140 basis points. This decrease was partially offset by the impact of favorable channel mix.
Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues increased 320 basis points. Business model changes, restructuring programs and Separation costs unfavorably impacted the prior year by approximately 300 basis points. The remaining increase as a percentage of net revenues was primarily driven by deleverage of fixed costs on lower revenues.
Non-cash impairment of intangible asset reflects a $32.6 million impairment of the Rock & Republic® trademark recorded during the third quarter of 2019. There were no intangible asset impairments in 2018.
The effective income tax rate was 28.5% for the year ended December 2019 compared to 22.6% for the year ended December 2018. The 2019 effective income tax rate included a net discrete tax expense of $3.8 million, comprised of $3.5 million of tax expense primarily related to an increase in unrecognized tax benefits and interest, $2.1 million of net tax expense related to recording valuation allowances on beginning balance deferred income tax assets at the date of Separation and the impact of a corresponding change in assertion on unremitted earnings, $1.9 million of tax expense related to adjustments to tax balances transferred from former parent at the Separation and $3.7 million of tax benefit related to stock compensation. The $3.8 million of net discrete tax expense in 2019 increased the effective income tax rate by 2.8% compared to an increase of 1.4% for discrete items in 2018.
Without discrete items, the effective income tax rate for the year ended December 2019 increased 4.5%, primarily due to losses incurred in certain foreign jurisdictions and the tax impacts of global intangible low-tax income ("GILTI"), partially offset by favorable changes in our jurisdictional mix of earnings. Our effective income tax rate for foreign operations was 20.1% and 17.2% for the years ended December 2019 and December 2018, respectively.
31 Kontoor Brands, Inc. 2020 Form 10-K
Information by Business Segment
Management at each of the brands has direct control over and responsibility for corresponding net revenues and operating income, hereinafter termed "segment revenues" and "segment profit," respectively. Our management evaluates operating performance and makes investment and other decisions based on segment revenues and segment profit. Common costs for certain centralized functions are allocated to the segments as discussed in Note 3 to the Company's financial statements.
The following tables present a summary of the changes in segment revenues and segment profit for the years ended December 2020 and December 2019:
Segment Revenues
Segment Profit
The following sections discuss the changes in segment revenues and segment profit.
Wrangler
2020 Compared to 2019
Global revenues for the Wrangler® brand decreased 11%, driven by declines in all channels.
•Revenues in the Americas region decreased 8%, primarily due to an 8% decrease in U.S. wholesale revenues as well as declines in the Company's brick and mortar retail stores due to temporary store closures and reduced retail store traffic resulting from COVID-19. The declines were partially offset by growth in the U.S. digital wholesale business and our owned e-commerce sites. Additionally, non-U.S. Americas wholesale revenues decreased 24%, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19, as well as lower revenues resulting from business model changes initiated in 2019 within the CASA region and a 2% unfavorable impact from foreign currency.
•Revenues in the APAC region decreased 68%, The decrease was primarily in India, driven by the impact of COVID-19 as well as the exit of unprofitable points of distribution initiated in 2019.
32 Kontoor Brands, Inc 2020 Form 10-K
•Revenues in the EMEA region decreased 25%, primarily due to the impact of COVID.
Operating margin increased to 18.1% compared to 14.2% for 2019, primarily due to lower restructuring and Separation costs, targeted reductions in operating expenses in response to COVID-19, favorable channel mix and benefits from product cost. The increase was also impacted by benefits from planned proactive quality-of-sales programs initiated in 2019. Partially offsetting these improvements was the impact of COVID-19, which included deleverage of fixed manufacturing costs resulting from reduced production, deleverage of other non-manufacturing fixed costs on lower revenues and increased bad debt expense. During 2020, operating margin was negatively impacted by 60 basis points due to restructuring and Separation costs. During 2019, operating margin was negatively impacted by 340 basis points due to restructuring, Separation costs and business model changes.
2019 Compared to 2018
Global revenues for the Wrangler® brand decreased 5%, driven by declines in all channels.
•Revenues in the Americas region decreased 4%, primarily due to a 2% decrease in U.S. wholesale revenues resulting from reduced sales of certain lower margin lines of business and the negative impact of a major U.S. retailer bankruptcy in the fourth quarter of 2018. Non-U.S. Americas wholesale revenues decreased 32%, primarily due to business model changes initiated in 2019 within the CASA region and a 5% unfavorable impact from foreign currency.
•Revenues in the APAC region decreased 29%, primarily due to results in India which reflected the economic impact of demonetization and our exit of certain unprofitable points of distribution initiated in 2019, as well as a 3% unfavorable impact from foreign currency.
•Revenues in the EMEA region decreased 13%, primarily due to business model changes initiated in 2019 and a 5% unfavorable impact from foreign currency.
Operating margin decreased to 14.2% compared to 16.6% for 2018, primarily due to higher product costs, unfavorable mix driven by lower international sales, higher restructuring and Separation costs as well as business model changes initiated in 2019.
Lee
2020 Compared to 2019
Global revenues for the Lee® brand decreased 22%, driven by declines in all channels.
•Revenues in the Americas region decreased 20%, primarily due to a 19% decrease in U.S. wholesale revenues as well as declines in our Company-operated retail stores due to temporary store closures and reduced retail store traffic resulting from COVID-19. The negative impact of a major U.S. retailer bankruptcy in the second quarter of 2020 also contributed to the decrease in U.S. wholesale revenues. These declines were partially offset by growth in new business and U.S. digital wholesale. Non-U.S. Americas revenues decreased 33%, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 and a 5% unfavorable impact from foreign currency.
•Revenues in the APAC region decreased 25%, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19. The decrease was also impacted by our exit of unprofitable points of distribution initiated in 2019 in India. The 35% decline in our wholesale business was partially offset by growth in our owned e-commerce sites.
•Revenues in the EMEA region decreased 27%, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19.
Operating margin decreased to 5.5% compared to 7.7% for 2019, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19, which included deleverage of fixed manufacturing costs resulting from reduced production, deleverage of other non-manufacturing fixed costs on lower revenues and increased bad debt expense associated with the bankruptcy of a major U.S. retailer in the second quarter of 2020. These declines were partially offset by benefits from targeted reductions in operating expenses in response to COVID-19, favorable channel mix, lower restructuring and Separation costs and benefits from product cost. During 2020, operating margin was negatively impacted by 150 basis points due to restructuring and Separation costs. During 2019, operating margin was negatively impacted by 250 basis points due to restructuring, Separation costs and business model changes.
33 Kontoor Brands, Inc. 2020 Form 10-K
2019 Compared to 2018
Global revenues for the Lee® brand decreased 8%, driven by declines in all channels.
•Revenues in the Americas region decreased 6%, primarily due to a 7% decrease in U.S. wholesale revenues resulting from the negative impact of a major U.S. retailer bankruptcy in the fourth quarter of 2018 and reduced sales in certain lower margin lines of business. Non-U.S. Americas revenues decreased 13%, primarily due to business model changes initiated in 2019 within the CASA region and a 2% unfavorable impact from foreign currency.
•Revenues in the APAC region decreased 7%, primarily due to a 4% unfavorable impact from foreign currency and results in India which reflected the economic impact of demonetization and our exit of certain unprofitable points of distribution in 2019.
•Revenues in the EMEA region decreased 16%, primarily due to business model changes initiated in 2019, softer European demand and a 5% unfavorable impact from foreign currency.
Operating margin decreased to 7.7% compared to 9.7% for 2018, primarily due to higher product costs, unfavorable mix driven by lower international sales, higher restructuring and Separation costs as well as business model changes initiated in 2019.
Other
In addition, we report an "Other" category in order to reconcile segment revenues and segment profit to the Company's operating results, but the Other category is not considered a reportable segment based on evaluation of aggregation criteria. Other includes sales of third-party branded merchandise at VF Outlet™ stores, sales and licensing of Rock & Republic® branded apparel, and sales of products manufactured for third-parties. During 2020, the Company decided to discontinue the sale of third-party branded merchandise in all VF Outlet™ stores in conjunction with our decision to exit certain of those stores. Sales of Wrangler® and Lee® branded products at VF Outlet™ stores are not included in Other and are reported in the respective segments discussed above. Prior to 2020, the Other category also included transactions with VF for pre-Separation activities, none of which continued in 2020. These transactions included sales of VF-branded products at VF Outlet™ stores, as well as sales to VF for products manufactured in our plants, use of our transportation fleet and fulfillment of a transition services agreement related to VF’s sale of its Nautica® brand business in mid-2018.
*Calculation not meaningful.
2020 Compared to 2019
Other revenues decreased 59% as sales of third-party branded merchandise at VF Outlet™ stores declined 51%, primarily due to temporary retail store closures, reduced retail store traffic attributable to COVID-19 as well as the Company's decision to exit certain VF Outlet™ stores and discontinue the sale of third-party branded merchandise in all stores. In addition, transactions with VF for pre-Separation activities did not continue in 2020.
(Loss) profit related to other revenues decreased $18.4 million, primarily due to restructuring charges related to the Company's decision to exit certain VF Outlet™ stores as well as deleverage of fixed costs on lower revenues resulting from temporary retail store closure and reduced retail store traffic attributable to COVID-19.
2019 Compared to 2018
Other revenues decreased 26% as transactions with VF for pre-Separation activities decreased to $22.6 million compared to $51.0 million during 2018. In addition, VF Outlet™ store revenues decreased 12% compared to 2018 as a result of a decrease in comparable store sales and total square footage.
34 Kontoor Brands, Inc 2020 Form 10-K
Reconciliation of Segment Profit to Income Before Income Taxes
The Company has incurred corporate and other expenses as a standalone public company since May 23, 2019. For purposes of preparing financial statements on a carve-out basis for periods through the Separation date of May 22, 2019, corporate and other expenses included the Company's allocation of a portion of VF's total corporate expenses. Refer to Note 3 to the Company's financial statements for additional information on the Company's methodology for allocating these costs.
The costs below are necessary to reconcile total reportable segment profit to income before taxes. These costs are excluded from segment profit as they are managed centrally and are not under control of brand management.
(1) Represents an impairment charge recorded during the third quarter of 2019 related to the Rock & Republic® trademark. See Note 7 to the Company's financial statements.
* Calculation not meaningful.
2020 Compared to 2019
Non-cash impairment of intangible asset represents a $32.6 million impairment of the Rock & Republic® trademark intangible asset recorded during the third quarter of 2019.
Corporate and other expenses increased $53.0 million, primarily due to an increase in general corporate costs required to operate as a standalone public company, including expenses related to the Company's global ERP implementation and information technology infrastructure build-out, partially offset by targeted reductions in operating expenses in response to the impact of COVID-19.
Interest income from former parent, net decreased $3.8 million as all notes to and from former parent were settled in connection with the Separation from VF.
Interest expense increased $14.2 million, primarily due to the timing of borrowings on term loans under our Credit Facilities established with the Separation in May 2019 as well as the timing of borrowings and repayments on our Revolving Credit Facilities. This increase was partially offset by favorable interest rates on Term Loan A and the Revolving Credit Facility as compared to the prior year.
2019 Compared to 2018
Non-cash impairment of intangible asset represents a $32.6 million non-cash impairment of the Rock & Republic® trademark intangible asset recorded during the third quarter of 2019.
Corporate and other expenses increased $59.2 million, due to Separation costs, an increase in general corporate costs required to operate as a standalone public company and expenses associated with the Company's global ERP implementation and information technology infrastructure build-out.
Interest income from former parent, net decreased $3.9 million as all notes to and from former parent were settled in connection with the Separation from VF.
Interest expense increased $34.6 million, primarily due to borrowings on our Credit Facilities established with the Separation.
35 Kontoor Brands, Inc. 2020 Form 10-K
ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company's ability to fund our operating needs is dependent upon our ability to generate positive long-term cash flow from operations and maintain our debt financing on acceptable terms. Given the complexity, rapid evolution and continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic, we took timely actions to increase our financial flexibility and strengthen liquidity. Such actions included draws on the Revolving Credit Facility, an amendment to the Credit Agreement as discussed below, temporary suspension of the payment of a dividend, targeted reductions in operating expenses and capital expenditures, temporary reduction of certain fees for the Board of Directors, reduction of payroll costs through restructuring, furloughs and temporary salary reductions, and focused management of working capital, including reduction in finished goods received from owned manufacturing and sourced vendors.
On May 5, 2020, given the uncertainties of COVID-19 and the associated impact on future results of operations, the Company entered into an amendment to the Credit Agreement (the “Amendment”) to address potential financial covenant compliance issues during future reporting periods. The Amendment established a temporary relief period for the Company (the "Relief Period") for certain provisions regarding financial covenants including (i) increase of the maximum Total Leverage Ratio, (ii) addition of a minimum liquidity floor of $200.0 million, (iii) addition of a $250.0 million limit on available cash at the time of and immediately after new borrowings, and (iv) imposition of stricter limitations on investments, acquisitions, restricted payments (including dividends) and the incurrence of indebtedness. For quarterly measurement periods during the Relief Period, the Company was required to maintain a Total Leverage Ratio not to exceed 5.50 to 1.00, 5.50 to 1.00, 5.00 to 1.00 and 4.50 to 1.00 for the periods ended June 2020, September 2020, December 2020 and March 2021, respectively. An increase in the credit spread over the appropriate LIBOR benchmark and increased facility fees per annum were applicable during the Relief Period under the Amendment, which was effective until the earlier of (i) the date on which a compliance certificate is delivered for the Company's quarter ended June 2021 or (ii) the date on which a compliance certificate is delivered in respect of the most recent fiscal quarter demonstrating that the Company is in full compliance with all financial covenants that were in effect prior to the Amendment and upon the Company's written notification to the administrative agent that the Relief Period should end on such date. Based on our improving financial performance and cash flows, the Company provided written notification to the administrative agent that it had terminated the temporary Relief Period effective February 26, 2021.
As of December 2020, the Company was in compliance with all applicable financial covenants and expects to maintain compliance with the applicable financial covenants for at least one year from the issuance of these financial statements. If economic conditions caused by COVID-19 significantly deteriorate for a prolonged period and the Company's operating results and cash flows do not continue to recover as currently estimated by management, this could impact the Company’s ability to maintain compliance with the applicable financial covenants and require the Company to seek additional amendments to the Credit Agreement. If the Company were not able to enter into such amendments, this would lead to an event of default which, if not cured timely, could require the Company to repay its outstanding debt. In the event the Company needs incremental liquidity, the additional cash requirements would likely be generated through refinancing of existing borrowings, the issuance of debt or equity securities, or sales of assets. However, the disruption of the capital markets caused by COVID-19 could make additional sources of financing more challenging to obtain. Additionally, under the terms of the Tax Matters Agreement with VF, there are restrictions on issuing equity securities until May 23, 2021. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that the Company would be able to obtain such additional financing on commercially reasonable terms or at all.
Our expectation of continued compliance with the financial covenants in our Credit Facilities provides us flexibility on utilization of the Revolving Credit Facility, which matures in May 2024.
The Revolving Credit Facility may be used to borrow funds in both U.S. dollar and certain non-U.S. dollar currencies, and has a maximum borrowing capacity of $500.0 million and a $75.0 million letter of credit sublimit. As of March 2020, the Company had $475.0 million of outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility, primarily resulting from drawdowns taken as a precautionary measure to provide increased financial flexibility, strengthen the Company’s near-term cash position and provide additional funding for working capital in response to COVID-19. The Company repaid $175.0 million in conjunction with the closing of the Amendment in May 2020 to comply with the available cash limitation. The Company made additional discretionary repayments totaling $300.0 million during the remainder of 2020, and had no outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility as of December 2020.
We anticipate utilizing cash flows from operations to support continued investments in our brands, talent and capabilities, growth strategies, dividend payments to shareholders and repayment of our debt obligations over time. Management believes that our cash balances and funds provided by operating activities, along with existing borrowing capacity and access to capital markets, taken as a whole, provide (i) adequate liquidity to meet all of our current and long-term obligations when due, (ii) adequate liquidity to fund capital expenditures and planned dividend payouts and (iii) flexibility to meet investment opportunities that may arise.
36 Kontoor Brands, Inc 2020 Form 10-K
The following table presents outstanding borrowings and available borrowing capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility and our cash and equivalents balances as of December 2020:
(1) Available borrowing capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility is net of $7.3 million of outstanding standby letters of credit issued on behalf of the Company under this facility.
See Note 10 to the Company's financial statements for additional information regarding the Credit Facilities, including financial covenants and interest rates thereunder as of December 2020.
At December 2020 and December 2019, the Company had $35.9 million and $47.8 million, respectively, of international lines of credit with various banks, which are uncommitted and may be terminated at any time by either the Company or the banks. Total outstanding balances under these arrangements were $0.2 million and $1.1 million at December 2020 and December 2019, respectively, and primarily consist of letters of credit that are non-interest bearing to the Company. In addition, short-term borrowings at December 2020 include other debt of $0.9 million.
During 2020, the Company paid $54.8 million of dividends to its shareholders. Under the terms of the amendment to the Credit Agreement, dividend payments were suspended for the second and third quarters of 2020. The Company re-evaluated its dividend policy based on attainment of certain levels of covenant compliance in the third quarter of 2020, and reinstated payment of quarterly dividends during the fourth quarter of 2020. The Company intends to continue to pay cash dividends in future periods. The declaration and amount of any future dividends will be determined and subject to authorization by our Board of Directors and will be dependent upon multiple factors including our financial condition, earnings, cash flows, capital requirements, covenants associated with our debt obligations, legal requirements, regulatory constraints, industry practice and any other factors or considerations that our Board of Directors deems relevant.
We currently expect capital expenditures to range from $40.0 million to $50.0 million in 2021, primarily to support our global ERP system.
The following table presents our cash flows during the periods:
Operating Activities
Cash flow provided by operating activities is dependent on the level of our net income, adjustments to net income and changes in working capital. During 2020, cash provided by operating activities decreased $535.8 million compared to 2019. The primary reason for higher cash flows in 2019 related to the net settlement at Separation of $532.2 million for amounts due to and from former parent related to the Company's sale of trade accounts receivable arrangement with VF, as well as a decrease in net income attributable to operating results. These declines were partially offset by changes in other working capital. During 2019, cash provided by operating activities increased $874.1 million as compared to 2018. The primary reason for higher cash flows in 2019 related to the net settlement at Separation noted above, partially offset by a decrease in net income attributable to operating results.
Refer to Note 4 to the Company's financial statements for additional information on sales of trade accounts receivable to VF.
Investing Activities
During 2020, cash used by investing activities was $49.1 million, primarily related to capital investments to support the ongoing implementation of the Company's global ERP system. Cash used by investing activities increased $533.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the collection of notes receivable from former parent in 2019 in connection with the Separation. During 2019, cash provided by investing activities increased $472.6 million compared to 2018, primarily due to the collection of notes receivable from former parent in 2019 noted above.
Financing Activities
During 2020, cash used by financing activities primarily related to dividend payments of $54.8 million. Cash used by financing activities in 2020 decreased $1.2 billion compared to 2019, primarily due to $2.1 billion of transfers to former parent in connection
37 Kontoor Brands, Inc. 2020 Form 10-K
with the Separation and $1.05 billion of net proceeds from borrowings in 2019, neither of which recurred in 2020. During 2019, cash provided by financing activities decreased $1.4 billion, primarily due to the $2.1 billion of transfers to former parent and $1.05 billion in net proceeds from borrowings noted above. The Company also made principal payments of $127.0 million on long-term debt obligations and paid $63.6 million of dividends to our shareholders in 2019.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our estimated material contractual obligations and other commercial commitments at December 2020, and the future periods in which such obligations are expected to be settled in cash:
(1)Long-term debt consists of mandatory principal payments on long-term debt.
(2)Other recorded liabilities represent all future payments related to "other liabilities" in the balance sheet, which represent long-term liabilities primarily related to deferred compensation and other employee-related benefits. These amounts are based on historical and forecasted cash outflows.
(3)Operating leases represent required minimum lease payments during the noncancelable lease term. Most real estate leases also require payments of related operating expenses such as taxes, insurance and utilities, which are not included above.
(4)Interest payment obligations represent estimated future interest payments on floating rate long-term debt and are estimated based on interest rates in effect as of December 2020 and the remaining term of the debt. Amounts exclude amortization of debt issuance costs, debt discounts and acquisition costs that would be included in interest expense in the financial statements.
(5)Minimum royalty payments represent obligations under license agreements to use trademarks owned by third parties and include required minimum advertising commitments. Actual payments could exceed related minimum royalty obligations.
(6)Inventory obligations represent binding commitments to purchase raw materials, contract production and finished products that are payable upon delivery of the inventory. This obligation excludes the amount included in accounts payable at December 2020 related to inventory purchases.
(7)Other obligations represent other binding commitments for the expenditure of funds, including (i) amounts related to contracts not involving the purchase of inventories, such as the noncancelable portion of service or maintenance agreements for management information systems, (ii) capital spending and (iii) advertising. The Company is party to a 10-year power purchase agreement to procure electricity generated from renewable energy sources to meet a portion of electricity needs for certain facilities in Mexico (including our manufacturing plants). Effective February 22, 2021, we terminated the contract related to total purchase commitments of $33.3 million that were included in other obligations above.
We had other financial commitments at December 2020 that are not included in the above table but may require the use of funds under certain circumstances:
•$40.2 million of surety bonds, custom bonds, standby letters of credit and international bank guarantees are not included in the above table because they represent contingent guarantees of performance under self-insurance and other programs and would only be drawn upon if we were to fail to meet our other obligations.
•Purchase orders for goods or services in the ordinary course of business are not included in the above table because they represent authorizations to purchase rather than binding commitments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not engage in any off-balance sheet financial arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
38 Kontoor Brands, Inc 2020 Form 10-K
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have chosen accounting policies that management believes are appropriate to accurately and fairly report our operating results and financial position in conformity with GAAP. We apply these accounting policies in a consistent manner. Significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 1 to the Company's financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The application of these accounting policies requires that we make estimates and assumptions about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net revenues, expenses, contingent assets and liabilities, and related disclosures. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are based on historical experience, current trends and other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Management evaluates these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Because our business cycle is relatively short (i.e., from the date that inventory is received until that inventory is sold and the trade accounts receivable is collected), actual results related to most estimates are known within a few months after any balance sheet date. In addition, we may retain outside specialists to assist in impairment testing of goodwill and intangible assets. Several of the estimates and assumptions we are required to make relate to future events and are therefore, inherently uncertain, especially as it relates to events outside of our control. If actual results ultimately differ from previous estimates, the revisions are included in results of operations when the actual amounts become known.
We believe the following accounting policies involve the most significant management estimates, assumptions and judgments used in preparation of the financial statements or are the most sensitive to change from outside factors. The selection and application of the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are periodically discussed with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Long-Lived Assets, Including Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Testing of Property, Plant and Equipment for Impairment
Our policy is to review property, plant and equipment for potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. We test for potential impairment at the asset or asset group level, which is the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are largely independent, by comparing the carrying value to the estimated undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the forecasted undiscounted cash flows to be generated by the asset are not expected to be adequate to recover the asset’s carrying value, a fair value analysis must be performed, and an impairment charge is recorded if there is an excess of the asset’s carrying value over its estimated fair value.
When testing property, plant and equipment for potential impairment, management uses the income-based discounted cash flow method using the estimated cash flows of the respective asset or asset group. The estimated undiscounted cash flows of the asset or asset group through the end of its useful life are compared to its carrying value. If the undiscounted cash flows of the asset or asset group exceed its carrying value, there is no impairment charge. If the undiscounted cash flows of the asset or asset group are less than its carrying value, the estimated fair value of the asset or asset group is calculated based on the discounted cash flows using the reporting unit’s weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”), and an impairment charge is recognized for the difference between the estimated fair value of the asset or asset group and its carrying value.
Testing of Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets and Goodwill for Impairment
Our policy is to evaluate indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill for possible impairment as of the beginning of the fourth quarter of each year, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of such assets may be below their carrying amount. As part of our annual impairment testing, we may elect to assess qualitative factors as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform quantitative impairment testing. If management’s assessment of these qualitative factors indicates that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the intangible asset or reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then no further testing is required. Otherwise, the intangible asset or reporting unit must be quantitatively tested for impairment.
•Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets - An indefinite-lived intangible asset is quantitatively tested for possible impairment by comparing the estimated fair value of the asset to its carrying value. Fair value of an indefinite-lived trademark is based on an income approach using the relief-from-royalty method. Under this method, forecasted net revenues for products sold with the trademark are assigned a royalty rate that would be charged to license the trademark (in lieu of ownership), and the estimated fair value is calculated as the present value of those forecasted royalties avoided by owning the trademark. The discount rate is based on the reporting unit’s WACC that considers market participant assumptions, plus a spread that factors in the risk of the intangible asset. The royalty rate is selected based on consideration of (i) royalty rates included in active license agreements, if applicable, (ii) royalty rates received by market participants in the apparel industry and (iii) the current performance of the reporting unit. If the estimated fair value of the trademark intangible asset exceeds its carrying value, there is no impairment charge. If the estimated fair value of the trademark is less than its carrying value, an impairment charge would be recognized for the difference.
•Rock & Republic® Trademark Intangible Asset Impairment Analysis - The Rock & Republic® brand has an exclusive wholesale distribution and licensing arrangement that covers all branded apparel, accessories and other merchandise. As of June 30, 2018, management performed a quantitative impairment analysis of the Rock & Republic® trademark intangible asset to determine if the carrying value was recoverable. This testing was determined to be necessary due to management's expectation that certain customer contract terms would be modified as it related to exclusivity of specific product lines to continue under the contract, which was considered a triggering event. Based on the analysis performed, management concluded that the trademark intangible asset did not require further testing as the undiscounted cash flows exceeded the carrying value of $49.0 million.
39 Kontoor Brands, Inc. 2020 Form 10-K
During the third quarter of 2019, management determined that the exclusive domestic wholesale distribution and licensing agreement of the Rock & Republic® brand would not be extended as previously expected. This was considered a triggering event that required management to perform a quantitative impairment analysis of the Rock & Republic® trademark intangible asset as of August 2019. Based on this analysis, the Company recorded a $32.6 million non-cash impairment charge which was reflected within "non-cash impairment of intangible asset" in the Company's statement of operations during the third quarter of 2019. The Company did not incur any impairment charges during 2018 or 2020. Refer to Note 13 to the Company's financial statements for additional information on the related fair value measurements.
It is possible that management’s conclusion regarding the recoverability of the intangible asset could change in future periods as there can be no assurance that the estimates and assumptions used in the analysis as of August 2019 will prove to be accurate predictions of the future.
•Goodwill - Goodwill is quantitatively evaluated for possible impairment by comparing the estimated fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value. Reporting units are businesses with discrete financial information that is available and reviewed by segment management.
For goodwill impairment testing, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit using both income-based and market-based valuation methods. The income-based approach is based on the reporting unit’s forecasted future cash flows that are discounted to present value using the reporting unit’s WACC as discussed above. For the market-based approach, management uses both the guideline company and similar transaction methods. The guideline company method analyzes market multiples of net revenues and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) for a group of comparable public companies. The market multiples used in the valuation are based on the relative strengths and weaknesses of the reporting unit compared to the selected guideline companies. Under the similar transactions method, valuation multiples are calculated utilizing actual transaction prices and net revenue / EBITDA data from target companies deemed similar to the reporting unit.
Based on the range of estimated fair values developed from the income and market-based methods, we determine the estimated fair value for the reporting unit. If the estimated fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, the goodwill is not impaired and no further review is required. However, if the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we calculate the impairment loss as the difference between the carrying value of the reporting unit and the estimated fair value.
The income-based fair value methodology requires management’s assumptions and judgments regarding economic conditions in the markets in which we operate and conditions in the capital markets, many of which are outside of management’s control. At the reporting unit level, fair value estimation requires management’s assumptions and judgments regarding the effects of overall economic conditions on the specific reporting unit, along with assessment of the reporting unit’s strategies and forecasts of future cash flows. Forecasts of individual reporting unit cash flows involve management’s estimates and assumptions regarding:
•Annual cash flows, on a debt-free basis, arising from future net revenues and profitability, changes in working capital, capital spending and income taxes for at least a ten-year forecast period.
•A terminal growth rate for years beyond the forecast period. The terminal growth rate is selected based on consideration of growth rates used in the forecast period, historical performance of the reporting unit and economic conditions.
•A discount rate that reflects the risks inherent in realizing the forecasted cash flows. A discount rate considers the risk-free rate of return on long-term treasury securities, the risk premium associated with investing in equity securities of comparable companies, the beta obtained from comparable companies and the cost of debt for investment grade issuers. In addition, the discount rate may consider any company-specific risk in achieving the prospective financial information.
Under the market-based fair value methodology, judgment is required in evaluating market multiples and recent transactions. Management believes that the assumptions used for its impairment tests are representative of those that would be used by market participants performing similar valuations of our reporting units.
Annual Impairment Testing
Management performs its annual goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment testing as of the fourth quarter of each fiscal year. Management performed a qualitative impairment assessment for all reporting units and indefinite-lived trademark intangible assets, as discussed below in the “Qualitative Impairment Assessment” section. We did not record any impairment charges in 2020, 2019 or 2018 related to results of our annual impairment testing. Refer to the Rock & Republic® Impairment Analysis section above for additional information on results of testing performed by management in response to a triggering event identified in the third quarter of 2019.
40 Kontoor Brands, Inc 2020 Form 10-K
Qualitative Impairment Assessment
For all reporting units, we elected to perform a qualitative impairment assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the goodwill and indefinite-lived trademark intangible assets in those reporting units were impaired. We considered relevant events and circumstances for each reporting unit, including (i) current year results, (ii) financial performance versus management’s annual and five-year strategic plans, (iii) changes in the reporting unit carrying value since prior year, (iv) industry and market conditions in which the reporting unit and indefinite-lived trademark operates, (v) macroeconomic conditions, including discount rate changes and (vi) changes in products or services offered by the reporting unit. If applicable, performance in recent years was compared to forecasts included in prior valuations. Based on the results of the qualitative impairment assessment, we concluded that it was not more likely than not that the carrying values of the goodwill and indefinite-lived trademark intangible assets were greater than their fair values, and that further quantitative impairment testing was not necessary.
Management’s Use Of Estimates and Assumptions
Management made its estimates based on information available as of the date of our assessment, using assumptions we believe market participants would use in performing an independent valuation of the business. It is possible that our conclusions regarding impairment or recoverability of goodwill or intangible assets in any reporting unit could change in future periods. There can be no assurance that the estimates and assumptions used in our goodwill and intangible asset impairment testing will prove to be accurate predictions of the future, if, for example, (i) the businesses do not perform as projected, (ii) overall economic conditions in future years vary from current assumptions (including changes in discount rates), (iii) business conditions or strategies for a specific reporting unit change from current assumptions, including loss of major customers, (iv) investors require higher rates of return on equity investments in the marketplace or (v) enterprise values of comparable publicly traded companies, or actual sales transactions of comparable companies, were to decline, resulting in lower multiples of net revenues and EBITDA.
A future impairment charge for goodwill or intangible assets could have a material effect on our financial position and results of operations.
Income Taxes
As a global company, Kontoor is subject to income taxes and files income tax returns in over 50 U.S. and foreign jurisdictions each year. The Company’s U.S. operations and certain of its non-U.S. operations historically have been included in the tax returns of VF or its subsidiaries that may not have been part of the spin-off transaction. Due to economic and political conditions, tax rates in various jurisdictions may be subject to significant change. The Company could be subject to changes in its tax rates, the adoption of new U.S. or international tax legislation or exposure to additional tax liabilities. The Company makes an ongoing assessment to identify any significant exposure related to increases in tax rates in the jurisdictions in which the Company operates.
The calculation of income tax liabilities involves uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations, which are subject to legal interpretation and significant management judgment. The Company’s income tax returns are regularly examined by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, and those audits may result in proposed adjustments. The Company has reviewed all issues raised upon examination, as well as any exposure for issues that may be raised in future examinations. The Company has evaluated these potential issues under the “more-likely-than-not” standard of the accounting literature. A tax position is recognized if it meets this standard and is measured at the largest amount of benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized. Such judgments and estimates may change based on audit settlements, court cases and interpretation of tax laws and regulations. Income tax expense could be materially affected to the extent Kontoor prevails in a tax position or when the statute of limitations expires for a tax position for which a liability for unrecognized tax benefits or valuation allowances have been established, or to the extent Kontoor is required to pay amounts greater than the established liability for unrecognized tax benefits. The Company does not currently anticipate any material impact on earnings from the ultimate resolution of income tax uncertainties. There are no accruals for general or unknown tax expenses.
Kontoor has $23.2 million of gross deferred income tax assets related to operating loss carryforwards, and $16.3 million of valuation allowances against those assets. Realization of deferred income tax assets related to operating loss carryforwards is dependent on future taxable income in specific jurisdictions, the amount and timing of which are uncertain, and on possible changes in tax laws. If management believes that the Company will not be able to generate sufficient taxable income to offset losses during the carryforward periods, the Company records valuation allowances to reduce those deferred income tax assets to amounts expected to be ultimately realized. If in a future period management determines that the amount of deferred income tax assets to be realized differs from the net recorded amount, the Company would record an adjustment to income tax expense in that future period.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 1 to the Company's financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussion of recently issued and adopted accounting standards.
41 Kontoor Brands, Inc. 2020 Form 10-K