ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on July 27, 2020 and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. Simultaneously with the consummation of the Public Offering, we consummated the private sale of an aggregate of 6,481,550 warrants, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Class A common stock”) at $11.50 per share, to Kingswood Global Sponsor LLC, our sponsor, and one of the Company’s directors at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds, before expenses, of approximately $6,481,550 (the “Private Placement”). We intend to consummate an initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering (the “Public Offering”) that closed on November 24, 2020 (the “Closing Date”) and the Private Placement, and from additional issuances of, if any, our equity and our debt, or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
At December 31, 2020, we held cash of $1,457,839, current liabilities of $81,284 and deferred underwriting compensation of $4,025,000. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For the period from July 27, 2020 (date of inception) through December 31, 2020, we incurred a loss from operations of $197,538, including franchise tax of $77,311, which was offset by interest income from the Trust Account of $1,242. Through December 31, 2020, our efforts have been limited to organizational activities, activities relating to the Public Offering, activities relating to identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates and activities relating to general corporate matters. We have not generated any revenues, other than interest income earned on the proceeds held in the Trust Account. As of December 31, 2020, $117,849,745 was held in the Trust Account (including $4,025,000 of deferred underwriting discounts and commissions) and we had cash outside of trust of $1,457,839 and $79,617 in accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Except for the withdrawal of interest to pay our taxes and up to $100,000 to pay dissolution expenses, if any, our amended and restated certificate of incorporation (the “Charter”) provides that none of the funds held in trust will be released from the Trust Account (i) the completion of an initial business combination; (ii) the redemption of any of the shares of Class A common stock included in the units sold in the Public Offering (the “Units”) properly submitted in connection with a stockholder vote to amend the Charter to modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation to redeem 100% of the common stock included in the Units being sold in the Public Offering if the Company does Offering if the Company does not complete an initial business combination within 18 months from the closing of the Public Offering or with respect to any other material provisions relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-initial business combination activity or (iii) the redemption of 100% of the shares of Class A common stock included in the Units sold in the Public Offering if we are unable to complete a business combination within such 18 month period. Through December 31, 2020, we have not withdrawn any funds from interest earned on the trust proceeds. Other than the deferred underwriting discounts and commissions, no amounts are payable to the underwriters of the Public Offering in the event of a business combination.
We have also agreed to reimburse an affiliate of the sponsor for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team, in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per month in the event that such space and/or services are utilized and we do not pay a third party directly for such services. Upon completion of our initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. For the period from July 27, 2020 (date of inception) through December 31, 2020, the Company accrued $13,667 under this agreement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash outside our Trust Account of $1,457,839, available for working capital needs. All remaining cash was held in the Trust Account and is generally unavailable for our use, prior to an initial business combination.
On November 24, 2020, the Company completed the sale of 10,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of Class A common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”) at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $100,000,000.
Simultaneous with the closing of the Public Offering, the Company completed the sale of 6,050,000 warrants (the “Private Warrants”), at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $6,050,000, and completed the issuance to Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. 104,000 units (“Underwriter Units”) in lieu of 0.9% of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering.
In connection with the Public Offering, the underwriters were granted a 30-day option from the date of the prospectus for the Public Offering to purchase up to 1,500,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any. Simultaneously with the closing of the Public Offering, the underwriters elected to exercise their full 1,500,000 Public Units over-allotment option which, at $10.00 per Unit, generated gross proceeds of $15,000,000. The Company, in parallel, consummated the private placement of an additional 431,550 Private Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant, which generated total additional gross proceeds of $431,550.
Following our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Warrants, a total of $117,848,550 ($10.25 per Unit) was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $6,854,972 in Initial Public Offering related costs, including $2,300,000 of underwriting fees ($1,260,000 in cash and $1,040,000 in the form of 104,000 Units at $10.00), $4,025,000 of deferred underwriting discount and $529,972 of other costs.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $117,849,745 (including approximately $1,195 of interest income) consisting of mutual funds. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $410,236. Net loss of $197,538 was impacted by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account and operating account totaled $1,242 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $211,456 of cash for operating activities.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (excluding the deferred underwriters’ discount) to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay our taxes and liquidation expenses if we are unsuccessful in completing a business combination. We estimate our annual franchise tax obligations to be $200,000, which is the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation per annum, which we may pay from funds from the Public Offering held outside of the Trust Account or from interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and released to us for this purpose. Our 2020 franchise tax was calculated using a partial year proration and amounted to $77,311. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account reduced by our operating expense and franchise taxes. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the Trust Account will be sufficient to pay our income taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Further, our sponsor, officers and directors or their respective affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a business combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Such Working Capital Loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. The notes would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, or converted upon consummation of a business combination into additional Private Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant. As of December 31, 2020, no Working Capital Loans have been issued.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, in addition to the access to the Working Capital Loans, we may need to obtain other financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial agreements involving assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an administrative agreement to reimburse our sponsor for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of the Company’s management team by the sponsor, members of our sponsor, and the Company’s management team or their affiliates in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per month in the event such space and/or services are utilized and the Company does not pay a third party directly for such services, from the date of closing of the Public Offering. Upon completion of a business combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the condensed financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5 A, “Expenses of Offering.” We incurred offering costs in connection with the Public Offering of approximately $6,854,972, consisting principally of underwriter discounts of $2,300,000 and $4,025,000 of deferred underwriters’ discount and approximately $529,972 of professional, printing, filing, regulatory and other costs were charged to stockholders’ equity upon completion of the Public Offering. Approximately $4,025,000 of such offering expenses were accrued but unpaid at December 31, 2020.
Redeemable Shares of Class A Common Stock
All of the 11,500,000 shares of Class A common stock included in the Units sold as part of the Public Offering contain a redemption feature as described in the prospectus for the Public Offering. In accordance with FASB ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. The Charter provides a minimum net tangible asset threshold of $5,000,001. The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and will adjust the carrying value of the security at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable shares will be affected by charges against additional paid-in capital.
Net Loss per Share
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Public Offering (including the over-allotment), underlying the additional Units issued to the Underwriters and Private Placement Warrants to purchase approximately 8,625,000 and 6,481,550 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, respectively, in the calculation of diluted income per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of net income per share for common shares subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of net loss per share. Net loss per common share for basic and diluted Class A common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable income taxes, by the weighted average number of Class A common stock since issuance. Net loss per common share for basic and diluted for Class B common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss, which excludes income attributable to Class A common stock, by the weighted average number of Class B common stock outstanding for the period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.