Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
As used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (the “Report”),
the terms “Quaker Houghton”, the “Company”, “we”,
and “our”
refer to Quaker Chemical Corporation (doing business as Quaker
Houghton), its subsidiaries, and associated companies, unless the
context otherwise requires.
The term Legacy Quaker refers to the Company prior to
the closing of its combination with Houghton
International, Inc. (“Houghton”) (herein referred
to as the “Combination”) on August 1, 2019.
Throughout the Report, all figures
presented, unless otherwise stated, reflect the results of
operations of the combined company for the year ended
December 31, 2020,
for the year ended December 31, 2019 includes the
result of Legacy Quaker plus five months of Houghton’s
operations post-closing of
the Combination on August 1, 2019, and for the year ended
December 31, 2018, the results only of Legacy Quaker.
Executive Summary
Quaker Houghton is a global leader in industrial process
fluids.
With a presence around the world,
including operations in over
25 countries, our customers include thousands of the world’s
most advanced and specialized steel, aluminum, automotive, aerospace,
offshore, can, mining, and metalworking
companies.
Our high-performing, innovative and sustainable solutions are
backed by best-
in-class technology,
deep process knowledge, and customized services.
Quaker Houghton is headquartered in Conshohocken,
Pennsylvania, located near Philadelphia in the U.S.
Overall, the Company’s
2020 performance, like most other companies in the
world, was negatively impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic and its impact on the global economy,
including
most of the Company’s
customers.
However, the Company’s
acquisition
activity in late 2019, including the Houghton Combination
and the Norman Hay acquisition, drove a 25% increase in 2020 net
sales to
$1,417.7
million compared to $1,133.5 million in 2019.
Excluding net sales from acquisitions, current year net
sales would have
declined approximately 11% primarily
due to a 9% decrease in sales volumes associated with the negative
impacts of COVID-19 on
global production levels throughout each of the Company’s
segments.
Similar to net sales, the Company’s
gross profit and selling,
general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) also increased
due to the full year inclusion of Houghton and Norman
Hay, but both
also benefited from the realization of cost savings associated with
synergies achieved with the Combination as well
as the impact of
cost saving measures put in place to help offset
the impacts of COVID-19.
The Company’s 2020 reported operating
income of $59.4
million increased compared to $46.1 million in 2019.
Excluding all one-time costs and other non-core items that largely
related to the
Combination and Norman Hay in each period, the Company’s
non-GAAP operating income of $134.0 million
increased 10%
compared to $122.0 million in 2019, primarily due to
the net sales increases and cost synergies and savings
mentioned above.
Further
details of the Company’s
consolidated operating performance are discussed in the Company’s
Consolidated Operations Review,
in the
Operations section of this Item, below.
The Company’s net income
and earnings per diluted share of $39.7 million and $2.22 in
2020, respectively, increased
compared
to $31.6 million and $2.08 per diluted share, respectively,
in 2019.
Excluding all one-time costs and other non-core items that largely
related to the Combination and Norman Hay in each
period, the Company’s current
year non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP
earnings per diluted share were $85.2 million and $4.78,
respectively, compared
to $88.7 million and $5.83, respectively,
in 2019.
The increase in the Company’s current
year reported earnings drove a 28% higher adjusted EBITDA of
$222.0 million compared to
$173.1 million in 2019, primarily due to the Houghton
and Norman Hay acquisitions as well as the benefit of costs savings
associated
with the Combination,
partially offset by the negative impacts of COVID-19.
See the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item,
below.
The Company’s 2020
operating performance in each of its four reportable segments: (i)
Americas; (ii) Europe, Middle East and
Africa (“EMEA”); (iii) Asia/Pacific; and (iv) Global Specialty
Businesses, reflect similar drivers to that of its consolidated
performance.
Each segment’s net sales benefited
from a full year of Houghton and the Company’s
Global Specialty Businesses
segment also benefited from a full year of Norman Hay.
Without the inclusion of Houghton and
Norman Hay, net sales would
have
been lower in all segments compared to the prior year,
primarily driven by declines in volume primarily due to the
negative impacts of
COVID-19 on the Company’s
end markets.
As reported, all of the Company’s
segment operating earnings were higher compared to
2019 because of the inclusion of a full year of Houghton and
Norman Hay as well as cost synergies achieved
with the Combination
and other cost savings actions taken due to COVID-19,
partially offset by the negative impacts of COVID-19
on global sales volumes.
Additional details of each segment’s
operating performance are further discussed in the Company’s
reportable segments review,
in the
Operations section of this Item, below.
The Company generated net operating cash flow of $178.4
million in 2020 compared to $82.4 million in 2019.
The 117%
increase in net operating cash flow year-over
-year was primarily driven by the inclusion of a full year of earnings
from Houghton and
Norman Hay, as well as
higher operating cash flow due to changes in working
capital.
The key drivers of the Company’s
operating
cash flow
and overall liquidity are further discussed in the Company’s
Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this Item, below
.
Overall, the Company’s
2020 results reflect the fact that the negative impacts of COVID-19
were partially offset by the positive
impacts of a full year of Houghton and Norman Hay performance
,
Combination synergies and cost savings actions
.
The Company’s
performance showed a good quarterly growth trend across the
globe beginning after the second quarter of 2020, during
which the
impacts of COVID-19 were most severe, indicating
a gradual improvement in the Company’s
end markets and continued market share
gains.
Despite these challenges, the Company was able to generate significant
net operating cash flow in 2020, continue to pay its
regular dividends, pay down its debt above its required commitments
,
and continue to execute its integration plans for the
Combination.
The global economic slowdown and other impacts due
to COVID-19 posed an unprecedented challenge in 2020, but the
Company successfully navigated this downturn, demonstrating
its ability to respond quickly to changing market conditions and
deliver
on the benefits it anticipated from the Combination
with Houghton.
In 2020, the Company continued to service and supply its
customers despite very difficult economic
conditions, it continued to gain share in the market, it completed
a significant part of the
integration activities, and realized $58 million of cost
synergies which exceeded the original estimate of $35
million.
The Company
also made recent bolt-on acquisitions which are expected
to contribute towards earnings growth in 2021 and, even with those
acquisitions, the Company reduced its net debt by
12% or $94 million during 2020.
As the Company looks forward, it
expects some
short-term headwinds from higher raw material costs and
lower than expected volumes in the automotive market due
to the
semiconductor shortage.
However, the Company expects 2021
to result in a step change in its profitability from 2020 as the Company
completes its integration cost synergies, continues
to take further share in the marketplace, benefits from a projected
gradual rebound
in demand, and sees the positive impact of its recent acquisit
ions.
Impact of COVID-19
In early 2020, the global outbreak of COVID-19
negatively impacted all locations where the Company
does business.
Although
the Company has now operated during several quarters
in this COVID-19 environment, the full extent of the outbreak
and related
business impacts remains
uncertain and volatile, and therefore the full extent to which COVID-19
may impact the Company’s future
results of operations or financial condition is uncertain.
This outbreak has significantly disrupted the operations
of the Company and
those of its suppliers and customers.
The Company has experienced significant volume declines and
lower net sales as further
described in this section, initially at its China subsidiaries in the
first quarter of 2020 and, beginning in late March continued
throughout the rest of its business due to the global economic
slowdown brought on by COVID-19.
Management continues to
monitor the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic is having
on the Company,
the overall specialty chemical industry and the
economies and markets in which the Company operates.
Given the speed and frequency of the continuously evolving developments
with respect to this pandemic, the Company cannot, as
of the date of this Report, reasonably estimate the
magnitude or the full extent of the impact to its future results of
operations or to the
ability of it or its customers to resume more normal
operations, even as certain restrictions are lifted.
The prolonged pandemic and a
resurgence of the outbreak, and continued
restrictions on day-to-day life and business operations may result
in volume declines and
lower net sales in future periods as compared to pre-COVID-19
levels.
To the extent that the Company’s
customers and suppliers
continue to be significantly and adversely impacted by
COVID-19, this could reduce the availability,
or result in delays, of materials
or supplies to or from the Company,
which in turn could significantly interrupt the Company’s
business operations.
Given this
ongoing uncertainty,
the Company cautions that its future results of operations could be significantly
adversely impacted by COVID-
19.
Further, management continues to
evaluate how COVID-19-related circumstances, such as remote
work arrangements, illness or
staffing shortages and travel restrictions have affected
financial reporting processes and systems, internal control
over financial
reporting, and disclosure controls and procedures.
While the circumstances have presented and are expected
to continue to present
challenges, and have necessitated additional time
and resources to be deployed to sufficiently address the
challenges brought on by the
pandemic, at this time, except as otherwise noted in
Item 9A of this Report, management does not believe that
COVID-19 has had a
material impact on financial reporting processes, internal
controls over financial reporting, or disclosure controls and procedures.
For
additional information regarding the potential impact of COVID-19,
see Item 1A of Part I of this Report.
The Company’s top
priority is, and especially during this pandemic remains, to protect the health
and safety of its employees and
customers, while working to ensure business continuity
to meet customers’ needs:
●
Our People
- The Company has taken steps to protect the health and wellbeing
of its people in affected areas through various
actions, including enabling work at home where needed and
possible, and employing social distancing standards,
implementing travel restrictions where applicable, enhancing
onsite hygiene practices, and instituting visitation restrictions
at
the Company’s facilities.
The Company does not expect that it will incur material
expenses implementing health and safety
policies for employees, contractors, and customers.
●
Our Operations
- Currently, all of
the Company’s 31 production
facilities worldwide are open and operating and are deemed
as essential businesses in the jurisdictions where they are
operating.
The Company believes that to date it has been able to
meet the needs of all its customers across the globe
despite the current economic challenges.
●
Our Business Conditions
- The Company’s second
half of 2020 showed solid improvement over the first half,
which was
consistent with expectations that April and May would
be the worst months of the year and that the Company
would show
gradual quarterly improvement sequentially throughout
the remainder of the year.
However, demand still remained lower
than pre-COVID-19 levels as many customers maintained
reduced production levels through the end of 2020.
Excluding
Houghton and Norman Hay net sales, all four of the Company’s
reportable segments showed declines in net sales due to
COVID-19 during 2020 compared to the prior year,
with the Americas and EMEA being the most impacted and
Asia/Pacific
being the least impacted.
The Company currently expects that the impact from COVID-19
will gradually improve each
quarter in 2021 subject to the effective containment
of the virus and successful distribution of a vaccine.
However, the
incidence of reported cases of COVID-19 appears to
be again increasing in several geographies where we have
significant
operations and it remains highly uncertain as to how long
the global pandemic and related economic challenges will last and
when our customers’ businesses will recover.
●
Our Actions
- The Company took various actions to temporarily conserve
cash and reduce costs during 2020.
Some of these
actions during 2020 included eliminating all discretionary
expenditures, delaying or freezing salary increases where legally
permitted, reducing executives’ salaries for a period of
time, lowering 2020 planned capital expenditures by approximately
30%, and accelerating and fine-tuning the Company’s
integration plans.
These temporary initiatives were designed and
implemented so that the Company could successfully manage through
the challenging COVID-19 situation while continuing
to protect the health of its employees, meet customers’ needs,
maintain the Company’s
long-term competitive advantages and
above-market growth, and enable it to continue to
effectively integrate Houghton.
While the actions taken in 2020 to protect
our workforce, to continue to serve our customers with excellence
and to conserve cash and reduce costs, have been effective
thus far, further actions to respond
to the pandemic and its effects may be necessary as conditions
continue to evolve.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Quaker Houghton’s discussion
and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations
are based upon its consolidated
financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S.
GAAP”).
The preparation of these financial statements requires the Company
to make estimates and judgments that affect the
reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and
related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
On an
ongoing basis, the Company evaluates its estimates, including
those related to customer sales incentives, product returns, bad
debts,
inventories, property,
plant and equipment (“PP&E”), investments, goodwill, intangible
assets, income taxes, business combinations,
restructuring, incentive compensation plans (including
equity-based compensation), pensions and other postretirement benefits,
contingencies and litigation.
Quaker Houghton bases its estimates on historical experience
and on various other assumptions that are
believed to be reasonable under such circumstances, the
results of which form the basis for making judgments about the
carrying
values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent
from other sources.
However, actual results may differ
from these
estimates under different assumptions or
conditions.
Quaker Houghton believes the following critical accounting
policies describe the more significant judgments and
estimates used
in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements:
Accounts receivable and inventory exposures:
Quaker Houghton establishes allowances for doubtful accounts
for estimated
losses resulting from the inability of its customers to
make required payments.
If the financial condition of the Company’s
customers
were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their
ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required.
As part of
our terms of trade, we may custom manufacture products
for certain large customers and/or may ship products
on a consignment basis.
Further, a significant portion of our
revenue is derived from sales to customers in industries where
companies have experienced past
financial difficulties.
If a significant customer bankruptcy occurs, then we must judge
the amount of proceeds, if any,
that may
ultimately be received through the bankruptcy or liquidation
process.
These matters may increase the Company’s
exposure should a
bankruptcy occur, and may require
a write down or a disposal of certain inventory as well as the failure
to collect receivables.
Reserves for customers filing for bankruptcy protection
are established based on a percentage of the amount of receivables
outstanding
at the bankruptcy filing date.
However, initially establishing
this reserve and the amount thereof is dependent on the Company’s
evaluation of likely proceeds to be received from the
bankruptcy process, which could result in the Company
recognizing minimal or
no reserve at the date of bankruptcy.
We generally reserve
for large and/or financially distressed customers on
a specific review basis,
while a general reserve is maintained for other customers
based on historical experience.
The Company’s consolidated
allowance for
doubtful accounts was $13.1 million and $11.7
million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company recorded
expense to increase its provision for doubtful accounts by
$3.6 million, $1.9 million and $0.5 million for the years
ended December
31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Changing the amount of expense recorded to the Company’s
provisions by 10% would have
increased or decreased the Company’s
pre-tax earnings by $0.4 million, $0.2 million and $0.1 million
for the years ended December
31, 2020,
2019 and 2018,
respectively.
See Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item
8 of this Report.
Environmental and litigation reserves:
Accruals for environmental and litigation matters are
recorded when it is probable that a
liability has been incurred and the amount of the liability
can be reasonably estimated.
Environmental costs and remediation costs are
capitalized if the costs extend the life, increase the
capacity or improve the safety or efficiency of the property
from the date acquired
or constructed, and/or mitigate or prevent contamination
in the future.
Estimates for accruals for environmental matters are based on a
variety of potential technical solutions, governmental regulations
and other factors, and are subject to a wide range of potential
costs
for remediation and other actions.
A considerable amount of judgment is required in determining
the most likely estimate within the
range of total costs, and the factors determining this judgment
may vary over time.
Similarly, reserves for
litigation and similar
matters are based on a range of potential outcomes and
require considerable judgment in determining the
most probable outcome.
If
no amount within the range is considered more probable
than any other amount, the Company accrues the lowest amount
in that range
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
See Note 26 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in
Item 8 of
this Report.
Realizability of equity investments:
The Company holds equity investments in various foreign
companies where it has the
ability to influence, but not control, the operations of the
entity and its future results.
The Company would record an impairment
charge to an investment if it concluded that a
decline in value that was other than temporary occurred.
Adverse
changes in market
conditions, poor operating results of underlying investments,
devaluation of foreign currencies or other events or circumstances
could
result in losses or an inability to recover the carrying value
of the investments, potentially leading to an impairment charge
in the
future.
The carrying amount of the Company’s
equity investments as of December 31, 2020 was $95.8 million,
which included four
investments: $19.4 million for a 32% interest in Primex, Ltd.
(Barbados); $7.8 million for a 50%
interest in Nippon Quaker Chemical,
Ltd. (Japan); $0.3 million for a 50% interest in Kelko
Quaker Chemical, S.A. (Panama); and $68.3 million for a 50% interest
in Korea
Houghton Corporation (Korea).
The Company also has a 50% interest in a Venezuelan
affiliate, Kelko Quaker Chemical, S.A
(Venezuela).
Due to heightened foreign exchange controls, deteriorating
economic circumstances and other restrictions in Venezuela,
during the third quarter of 2018 the Company concluded that it no
longer had significant
influence over this affiliate.
Prior to this
determination, the Company historically accounted
for this affiliate under the equity method.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the
Company had no remaining carrying value for its investment
in Venezuela.
See Note 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
Tax
exposures, uncertain tax positions and valuation
allowances:
Quaker Houghton records expenses and liabilities for taxes
based on estimates of amounts that will be determined as deductible
in tax returns filed in various jurisdictions.
The filed tax returns
are subject to audit, which often occur
several years subsequent to the date of the financial statements.
Disputes or disagreements may
arise during audits over the timing or validity of certain
items or deductions, which may not be resolved for extended
periods of time.
The Company also evaluates uncertain tax positions on
all income tax positions taken on previously filed tax returns or
expected to be
taken on a future tax return in accordance with FIN 48,
which prescribes the recognition threshold and measurement attributes
for
financial statement recognition and measurement of tax
positions taken or expected to be taken on a tax return
and, also, whether the
benefits of tax positions are probable or if they will be more
likely than not to be sustained upon audit based upon the
technical merits
of the tax position.
For tax positions that are determined to be more likely than not to
be sustained upon audit, the Company
recognizes the largest amount of benefit that
is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate
settlement in the financial
statements.
For tax positions that are not determined to be more
likely than not sustained upon audit, the Company does not recognize
any portion of the benefit in its financial statements.
In addition, the Company’s
continuing practice is to recognize interest and/or
penalties related to income tax matters in income tax expense.
Also, the Company nets its liability for unrecognized tax benefits
against deferred tax assets related to net operating
losses or other tax credit carryforward on the basis that the uncertain
tax position is
settled for the presumed amount at the balance sheet
date.
Quaker Houghton also records valuation allowances
when necessary to reduce its deferred tax assets to the amount
that is more
likely than not to be realized.
While the Company has considered future taxable income
and assesses the need for a valuation
allowance, in the event Quaker Houghton were
to determine that it would be able to realize its deferred tax assets in the future
in
excess of its net recorded amount, an adjustment to
the deferred tax asset would increase income in the period
such determination was
made.
Likewise, should the Company determine that it would not be able
to realize all or part of its net deferred tax assets in the
future, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would be
charged to income in the period such determination was made.
Both
determinations could have a material impact on the Company’s
financial statements.
In 2017, the U.S. government enacted comprehensive
tax legislation commonly referred to as “U.S. Tax
Reform”
which
implemented significant changes, particularly impacting
taxation for non-U.S. earnings and dividends from certain
foreign
subsidiaries.
Based on interpretations and assumptions the Company
believes to be reasonable with regard to various uncertainties
and ambiguities in the application of certain provisions
of U.S. Tax Reform
and subsequent to numerous temporary regulations,
notices, and other formal guidance published by the Internal Revenue
Service (“I.R.S.”), U.S. Treasury,
and various state taxing
authorities in 2018, the Company completed its accounting
for the tax effects of U.S. Tax
Reform as of December 22, 2018.
It is
possible that the I.R.S. could issue subsequent guidance
or take positions on audit that differ from the Company’s
interpretations and
assumptions.
The Company currently believes that subsequent guidance
or interpretations made by the I.R.S. will not be materially
different from the Company’s
application of the provisions of U.S. Tax
Reform and would not have a material adverse effect on
the
Company’s tax liabilities,
earnings, or financial condition.
Pursuant to U.S. Tax
Reform, the Company recorded a $15.5 million transition
tax liability for U.S. income taxes on the
undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries.
As of December 31, 2020, $7.0 million in installment have
been paid with the
remaining $8.5 million to be paid through installments
in future years.
However, the Company may also be subject
to other taxes,
such as withholding taxes and dividend distribution
taxes, if these undistributed earnings are ultimately remitted to
the U.S.
As of
December 31, 2020,
the Company has a deferred tax liability of $5.9 million, which
primarily represents the estimate of the non-U.S.
taxes the Company will incur to remit certain previously taxed
earnings to the U.S.
It is the Company’s current
intention to reinvest
its future undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries
to support working capital needs and certain other growth
initiatives outside
of the U.S.
The amount of such undistributed earnings at December 31, 2020
was approximately $322.6 million.
Any tax liability
which might result from ultimate remittance of these
earnings is expected to be substantially offset by foreign
tax credits (subject to
certain limitations).
It is currently impractical to estimate any such incremental
tax expense.
See Note 10 of Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
Goodwill and other intangible assets:
The Company accounts for business combinations und
er the acquisition method of
accounting.
This method requires the recording of acquired assets, including
separately identifiable intangible assets, at their
acquisition date fair values.
Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of
the identifiable net assets acquired is
recorded as goodwill.
The determination of the estimated fair value of assets acquired
requires management’s judgment
and often
involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions,
including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows
and outflows,
discount rates, royalty rates, asset lives and market multiples, among
other items.
When necessary, the Company
consults with
external advisors to help determine fair value.
For non-observable market values, the Company may determine
fair value using
acceptable valuation principles, including the excess earnings,
relief from royalty,
lost profit or cost methods.
The Company amortizes definite-lived intangible assets on
a straight-line basis over their useful lives.
Goodwill and intangible
assets that have indefinite lives are not amortized and are
required to be assessed at least annually for impairment.
The Company
completes its annual goodwill and indefinite lived intangible
asset impairment test during the fourth quarter of each
year, or more
frequently if triggering events indicate a possible impairment.
In completing a quantitative impairment test, the Company compares
the reporting units’ or indefinite lived intangible assets fair
value to their carrying value, primarily based on future discounted
cash
flows, in order to determine if an impairment charge
is warranted.
The estimates of future discounted cash flows involve considerable
management judgment and are based upon certain significant
assumptions.
These assumptions include the weighted average cost of
capital (“WACC”)
as well as projected revenue growth rates and operating
income, which result in estimated EBITDA and EBITDA
margins.
As of March 31, 2020, the Company evaluated the initial impact
of COVID-19 on the Company’s
operations, as well as the
volatility and uncertainty in the economic outlook as a
result of COVID-19, to determine if this indicated it was more likely
than not
that the carrying value of any of the Company’s
indefinite-lived or long-lived assets was not recoverable.
The Company considered
the negative effect of COVID-19 on the Company’s
operations and, at the time, the impact it expected to have
on its full year 2020
results in evaluating if a triggering event was present for
one or more of the Company indefinite-lived or long-lived
assets and, also,
the Company took into consideration the carrying value
and estimated fair value for each of its assets.
The Company concluded that
the impact of COVID-19 did not represent a triggering
event as of March 31, 2020 with regards to any of the Company’s
indefinite-
lived and long-lived assets, except for the Company’s
Houghton and Fluidcare trademarks
and tradename indefinite-lived intangible
assets.
Given the relatively short period of time between the
fair value determination of the acquired Houghton and Fluidcare
trademarks
and tradename intangible assets as of the closing of the
Combination on August 1, 2019, and the 2019 annual impairment testing date
of October 1, the Company’s
2019 annual impairment assessment concluded that
the $242.0 million carrying value of acquired
Houghton and Fluidcare trademarks and tradename intangible
assets generally approximated fair value, with excess fair
value of less
than 5%.
Because of the previously concluded relatively narrow gap
between its fair value and its carrying value, the Company
concluded in the first quarter of 2020 that the expected
current year impact from COVID-19 on the Company’s
net sales represented a
triggering event.
As a result of the conclusion, the Company completed an interim
quantitative indefinite-lived intangible asset
impairment assessment as of March 31, 2020.
The determination of estimated fair value of the Houghton
and Fluidcare trademarks
and tradename intangible assets was based
on a relief from royalty valuation method which requires
management’s judgment
and often involves the use of significant estimates
and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to
the WACC
and royalty rates, as well as revenue growth rates
and terminal
growth rates.
In completing the interim quantitative impairment assessment as of March
31, 2020, the Company used a WACC
assumption of approximately 10% as well as current year
forecasted net sales and management’s
estimates with respect to future net
sales growth
rates specific to legacy Houghton’s
net sales.
As a result of an increase in the WACC
assumption as of March 31, 2020,
compared to the prior year fourth quarter annual impairment
assessment, and the significant decline in current year projected
legacy
Houghton net sales due to the impact of COVID-19,
the Company concluded that the estimated fair values of these intangible
assets
were less than their carrying values and that an
impairment charge to write down their carrying values
to their estimated fair values
was warranted.
This resulted in a first quarter of 2020 non-cash impairment
charge of $38.0 million for these indefinite-lived
intangible assets, primarily related to the Houghton trademarks
and tradename.
The book value of these assets as of December 31,
2020 was $204.0 million.
The Company’s consolidated
goodwill at December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $631.2
million and $607.2 million, respectively.
The
Company completed its annual impairment assessment over
goodwill during the fourth quarter of 2020, and no impairment
charges
were warranted.
Furthermore, the estimated fair value of each of the Company’s
reporting units substantially exceeded their carrying
value, with none of the Company’s
reporting units at risk for failing the goodwill impairment test.
The Company used a WACC
assumption for each of its reporting units of approximately
9.5%, and this assumption would have had to increase
by approximately
59%, or 6 percentage points, before any of the Company’s
reporting units would be considered potentially impaired.
Separately,
the
Company’s assumption
of future and projected EBITDA margins by reporting
unit would have had to decrease by more than
approximately 75%
before any of the Company’s
reporting units would be considered potentially impaired.
The Company’s
consolidated indefinite-lived intangible assets at December
31, 2020 and 2019 were $205.1 million and $243.1 million,
respectively.
The Company completed its annual indefinite lived
intangible asset impairment assessment during the fourth quarter
of 2020, and
determined that no impairment charge was
warranted.
The Company’s impairment assessment
concluded that the $204.0 million
carrying value of acquired Houghton and Fluidcare
trademarks and tradename intangible assets exceeded fair value
by approximately
18%.
See Note 16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in
Item 8 of this Report.
Pension and Postretirement benefits:
The Company provides certain defined benefit pension
and other postretirement benefits
to current employees, former employees and retirees.
Independent actuaries, in accordance with U.S. GAAP,
perform the required
valuations to determine benefit expense and, if necessary,
non-cash charges to equity for additional minimum
pension liabilities.
Critical assumptions used in the actuarial valuation include
the weighted average discount rate, which is based on applicable
yield
curve data,
including the use of a split discount rate (spot-rate approach)
for the U.S. plans and certain foreign plans, rates of increase
in compensation levels, and expected long-term rates of
return on assets.
If different assumptions were used, additional
pension
expense or charges to equity might be required.
The Company had two noncontributory U.S. pension plan
s, one of which (the “Legacy Quaker U.S. Pension Plan”) had
a
November 30 year-end and a measurement date of December
31.
As previously disclosed, the Company began the process of
terminating the Legacy Quaker U.S. Pension Plan during
the fourth quarter of 2018.
During the third quarter of 2019, the Company
received a favorable termination determination letter
from the Internal Revenue Service (“I.R.S.”) and completed the
Legacy Quaker
U.S. Pension Plan termination during the first quarter
of 2020.
In order to terminate the Legacy Quaker U.S. Pension Plan
in
accordance with I.R.S. and Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
requirements, the Company was required to fully fund the Legacy
Quaker U.S. Pension Plan on a termination basis and
the amount necessary to do so was approximately $1.8 million, subject to
final
true up adjustments.
In the third quarter of 2020, the Company finalized the amount
of the liability and related annuity payments and
received a refund in premium of approximately $1.6
million.
In addition, the Company recorded a non-cash pension settlement
charge
at plan termination of approximately $22.7 million.
This settlement charge included the immediate recognition
into expense of the
related unrecognized losses within accumulated other
comprehensive income (loss) (“AOCI”) on the balance sheet
as of the plan
termination date.
The following table highlights the potential impact
on the Company’s pre
-tax earnings due to changes in assumptions with respect
to the Company’s defined
benefit pension and postretirement benefit plans, based on assets and
liabilities as of December 31, 2020:
1/2 Percentage Point Increase
1/2 Percentage Point Decrease
(dollars in millions)
Foreign
U.S.
Total
Foreign
U.S.
Total
Discount rate (1)
$
0.4
$
0.2
$
0.6
$
(0.4)
$
(0.2)
$
(0.6)
Expected rate of return on plan
assets (2)
0.9
0.2
1.1
(1.0)
(0.2)
(1.2)
(1)
The weighted-average discount rate used to determine
net periodic benefit costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 was
2.3%
for Foreign plans and 3.1% for
U.S. plans.
(2)
The weighted average expected rate of return on plan
assets used to determine net periodic benefit costs for the year ended
December 31, 2020 was 2.2% for Foreign plans and
6.5% for U.S. plans.
Restructuring and other related liabilities:
A restructuring related program may consist of charges
for employee severance,
rationalization of manufacturing facilities and other related
expenses.
To account for
such, the Company applies the Financial
Accounting Standards Board’s
guidance regarding exit or disposal cost obligations.
This guidance requires that a liability for a cost
associated with an exit or disposal activity be recognized
when the liability is incurred, is estimable, and payment is probable.
See
Note 7 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in
Item 8 of this Report.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 3 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in
Item 8 of this Report for a discussion regarding recently issued
accounting standards.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, the Company had cash,
cash equivalents and restricted cash of $181.9 million.
Total cash, cash
equivalents and restricted cash was $143.6 million
at December 31, 2019.
The $38.3 million increase in cash, cash equivalents and
restricted cash was the net result of $178.4 million
of cash provided by operating activities and $6.6 million
of positive impacts due to
the effect of foreign currency translation on
cash, partially offset by $75.3 million of cash used in financing
activities and $71.4
million of cash used in investing activities.
Net cash flows provided by operating activities were $178.4
million in 2020 compared to $82.4 million in 2019.
The Company’s
current year net operating cash flow increase was largely
due to higher earnings from including a full year of Houghton
and Norman
Hay, lower net
cash outflows than in 2019 associated with restructuring and the Combination
and other acquisition-related expenses,
higher cash dividends received from its equity affiliated
companies year-over-year, and higher operating
cashflow from changes in
working capital.
The operating cashflow improvement due to working capital
changes includes benefits from changes in accounts
payable and accrued liabilities due to more favorable negotiated
vendor terms and other benefits from the Combination, impacts
due to
volume declines related to COVID-19, and lower
cash tax payments due to current year mix of earnings and deductibility of
one-time
expenses.
Net cash flows used in investing activities were $71.4
million in 2020 compared to $908.6 million in 2019.
This $837.2 million
decrease in cash outflows used in investing activities
was largely due to a decrease in payments related to
acquisitions as the prior year
$893.4 million outflow included the closing of the
Combination on August 1, 2019, as further described below,
compared to the
current year payments related to acquisitions
of $56.2 million that were mainly driven by the acquisition of Coral
for approximately
$53.1
million,
net of cash acquired, further described below,
and a post-closing adjustment related to Norman Hay of approximately
$3.2 million.
In addition, the Company had higher investments in property,
plant and equipment in the current year due to the
inclusion of a full year of both Houghton and Norman
Hay, including higher
expenditures related to integrating the companies during
2020.
These higher outflows were partially offset by approximately
$2.6 million of higher proceeds from disposition of assets in
2020, which was mainly driven by the sale of certain
assets as part of its Combination integration plan.
Net cash flows used in financing activities
were $75.3 million in 2020 compared to cash provided
in financing activities of $844.1
million in 2019.
The $919.4 million decrease in net cash flows from financing
activities was due primarily to $897.1 million of
additional term loan and revolving credit facility borrowings in
the prior year used to close the Combination compared
to $49.1
million of current year debt repayments in accordance with
its term loan agreements and other reductions in borrowings
under its
revolving credit facilities.
Also, as part of the Combination, the Company incurred and
paid debt issuance costs of approximately
$23.7 million in the prior year.
In addition, the Company paid $27.6 million of cash dividends
during 2020, a $5.7 million or 26%
increase in cash dividends compared to the prior year,
primarily due to the approximately 4.3 million shares issued at closing
of the
Combination, as well as both the current year and
prior year cash dividend per share increases.
Finally, during
2020, the Company
used $1.0 million to purchase the remaining noncontrolling
interest in one of its South African affiliates.
Prior to this buyout, this
South African affiliate made a distribution
to the prior noncontrolling affiliate shareholder of approximately
$0.8 million in 2020.
There were no similar noncontrolling interest activities in
2019.
On August 1, 2019, the Company completed the Combination,
whereby the Company acquired all of the issued and outstanding
shares of Houghton from Gulf Houghton Lubricants, Ltd.
in accordance with the Share Purchase Agreement dated
April 4, 2017.
The
final purchase consideration was comprised of:
(i) $170.8 million in cash; (ii) the issuance of approximately
4.3 million shares of
common stock of the Company with par value of $1.00,
comprising 24.5% of the common stock of the Company
at closing; and (iii)
the Company’s refinancing
of $702.6 million of Houghton’s
indebtedness at closing.
Cash acquired in the Combination was $75.8
million.
Prior to the Combination, the Company secured commitments
from certain banks for a new credit facility (as amended,
the
“Credit Facility”).
The Credit Facility is comprised of a $400.0 million multicurrency
revolver (the “Revolver”), a $600.0 million term loan (the
“U.S. Term Loan”),
each with the Company as borrower,
and a $150.0 million (as of August 1, 2019) Euro equivalent term
loan (the
“Euro Term Loan”
and together with the “U.S. Term
Loan”, the “Term
Loans”) with Quaker Chemical B.V.,
a Dutch subsidiary of the
Company as borrower, each
with a five-year term maturing in August 2024.
Subject to the consent of the administrative agent and
certain other conditions, the Company may designate
additional borrowers.
The maximum amount available under the Credit Facility
can be increased by up to $300.0 million at the Company’s
request if there are lenders who agree to accept additional commitments
and the Company has satisfied certain other conditions.
Borrowings under the Credit Facility bear interest at a base rate
or LIBOR
plus an applicable margin based upon the
Company’s consolidated net leverage
ratio.
There are LIBOR replacement provisions that
contemplate a further amendment if and when LIBOR ceases
to be reported.
The interest rate incurred on the outstanding borrowings
under the Credit Facility during 2020 was approximately
2.1%.
At December 31, 2020, the interest rate on the
outstanding
borrowings under the Credit Facility was approximately
1.9%.
In addition to paying interest on outstanding principal under
the Credit
Facility, the Company
is required to pay a commitment fee ranging from 0.2% to
0.3% depending on the Company’s
consolidated net
leverage ratio to the lenders under the Revolver in
respect of the unutilized commitments thereunder.
The Credit Facility is subject to certain financial and
other covenants.
The Company’s initial consolidated
net debt to
consolidated adjusted EBITDA ratio could not exceed
4.25 to 1, with step downs in the permitted ratio over the
term of the Credit
Facility.
As of December 31, 2020, the consolidated net debt to consolidated
adjusted EBITDA ratio may not exceed 4.00 to 1.
The
Company’s consolidated
adjusted EBITDA to interest expense ratio may not be less than
3.0 to 1 over the term of the agreement.
The
Credit Facility also prohibits
the payment of cash dividend if the Company is in default
or if the amount of the dividend paid annually
exceeds the greater of $50.0 million and 20% of consolidated
adjusted EBITDA unless the ratio of consolidated
net debt to
consolidated adjusted EBITDA is less than 2.0 to 1,
in which case there is no such limitation on amount.
As of December 31, 2020
and December 31, 2019, the Company was in compliance
with all of the Credit Facility covenants.
The Term Loans have
quarterly
principal amortization during their five-year terms,
with 5.0% amortization of the principal balance due in years 1 and
2, 7.5% in year
3, and 10.0% in years 4 and 5, with the remaining principal
amount due at maturity.
The Credit Facility is guaranteed by certain of the
Company’s domestic subsidiaries
and is secured by first priority liens on substantially all of
the assets of the Company and the
domestic subsidiary guarantors, subject to certain customary exclusions.
The obligations of the Dutch borrower are guaranteed only
by certain foreign subsidiaries on an unsecured basis.
The Credit Facility required the Company to fix its variable
interest rates on at least 20% of its total Term
Loans.
In order to
satisfy this requirement as well as to manage the
Company’s exposure to variable
interest rate risk associated with the Credit Facility,
in November 2019, the Company entered into $170.0
million notional amounts of three-year interest rate swaps at a base
rate of
1.64% plus an applicable margin as provided
in the Credit Facility, based on
the Company’s consolidated net
leverage ratio.
At the
time the Company entered into the swaps, and as
of December 31, 2020, the aggregate interest rate on the swaps,
including the fixed
base rate plus an applicable margin, was 3.1%.
The Company capitalized $23.7 million of certain third-party
debt issuance costs in connection with executing the
Credit Facility.
Approximately $15.5 million of the capitalized costs were attributed
to the Term Loans and
recorded as a direct reduction of long-
term debt on the Company’s
Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Approximately $8.3 million of the capitalized costs were
attributed to the
Revolver and recorded within other assets on the Company’s
Consolidated Balance Sheet.
These capitalized costs are being
amortized into interest expense over the five-year term
of the Credit Facility.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had Credit Facility
borrowings outstanding of $887.1 million.
As of December 31, 2019,
the Company had Credit Facility borrowings outstandin
g
of $922.4 million.
The Company has unused capacity under the Revolver of
approximately $234 million, net of bank letters of
credit of approximately $6 million, as of December 31, 2020.
The Company’s other
debt obligations are primarily industrial development
bonds, bank lines of credit and municipality-related loans, which
totaled $12.1
million and $12.6 million as of December 31, 2020 and
2019, respectively.
Total unused capacity
under these arrangements as of
December 31, 2020 was approximately $40 million.
The Company’s total net debt
as of December 31, 2020 was $717.3 million.
The Company estimates that it realized full year cost synergies
in 2020 of approximately $58 million compared to
$7 million in
2019.
The Company continues to expect to realize Combination cost synergies
of approximately $75 million in 2021 and $80 million
in 2022.
The Company expects to continue to incur additional costs
and make associated cash payments to integrate Quaker
and Houghton
and continue realizing the Combination’s
total anticipated cost synergies.
The Company expects total cash payments, including those
pursuant to the QH Program, described below,
but excluding incremental capital expenditures related to
the Combination, will be in
the range of 1.3 times its total anticipated 2022 cost
synergies of $80 million.
A significant portion of these costs were already
incurred in 2019 and 2020, but the Company expects
to continue to incur such costs through 2021.
The Company incurred $30.3
million of total Combination, integration and other acquisition-related
expenses in 2020, including $0.8 million of accelerated
depreciation, a $0.6 million loss on the sale of held-for-sale
assets, and $0.8 million of other income related to an indemnification
asset, described in the Non-GAAP Measures section of this
Item below.
The Company had aggregate net cash outflows of
approximately $29.4 million related to the Combination,
integration and other acquisition-related expenses during
2020.
Comparatively,
in 2019, the Company incurred $38.0 million of total Combination,
integration and other acquisition-related expenses,
including $2.1 million of ticking fees as well as $0.6
million of accelerated depreciation, and aggregate net cash outflows related
to
these costs were approximately $52.4 million.
Quaker Houghton’s management
approved, and the Company initiated, a global restructuring
plan (the “QH Program”) in the
third quarter of 2019 as part of its planned cost synergies
associated with the Combination and recorded $26.7
million in restructuring
and related charges in 2019.
The Company recognized an additional $5.5 million of
restructuring and related charges in 2020 as
a
result of the QH Program.
The QH Program includes restructuring and associated severance costs to
reduce total headcount by
approximately 350 people globally and plans for the
closure of certain manufacturing and non-manufacturing
facilities.
In connection
with the plans for closure of certain manufacturing and
non-manufacturing facilities, the Company made a decision
to make available
for sale certain facilities during the second quarter of 2020.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, certain of these facilities were
sold and
the Company recognized a loss on disposal of $0.6 million
included within other expense, net on the Consolidated Statement
of
Income.
Additionally, certain
buildings and land with an aggregate book value of
approximately $10.0 million have been reclassified
to other current assets from property,
plant and equipment as of December 31, 2020.
The Company expects to receive amounts
in
excess of net book value for the properties held for sale.
The exact timing and total costs associated with the QH Program
will depend
on a number of factors and is subject to change;
however, the Company currently expects
reduction in headcount and site closures will
continue to occur into 2021 under the QH Program
and estimates that the anticipated cost synergies realized
under this program will
approximate one-times restructuring costs incurred.
The Company made cash payments related to the settlement
of restructuring
liabilities under the QH Program during 2020 of approximately
$15.7 million compared to $8.9 million in 2019.
As described above, in the first quarter of 2020, the
Company completed the termination of the Legacy Quaker U.S. Pension
Plan
and funded the plan on a termination basis with approximately
$1.8 million, subject to final true up adjustments.
In the third quarter
of 2020, the Company finalized the amount of liability and
related annuity payments and received a refund in premium
of $1.6
million.
In addition, the Company recorded a non-cash pension settlement charge
at plan termination of approximately $22.7 million
in the first quarter of 2020.
On December 22, 2020, the Company closed its acquisition
of Coral Chemical Company (“Coral”), a privately held,
U.S. based
provider of metal finishing fluid solutions.
The purchase price was $54.1 million,
on a cash-free and debt-free basis, subject to routine
and customary post-closing adjustments related to working
capital and net indebtedness levels.
The Company expects to finalize its
post-closing adjustments for the Coral acquisition in the first quarter
of 2021.
Cash paid for Coral in the fourth quarter of 2020 was
approximately $53.1 million, net of cash acquired.
In February 2021, the Company acquired certain assets related to
tin-plating
solutions primarily for steel end markets for approximately
$25 million.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s
gross liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest
and penalties, was $28.9
million.
The Company cannot determine a reliable estimate of the
timing of cash flows by period related to its uncertain tax position
liability.
However, should the entire liability
be paid, the amount of the payment may be reduced by up
to $7.5 million as a result of
offsetting benefits in other tax jurisdictions.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, one of the Company’s
subsidiaries received a notice of
inspection from a taxing authority in a country where certain
of its subsidiaries operate, which related to a non-income
(indirect) tax
that may be applicable to certain products the subsidiary
sells.
To date, the Company
has not received any assessment from the
authority related to potential liabilities that may be due
from the Company’s subsidiary.
Consequently there is substantial uncertainty
with respect to the Company’s
ultimate liability with respect to this indirect tax.
See Note 26 of Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
The Company believes that its existing cash, anticipated
cash flows from operations and available additional liquidity
will be
sufficient to support its operating requirements
and fund its business objectives for at least the next twelve
months, including but not
limited to, payments of dividends to shareholders, costs related
to the Combination and integration, pension plan contributions,
capital
expenditures, other business opportunities (including
potential acquisitions) and other potential contingencies.
The Company’s
liquidity is affected by many factors, some
based on normal operations of our business and others related
to the impact of the
pandemic on our business and on global economic
conditions as well as industry uncertainties, which we cannot
predict.
We also
cannot predict economic conditions and industry downturns
or the timing, strength or duration of recoveries.
We may seek,
as we
believe appropriate, additional debt or equity financing
which would provide capital for corporate purposes, working
capital funding,
additional liquidity needs or to fund future growth opportunities, including
possible acquisitions and investments.
The timing and
amount of potential capital requirements cannot be
determined at this time and will depend on a number of factors,
including the
actual and projected demand for our products, specialty
chemical industry conditions, competitive factors, and the
condition of
financial markets, among others.
The following table summarizes the Company’s
contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020, and the effect
such obligations
are expected to have on its liquidity and cash flows in
future periods.
Pension and postretirement plan contributions beyond 2021
are
not determinable since the amount of any contribution
is heavily dependent on the future economic environment and investment
returns on pension trust assets.
The timing of payments related to other long-term liabilities which
consists primarily of deferred
compensation agreements and environmental reserves,
also cannot be readily determined due to their uncertainty.
Interest obligations
on the Company’s long-term
debt and capital leases assume the current debt levels will be outstanding
for the entire respective period
and apply the interest rates in effect as of
December 31, 2020.
Payments due by period
(dollars in thousands)
2026 and
Contractual Obligations
Total
Beyond
Long-term debt
$
898,789
$
38,686
$
57,754
$
76,856
$
715,155
$
$
10,166
Interest obligations
52,997
14,514
13,703
12,583
10,444
1,227
Capital lease obligations
Operating leases
43,544
12,342
8,395
6,220
4,610
3,836
8,141
Purchase obligations
2,377
2,279
-
-
-
Transition tax
8,500
-
-
1,529
3,099
3,872
-
Pension and other postretirement plan
contributions
10,280
10,280
-
-
-
-
-
Other long-term liabilities (See Note 22 of
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements)
12,494
-
-
-
-
-
12,494
Total contractual
cash obligations
$
1,029,420
$
78,210
$
80,040
$
97,281
$
733,380
$
8,465
$
32,044
Non-GAAP Measures
The information in this Form 10-K filing includes non-GAAP (unaudited)
financial information that includes EBITDA, adjusted
EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, non-GAAP operating
income, non-GAAP operating margin, non-GAAP
net income and non-
GAAP earnings per diluted share.
The Company believes these non-GAAP financial measures provide
meaningful supplemental
information as they enhance a reader’s understanding
of the financial performance of the Company,
are indicative of future operating
performance of the Company,
and facilitate a comparison among fiscal periods, as the
non-GAAP financial measures exclude items
that are not considered indicative of future operating performance
or not considered core to the Company’s
operations.
Non-GAAP
results are presented for supplemental informational
purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for the
financial
information presented in accordance with GAAP.
The Company presents EBITDA which is calculated as net income
attributable to the Company before depreciation and
amortization, interest expense, net, and taxes on income
before equity in net income of associated companies.
The Company also
presents adjusted EBITDA which is calculated as EBITDA plus
or minus certain items that are not considered indicative
of future
operating performance or not considered core to the Company’s
operations.
In addition, the Company presents non-GAAP operating
income which is calculated as operating income plus or
minus certain items that are not considered indicative of future operating
performance or not considered core to the Company’s
operations.
Adjusted EBITDA margin and non-GAAP operating
margin are
calculated as the percentage of adjusted EBITDA and
non-GAAP operating income to consolidated net sales, respectively.
The
Company believes these non-GAAP measures provide
transparent and useful information and are widely used by analysts, investors,
and competitors in our industry as well as by management
in assessing the operating performance of the Company on
a consistent
basis.
Additionally, the
Company presents non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP earnings
per diluted share as additional performance
measures.
Non-GAAP net income is calculated as adjusted EBITDA, defined
above, less depreciation and amortization, interest
expense, net, and taxes on income before equity in
net income of associated companies, in each case adjusted,
as applicable, for any
depreciation, amortization, interest or tax impacts resulting
from the non-core items identified in the reconciliation
of net income
attributable to the Company to adjusted EBITDA.
Non-GAAP earnings per diluted share is calculated as non
-GAAP net income per
diluted share as accounted for under the “two-class share
method.”
The Company believes that non-GAAP net income and non-
GAAP earnings per diluted share provide transparent
and useful information and are widely used by analysts, investors,
and
competitors in our industry as well as by management in
assessing the operating performance of the Company on a consistent
basis.
The following tables reconcile the Company’s
non-GAAP financial measures (unaudited) to their most
directly comparable
GAAP financial measures (dollars in thousands, unless otherwise
noted, except per share amounts):
Non-GAAP Operating Income and Margin Reconciliations
For the years ended December 31,
Operating income
$
59,360
$
46,134
$
87,781
Fair value step up of inventory sold (a)
11,714
-
Houghton combination, integration and other
acquisition-related expenses (b)
30,446
35,945
16,661
Restructuring and related charges (c)
5,541
26,678
-
Customer bankruptcy costs (d)
1,073
-
Charges related to the settlement of a non-core
equipment sale (e)
-
-
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment (f)
38,000
-
-
Non-GAAP operating income
$
134,036
$
121,928
$
104,442
Non-GAAP operating margin (%) (o)
9.5%
10.8%
12.0%
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin and
Non-GAAP Net Income Reconciliations
For the years ended December 31,
Net income attributable to Quaker Chemical Corporation
$
39,658
$
31,622
$
59,473
Depreciation and amortization (b)(m)
84,494
45,264
19,714
Interest expense, net (b)
26,603
16,976
4,041
Taxes on income
before equity in net income of associated companies (n)
(5,296)
2,084
25,050
EBITDA
145,459
95,946
108,278
Equity income in a captive insurance company (g)
(1,151)
(1,822)
(966)
Fair value step up of inventory sold (a)
11,714
-
Houghton combination, integration and other
acquisition-related expenses (b)
29,538
35,361
16,051
Restructuring and related charges (c)
5,541
26,678
-
Customer bankruptcy costs (d)
1,073
-
Charges related to the settlement of a non-core
equipment sale (e)
-
-
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment (f)
38,000
-
-
Pension and postretirement benefit costs, non-service components
(h)
21,592
2,805
2,285
Gain on changes in insurance settlement restrictions of an
inactive
subsidiary and related insurance insolvency recovery (i)
(18,144)
(60)
(90)
Gain on liquidation of an inactive legal entity (j)
-
-
(446)
Currency conversion impacts of hyper-inflationary economies (k)
1,033
Adjusted EBITDA
$
221,974
$
173,112
$
125,776
Adjusted EBITDA margin (%) (o)
15.7%
15.3%
14.5%
Adjusted EBITDA
$
221,974
$
173,112
$
125,776
Less: Depreciation and amortization - adjusted (b)
83,732
44,680
19,714
Less: Interest expense, net - adjusted (b)
26,603
14,896
Less: Taxes on income
before equity in net income
of associated companies - adjusted (l)(n)
26,488
24,825
22,978
Non-GAAP net income
$
85,151
$
88,711
$
82,491
Non-GAAP Earnings per Diluted Share Reconciliations
For the years ending December 31,
GAAP earnings per diluted share attributable to
Quaker Chemical Corporation common shareholders
$
2.22
$
2.08
$
4.45
Equity income in a captive insurance company per diluted
share (g)
(0.07)
(0.12)
(0.07)
Fair value step up of
inventory sold per diluted share (a)
0.01
0.58
-
Houghton combination, integration and other
acquisition-related expenses per diluted share (b)
1.31
2.05
1.21
Restructuring and related charges per diluted
share (c)
0.23
1.34
-
Customer bankruptcy costs per diluted share (d)
0.02
0.05
-
Charges related to the settlement of a non-core
equipment
sale per diluted share (e)
-
0.02
-
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment per diluted
share (f)
1.65
-
-
Pension and postretirement benefit costs, non-service
components per diluted share (h)
0.79
0.14
0.13
Gain on changes in insurance settlement restrictions of an
inactive
subsidiary and related insurance insolvency recovery per diluted
share (i)
(0.78)
(0.00)
(0.01)
Gain on liquidation of an inactive legal entity per diluted
share (j)
-
-
(0.03)
Currency conversion impacts of hyper-inflationary economies
per diluted share (k)
0.02
0.07
0.06
Impact of certain discrete tax items per diluted share (l)
(0.62)
(0.38)
0.43
Non-GAAP earnings per diluted share (p)
$
4.78
$
5.83
$
6.17
(a)
Fair value step up of inventory sold relates to expenses associated
with selling inventory from acquired businesses which
was
adjusted to fair value as part of purchase accounting.
These increases to costs of goods sold (“COGS”) are not indicative
of the
future operating performance of the Company.
(b)
Houghton combination, integration and other acquisition-related
expenses include certain legal, financial, and other advisory
and
consultant costs incurred in connection with due diligence,
regulatory approvals and closing the Combination, as well as
integration planning and post-closing integration activities including
internal control readiness and remediation.
These cost also
include certain one-time labor costs associated with the Company’s
acquisition-related activities.
These costs are not indicative
of the future operating performance of the Company.
Approximately $1.5 million, $9.4 million and $5.1 million for
the years
ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively,
of these pre-tax costs were considered non-deductible for the
purpose of
determining the Company’s
effective tax rate, and, therefore, taxes on income before
equity in net income of associated
companies - adjusted reflects the impact of these items.
During 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded $0.8 million
and $0.6
million, respectively,
of accelerated depreciation related to certain of the Company’s
facilities, which is included in the caption
“Houghton combination, integration and other acquisition
-related expenses” in the reconciliation of operating income
to non-
GAAP operating income and included in the caption
“Depreciation and amortization” in the reconciliation of net
income
attributable to the Company to EBITDA, but excluded from
the caption “Depreciation and amortization - adjusted” in the
reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to non-GAAP net
income attributable to the Company.
During 2019 and 2018, the Company
incurred $2.1 million and $3.5 million, respectively,
of ticking fees to maintain the bank commitment related
to the Combination.
These interest costs are included in the caption “Interest expense,
net” in the reconciliation of net income attributable to
the
Company to EBITDA, but are excluded from the caption
“Interest expense, net - adjusted” in the reconciliation of adjusted
EBITDA to non-GAAP net income.
During 2020, the Company recorded $0.8 million of other income
related to an
indemnification asset.
During 2020 and 2018, the Company recorded a loss of
$0.6 million and a gain of $0.6 million,
respectively, on the
sale of held-for-sale assets related to the Combination.
Each of these items are included in the caption
“Houghton combination, integration and other acquisition
expenses” in the reconciliation of GAAP earnings per diluted
share
attributable to Quaker Chemical Corporation common shareholders
to Non-GAAP earnings per diluted share as well as the
reconciliation of Net Income attributable to Quaker Chemical Corporation
to Adjusted EBITDA and Non-GAAP net income See
Note 2 and Note 9 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,
which appears in Item 8 of this Report.
(c)
Restructuring and related charges represent
the costs incurred by the Company associated with the QH restructuring
program
which was initiated in the third quarter of 2019 as part
of the Company’s plan
to realize cost synergies associated with the
Combination.
These costs are not indicative of the future operating performance
of the Company.
See Note 7 of Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements, which appears in Item
8 of this Report.
(d)
Customer bankruptcy costs represent the cost associated
with a specific reserve for trade accounts receivable related
to a customer
who filed for bankruptcy protection.
These expenses are not indicative of the future operating
performance of the Company.
See
Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which
appears in Item 8 of this Report.
(e)
Charges related to the settlement of a non-core
equipment sale represent the pre-tax charge related to
a one-time, uncommon,
customer settlement associated with a prior sale of non
-core equipment.
These charges are not indicative of the future operating
performance of the Company.
(f)
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment represents the
non-cash charge taken to write down the value
of certain indefinite-
lived intangible assets associated with the Houghton
Combination.
The Company has no prior history of goodwill or intangible
asset impairments and this charge is not indicative
of the future operating performance of the Company.
See Note 16 of Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements, which appears in Item
8 of this Report.
(g)
Equity income in a captive insurance company represents the
after-tax income attributable to the Company’s
interest in Primex,
Ltd. (“Primex”), a captive insurance company.
The Company holds a 32% investment in and has significant
influence over
Primex, and therefore accounts for this investment under
the equity method of accounting.
The income attributable to Primex is
not indicative of the future operating performance of the
Company and is not considered core to the Company’s
operations.
(h)
Pension and postretirement benefit costs, non-service components
represent the pre-tax, non-service components of the
Company’s pension and
postretirement net periodic benefit cost in each period.
These costs are not indicative of the future
operating performance of the Company.
The year ended December 31, 2020 includes a $22.7 million
settlement charge for the
Company’s termination
of the Legacy Quaker U.S. Pension Plan.
See Note 21 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,
which appears in Item 8 of this Report.
(i)
Gain on changes in insurance settlement restrictions of an
inactive subsidiary and related insurance insolvency recovery
represents income associated with the gain on the termination
of restrictions on insurance settlement reserves and the cash
receipts from an insolvent insurance carrier for previously
submitted claims by an inactive subsidiary of the Company.
This other
income is not indicative of the future operating performance
of the Company.
See Notes 9 and 26 of Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements, which appears in Item 8 of this Report.
(j)
Gain on liquidation of an inactive legal entity represents
the decrease in historical cumulative currency translation adjustments
associated with an inactive legal entity which was closed.
These cumulative currency translation adjustments were the result of
remeasuring the legal entity’s
monetary assets and liabilities to the applicable published
exchange rates and were a component of
accumulated other comprehensive loss, which was included
in total shareholder’s equity on the Company’s
Consolidated Balance
Sheet.
As required under U.S. GAAP,
when a legal entity is liquidated, any amount attributable to that
legal entity and
accumulated in the currency translation adjustment component
of equity is required to be removed from equity and reported
as
part of the gain or loss on liquidation of the legal entity
during the period in which the liquidation occurs.
This non-deductible
recognized gain is not indicative of the future operating
performance of the Company.
See Note 9 of Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements, which appears in Item 8 of this Report.
(k)
Currency conversion impacts of hyper-inflationary economies represents
the foreign currency remeasurement impacts associated
with the Company’s affiliates
whose local economies are designated as hyper-inflationary
under U.S. GAAP.
An entity which
operates within an economy deemed to be hyper-inflationary
under U.S. GAAP is required to remeasure its monetary
assets and
liabilities to the applicable published exchange rates and
record the associated gains or losses resulting from the remeasurement
directly to the Consolidated Statements of Income.
Venezuela’s
economy has been considered hyper-inflationary
under U.S.
GAAP since 2010, while Argentina’s
economy has been considered hyper-inflationary beginning
July 1, 2018.
In addition, the
Company acquired an Argentine Houghton
subsidiary which also applies hyper-inflationary accounting.
During 2020 and 2019,
the Company incurred non-deductible, pre-tax charges
related to the Company’s Argentine
affiliates.
During 2018, the Company
incurred non-deductible, pre-tax charges related
to the Company’s Legacy
Quaker Argentine affiliate as well as after
-tax charges
related to the Company’s
Venezuela
joint venture.
The charges incurred related to the immediate recognition
of foreign currency
remeasurement in the Consolidated Statements of
Income associated with these entities are not indicative of the
future operating
performance of the Company.
See Notes 1, 9 and 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements, which appears in Item 8 of
this Report.
(l)
The impacts of certain discrete tax items included the impact of
changes in the valuation allowance for foreign tax credits
acquired with the Combination, changes in withholding
tax rates and the associated impact on previously accrued
for distributions
at certain of the Company’s
Asia/Pacific subsidiaries, additional reserves for uncertain
tax positions related to tax audits at certain
of the Company’s EMEA
subsidiaries.
This line item also includes deferred tax benefits the Company
recorded in 2020 and 2019
related to intercompany intangible asset transfers and
the related amortization of these deferred tax benefits.
Additionally, the
2019 and 2018 amounts include certain transition tax adjustments
related to adjustments to adopt U.S. Tax
Reform.
See Note 10
of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which appears
in Item 8 of this Report.
(m)
Depreciation and amortization for the years ended
December 31, 2020 and 2019 includes $1.2 million and $0.4 million,
respectively, of
amortization expense recorded within equity in net income of
associated companies in the Company’s
Consolidated Statements of Income, which is attributable
to the amortization of the fair value step up for the Company’s
50%
interest in a Houghton joint venture in Korea as a result
of required purchase accounting.
(n)
Taxes on income
before equity in net income of associated companies - adjusted
presents the impact of any current and deferred
income tax expense (benefit), as applicable, of
the reconciling items presented in the reconciliation of net income attributable
to
Quaker Chemical Corporation to adjusted EBITDA, and
was determined utilizing the applicable rates in the taxing jurisdictions
in
which these adjustments occurred, subject to deductibility.
Fair value step up of inventory sold described in (a) resulted
in
incremental taxes of less than $0.1 million and $2.9
million for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Houghton combination,
integration
and other acquisition-related expenses described in
(b) resulted in incremental taxes of $6.9 million for 2020
,
$6.7 million for
2019, and $3.1 million for 2018.
Restructuring and related charges described in (c) resulted
in incremental taxes of $1.4 million
for 2020 and $6.2 million for 2019.
Customer bankruptcy costs described in (d) resulted in incremental
taxes of $0.1 million in
2020 and $0.3 million in 2019.
Charges related to the settlement of a non-core
equipment sale described in (e) resulted in
incremental taxes of $0.1 million for 2019.
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment described in (f) resulted
in incremental
taxes of $8.7 million for 2020.
Pension and postretirement benefit costs, non-service components
described in (h) resulted in
incremental taxes of $7.5 million for 2020, $0.7 million
for 2019, and $0.5 million for 2018.
Gain on changes in insurance
settlement restrictions of an inactive subsidiary and related
insurance insolvency recovery described in (i) resulted in a reduction
of taxes of $4.2 million in 2020 and less than $0.1
million in 2019 and 2018.
Gain on liquidation of an inactive legal entity
described in (k) resulted in a reduction of taxes of $0.1
million in 2018.
The impact of certain discrete items described in (m)
resulted in incremental taxes of $11.2
million for 2020, $5.7 million for 2019, and a reduction of taxes
of $5.8 million in 2018.
(o)
The Company calculates adjusted EBITDA margin
and non-GAAP operating margin as the percentage
of adjusted EBITDA and
non-GAAP operating income to consolidated net sales.
(p)
The Company calculates non-GAAP earnings per diluted share
as non-GAAP net income attributable to the Company
per
weighted average diluted shares outstanding using the “two-class share
method” to calculate such in each given period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company had no material off-balance
sheet items, as defined under Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K as of
December 31,
2020.
The Company’s only off
-balance sheet items outstanding as of December 31,
2020 represented approximately $10 million of
total bank letters of credit and guarantees.
The bank letters of credit and guarantees are not significant to
the Company’s liquidity or
capital resources.
See Note 20 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in
Item 8 of this Report.
Operations
Consolidated Operations Review - Comparison of 2020
with 2019
Net sales were 1,417.7 million in 2020 compared to $1,133.5
million in 2019.
The net sales increase of 25% year-over-year
includes additional net sales from acquisitions, primarily
Houghton and Norman Hay,
of $408.6 million.
Excluding net sales related
to acquisitions, the Company’s
current year net sales would have declined approximately
11% which reflects a decrease in
sales
volumes of 9%, a negative impact from foreign currency
translation of 1% and a decrease from selling price and product
mix of 1%.
The primary driver of the volume decline in the current
year was the negative impact of COVID-19 on global production
levels.
COGS were $904.2 million in 2020 compared to $741.4
million in 2019.
The increase in COGS of 22% was primarily due to the
inclusion of a full year of Houghton and Norman Hay COGS and
$0.8 million of accelerated depreciation charges in
the current year,
partially offset by lower current year COGS on
the decline in net sales due to COVID-19 and prior year charges
of $11.7 million to
increase acquired inventory to its fair value, described
in the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item above.
Gross profit in 2020 increased $121.3 million or 31%
from 2019 due primarily to additional gross profit from
Houghton and
Norman Hay.
The Company’s reported
gross margin in the current period
was 36.2% compared to 34.6% in 2019, which included the
inventory fair value step up described above.
Excluding one-time increases to COGS in both periods,
the Company estimates that its
gross margins for 2020 and 2019 would have
been 36.3% and 35.7%, respectively.
The estimated increase in gross margin year-over-
year was primarily due to lower COGS as a result of the Company’s
progress on Combination-related logistics, procurement and
manufacturing cost savings initiatives, partially offset
by the lower current year sales volumes on certain fixed
manufacturing costs.
SG&A in 2020 increased $96.9 million compared
to 2019 due primarily to additional SG&A from Houghton and Norman
Hay,
partially offset by the impact of COVID-19
cost savings actions, including lower travel expenses, and the
benefits of realized costs
savings associated with the Combination.
During 2020, the Company incurred $29.8 million
of Combination, integration and other acquisition-related
expenses, primarily
for professional fees related to Houghton integration
and other acquisition-related activities.
Comparatively,
the Company incurred
$35.5 million of similar expenses in the prior year,
primarily due to various professional fees related to integration
planning and
regulatory approval as well as professional fees associated
with closing the Combination.
See the Non-GAAP Measures section of
this Item, above.
The Company initiated a restructuring program during
the third quarter of 2019 as part of its global plan to realize cost
synergies
associated with the Combination.
The Company recorded additional restructuring and related charges
of $5.5 million during 2020
compared to $26.7 million during 2019 under this program.
See the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item, above.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company recorded
a $38.0 million non-cash impairment charge to write
down the value of
certain indefinite-lived intangible assets associated with the
Combination.
This non-cash impairment charge is related to certain
acquired Houghton trademarks and tradenames and
is primarily the result of the current year negative impacts of
COVID-19 on their
estimated fair values.
There were no additional impairment charges in the
remainder of 2020 or in the prior year.
See the Critical
Accounting Policies and Estimates section as well as the Non
-GAAP Measures section,
of this Item, above.
Operating income in 2020 was $59.4 million compared
to $46.1 million in 2019.
Excluding Combination, integration and other
acquisition-related expenses, restructuring and related
charges, the non-cash indefinite-lived intangible
asset impairment charge, and
other expenses that are not indicative of the Company’s
future operating performance,
the Company’s current year
non-GAAP
operating income of $134.0 million increased compared
to $121.9 million in the prior year, primarily
due to additional operating
income from Houghton and Norman Hay and
the benefits from costs savings initiatives related to the Combination
,
partially offset by
the current year negative impact due to COVID-19.
The Company’s other
expense, net, was $5.6 million in 2020 compared to $0.3 million in
2019.
The year-over-year increase in
other expense, net was primarily due to the first quarter
of 2020 non-cash settlement charge of $22.7 million
associated with the
termination of the Legacy Quaker U.S. Pension Plan,
partially offset by a fourth quarter of 2020 gain
of $18.1 million related to the
lapsing of restrictions over certain cash that was previously
designated solely for the settlement of asbestos claims at
an inactive
subsidiary of the Company,
which are both described in the Non-GAAP Measures section of this
Item, above.
Additionally, the
increase year-over-year in other expense,
net, includes higher foreign currency transaction losses in the current
year.
Interest expense, net, increased $9.6 million in 2020 compared
to 2019 primarily due to a full year of borrowings under the
Company’s Credit Facility
to finance the closing of the Combination on August 1,
2019, partially offset by lower overall interest rates
in the current year.
The Company’s effective
tax rates for 2020 and 2019 were a benefit of 19.5% and an expense of
7.2%, respectively.
The
Company’s current year
effective tax rate was impacted by the tax effect
of certain one-time tax charges and benefits in the
current
period, including deferred tax benefits related to an intercompany
intangible asset transfer, as well as changes in
the valuation
allowance for foreign tax credits acquired with the Combination,
additional charges for uncertain tax positions relating
to certain
foreign tax audits, and the tax impact of the Company’s
termination of its Legacy Quaker U.S. pension plan.
Comparatively, the prior
year effective tax rate was primarily impacted
by certain non-deductible costs associated with the Combination
as well as a prior year
deferred tax benefit related to a separate intercompany
intangible asset transfer.
Excluding the impact of all non-core items in each
year, described in the Non-GAAP measures
section of this Item, above, the Company estimates that its effective
tax rates for 2020 and
2019 were approximately 25% and 22%, respectively.
The year-over-year increase is driven primarily
by higher U.S. income taxes
resulting from a change in certain deductions and
the taxability of foreign earnings in the U.S., partially offset
by a change in the mix
of earnings.
The Company has experienced and expects to continue to experience
volatility in its effective tax rates due to several
factors, including the timing of tax audits and the expiration
of applicable statutes of limitations as they relate to uncertain
tax
positions, the unpredictability of the timing and
amount of certain incentives in various tax jurisdictions, valuation
allowances
necessary on certain of the Company’s
tax positions, the treatment of certain acquisition-related costs and
the timing and amount of
certain share-based compensation-related tax benefits,
among other factors.
Equity in net income of associated companies increased $2.3
million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to additional
earnings from our 50% interest in a joint venture
in Korea partially offset by lower earnings as compared
to the prior year period from
the Company’s interest in
a captive insurance company.
See the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item, above.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest was $0.1
million in 2020 compared to $0.3 million in 2019
primarily a result of
the first quarter of 2020 acquisition of the remaining
ownership interest in one of the Company’s
South African affiliates.
Foreign exchange negatively impacted the Company’s
2020 results by approximately $0.38 per diluted share, primarily
due to
higher foreign exchange transaction losses year-over-year
and, to a lesser extent, an aggregate negative
impact from foreign currency
translation on earnings.
Consolidated Operations Review - Comparison of 2019
with 2018
Net sales were $1,133.5 million in 2019 compared to
$867.5 million in 2018.
The net sales increase of 31% year-over-year
includes additional net sales from Houghton and
Norman Hay of $319.4 million.
Excluding Houghton and Norman Hay net sales, the
Company’s 2019 net sales would
have declined 6% compared to the prior year,
reflecting a decrease in sales volumes of
approximately 3% and a negative impact from foreign
currency translation of 3%.
COGS in 2019 of $741.4 million increased approximately
$186.2 million or 34% from $555.2 million in 2018.
The increase in
COGS was primarily due to the inclusion of Houghton
and Norman Hay COGS, as well as the fair value inventory step
up and
accelerated depreciation charges described in
the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item above, partially
offset by lower COGS on
the decline in Legacy Quaker net sales.
Gross profit in 2019 increased $79.8 million from 2018
due primarily to Houghton and Norman Hay net sales noted above.
The
Company’s reported
gross margin in 2019 was 34.6%, which includes
an aggregate $11.7 million of expense
associated with selling
Houghton and Norman Hay acquired inventory adjusted
to fair value as well as 2019 accelerated depreciation
charges, both of which
are described in the Non-GAAP Measures section of this
Item above.
Excluding these one-time increases to COGS, the Company
estimates that its gross margin would have been
approximately 35.7% in 2019 compared to 36.0% in 2018.
The decrease in gross
margin year-over-year
was primarily the result of price and product mix attributed
to lower Houghton gross margin compared to
Legacy Quaker.
SG&A in 2019 increased $76.0 million compared to 2018 driven
by additional Houghton and Norman Hay SG&A as
well as charges related to the settlement of a
non-core equipment sale and certain customer bankruptcy costs, both
of which are
described in the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item
above, partially offset by lower SG&A due to
foreign currency translation,
the impact of the year-over-year base
sales decline noted above on direct selling costs, and the benefits
of realized cost savings
associated with the Combination.
During 2019, the Company incurred $35.5 million
of Combination and other acquisition-related expenses,
primarily for legal,
financial, and other advisory and consultant expenses for
integration planning and regulatory approvals, fees associated
with the
closing of the Combination and costs associated with various integration
activities.
Comparatively, the Company
incurred $16.7
million of expenses in 2018, primarily due to various professional
fees related to integration planning and regulatory approval.
See
the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item above.
The Company initiated a restructuring program during
the third quarter of 2019 as part of its global
plan to realize cost synergies
associated with the Combination.
The Company expects reductions in headcount and site closures to occur
over the next two years
under this program.
The Company recorded restructuring expense during 2019 of $26.7
million related to this program.
There were
no similar restructuring expenses recorded during the prior
year.
See the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item, above.
Operating income in 2019 was $46.1 million compared
to $87.8 million in 2018.
Excluding the Combination and other
acquisition-related charges, restructuring
expenses and other non-core items, described in the Non-GAAP Measures
section of this
Item, above, the Company’s
2019 non-GAAP operating income increased to $121.9 million
compared to $104.4 million in 2018,
primarily due to additional net sales and operating income
from Houghton and Norman Hay.
The Company had other expense, net, of $0.3 million
in 2019 compared to $0.6 million in 2018.
The decrease in other expense,
net, was primarily driven by foreign currency transaction
gains in 2019 compared to foreign currency transaction
losses in 2018.
The
Company’s 2019 and
2018 foreign currency transaction gains and losses included
both recurring transactional activity as well as
foreign currency transaction losses of approximately $1.0
million and $0.4 million, respectively,
related to the Company’s Argentine
subsidiaries and, in 2018, a foreign currency transaction
gain of approximately $0.4 million related to the liquidation
of an inactive
legal entity, both
of which are described in the Non-GAAP measures section of
this Item, above.
In addition, the Company had an
increase in receipts of local municipality-related grants in
one of the Company’s regions year
-over-year, partially offset
by an increase
in pension and postretirement benefit costs, non-service
components, in 2019 compared to 2018.
Lastly, in 2018, the
Company
recorded a gain of $0.6 million for the sale of a
held-for-sale asset.
Interest expense, net, increased $12.9 million in 2019
compared to 2018, primarily as a result of additional borrowings
under the
Company’s Credit Facility
to finance the closing of the Combination on August 1,
2019.
The Company’s effective
tax rates for 2019 and 2018 were 7.2% and 30.1%, respectively.
The Company’s low 2019
effective tax
rate was primarily driven by a one-time deferred tax
benefit related to an intercompany intangible asset transfer,
described in the Non-
GAAP measures section of this Item, above.
Comparatively, the Company’s
higher 2018 effective tax rate was largel
y
driven by
combination-related expenses incurred, certain of which
were non-deductible for the purpose of determining the
Company’s effective
tax rate, as well as tax charges related to an
adjustment to the Company’s
initial estimate of the impact from U.S. Tax
Reform.
Excluding the impact of these and all other non-core items
in each period, described in the Non-GAAP Measures section
of this Item,
above, the Company estimates that its effective tax
rates would have been approximately 22% in each year.
Equity in net income of associated companies increased $3.3 million
in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to additional
earnings from the Company’s
50% interest in a Houghton joint venture in Korea and
higher earnings from the Company’s
interest in a
captive insurance company.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest was relatively
consistent in both 2019 and 2018.
Foreign exchange negatively impacted the Company’s
2019 earnings by approximately 2% or $0.09 per diluted share, as the
negative impact from foreign currency translation
of approximately 3% due to the strengthening of the U.S.
dollar in 2019 was
partially offset by higher 2019 foreign exchange
transaction gains.
Reportable Segments Review - Comparison of 2020
with 2019
The Company’s reportable
segments reflect the structure of the Company’s
internal organization, the method by which the
Company’s resources are
allocated and the manner by which the chief operating decision
maker assesses the Company’s
performance.
During the third quarter of 2019 and in connection with the
Combination, the Company reorganized its executive
management team to
align with its new business structure which reflects the method
by which the Company assesses its performance and allocates its
resources.
The Company’s current
reportable segment structure includes four segments: (i) Americas;
(ii) EMEA; (iii) Asia/Pacific;
and (iv) Global Specialty Businesses.
The three geographic segments are composed of
the net sales and operations in each respective
region, excluding net sales and operations managed globally
by the Global Specialty Businesses segment, which includes the
Company’s container,
metal finishing, mining, offshore, specialty coatings,
specialty grease and Norman Hay businesses.
Segment operating earnings for each of the Company’s
reportable segments are comprised of the segment’s
net sales less directly
related COGS and SG&A.
Operating expenses not directly attributable to the net sales of
each respective segment are not included in
segment operating earnings, such as certain corporate
and administrative costs, Combination,
integration and other acquisition-related
expenses, Restructuring and related charges
,
and COGS related to acquired inventory sold, which is adjusted
to fair value as part of
purchase accounting.
Other items not specifically identified with the Company’s
reportable segments include interest expense, net
and other expense, net.
Certain immaterial reclassifications within the segment disclosures for
the years ended December 31, 2019
have been made to conform with the Company’s
current customer industry segmentation and reflected in the prior
year comparisons
below.
Americas
Americas represented approximately 32% of the Company’s
consolidated net sales in 2020.
The segment’s net sales were $450.2
million, an increase of $58.0 million or 15% compared
to 2019.
The increase in net sales reflects additional net sales from
acquisitions of $120.4 million, primarily a result of
the inclusion of seven additional months of Houghton net sales, as the
Combination closed on August 1 in the prior year.
Excluding net sales from acquisitions, the segment’s
net sales decreased
year-over-
year by approximately 16% due to lower volumes of 12%
and a negative impact of foreign currency translation of 4%.
The current
year volume decline was driven by the economic slowdown
that began in late March and continued throughout 2020
due to the
impacts of COVID-19.
The foreign exchange impact was primarily due to the weakening
of the Brazilian real and the Mexican peso
against the U.S. dollar, as these exchange
rates averaged 5.10 and 21.34, respectively,
in 2020 compared to 3.94 and 19.24,
respectively in 2019.
This segment’s operating earnings
were $96.4 million, an increase of $18.1 million or 23% compared
to 2019.
The increase in segment operating earnings reflects the
inclusion of a full year of Houghton net sales, noted,
above, and the impacts on
gross margins and SG&A due to the Combination’s
cost synergies and costs savings actions related to COVID-19
year-over-year,
partially offset by the impact of COVID-19
on current year sales volumes and higher COGS and SG&A due
to seven additional
months of Houghton in the current year.
EMEA
EMEA represented approximately 27% of the Company’s
consolidated net sales in 2020.
The segment’s net
sales were $383.2
million, an increase of $97.6 million or 34% compared
to 2019.
The increase in net sales reflects additional net sales from
acquisitions of $117.9 million, primarily
a result of the inclusion of seven additional months of Houghton net
sales, as the
Combination closed on August 1 in the prior year.
Excluding net sales from acquisitions, the segment’s
net sales decreased
year-over-
year by approximately 7% due to lower volumes of
10%, partially offset by a positive impact of foreign
currency translation of 2%
and increases in selling price and product mix of 1%.
The current year volume decline was driven by the economic slowdown
that
began in late March and continued throughout 2020
due to the impacts of COVID-19.
The foreign exchange impact was primarily
due to the strengthening of the euro against the U.S. dollar
as this exchange rate averaged 1.14 in 2020 compared to 1.12
in 2019.
This segment’s operating
earnings were $69.2 million, an increase of $22.1
million or 47% compared to 2019. The increase in
segment operating earnings reflects the inclusion of
a full year of Houghton net sales, noted, above, and the impacts on
gross margins
and SG&A due to the Combination’s
cost synergies and costs savings actions related
to COVID-19 year-over-year,
partially offset by
the impact of COVID-19 on current year sales volumes
and higher COGS and SG&A due to seven additional months of
Houghton in
the current year.
Asia/Pacific
Asia/Pacific represented approximately 22% of the
Company’s consolidated net
sales in 2020.
The segment’s net sales were
$315.3 million,
an increase of $67.5 million or 27% compared to 2019.
The increase in net sales reflects the inclusion of seven
additional months of Houghton net sales of $79.7 million,
as the Combination closed on August 1 in the prior year.
Excluding
Houghton net sales, the segment’s
net sales decreased
by approximately 5% year-over-year was due to
lower volumes of 3% and
decreases in selling price and product mix of 3% partially offset
by the positive impact of foreign currency translation
of 1%.
The
current year volume decline was driven by the economic
slowdown that began in the first quarter in China and in late March
throughout the rest of the region due to the impacts of
COVID-19.
The foreign exchange impact was primarily due to the
strengthening of the Chinese renminbi against the U.S. dollar.
While this exchange rate averaged
6.90 in each of 2020 and 2019,
respectively, post
the closing of the Combination, this exchange rate strengthened
in the last 5 months of 2020 to average 6.72
compared to 7.06 in the last 5 months of 2019, partially offset
by the weakening of the Indian rupee against the U.S.
dollar as this
exchange rate averaged
73.95 in 2020 compared to 70.35 in 2019.
This segment’s operating earnings
were $88.4 million, an increase
of $20.8 million or 31% compared to 2019.
The increase in segment operating earnings reflects the inclusion
of incremental
Houghton net sales, noted, above, and the impacts on
gross margins and SG&A due to the Combination’s
cost synergies and costs
savings actions related to COVID-19 year-over-year,
partially offset by the impact of COVID-19 on current
year sales volumes and
higher COGS and SG&A due to seven additional months
of Houghton in the current year.
Global Specialty Businesses
Global Specialty Businesses represented approximately
19% of the Company’s consoli
dated net sales in 2020.
The segment’s net
sales were $269.0 million, an increase of $61.1 million
or 29%
compared to 2019.
The increase in net sales reflects the inclusion of
seven additional months of Houghton net sales and nine
additional months of Norman Hay net sales, totaling $90.6
million, as the
Combination closed on August 1 and the Norman Hay
acquisition closed on October 1 in the prior year.
Excluding Houghton and
Norman Hay net sales, the segment’s
net sales decreased by approximately 14%
year-over-year due to lower volumes of 7%,
decreases in selling price and product mix of 5% and a negative
impact from foreign currency translation of 2%.
The current year
volume decline was primarily due to a decrease in
the Company’s specialty coatings
business driven by Boeing’s
decision to
temporarily stop production of the 737 Max aircraft and
volume declines due to the economic slowdown resulting
from COVID-19.
Partially offsetting these volume declines,
and contributing to the decrease in selling price and product mix
,
were higher shipments of
a lower priced product in the Company’s
mining business compared to the prior year.
The foreign exchange impact was primarily due
to the weakening of the Brazilian real against the U.S.
dollar described in the Americas section, above.
This segment’s operating
earnings were $79.7 million, an increase of $20.8
million or 35%
compared to 2019.
The increase in segment operating earnings
reflects the inclusion of incremental Houghton and Norman
Hay net sales, noted above, coupled with an increase in
gross margin due
to the Company’s progress
on Combination-related logistics, procurement and manufacturing
cost savings initiatives, partially offset
by higher SG&A, including seven additional months of
Houghton and nine additional months of Norman Hay SG&A in the current
year.
Reportable Segments Review - Comparison of 2019
with 2018
Americas
Americas represented approximately 35% of the Company’s
consolidated net sales in 2019.
The segment’s net sales were $392.1
million, an increase of $94.5 million or 32% compared
to 2018.
The increase in net sales reflects the inclusion of Houghton
net sales
of $110.1 million.
Excluding Houghton net sales, the segment’s
net sales decrease year-over-year of 5% was due
primarily to lower
volumes of 6% and a negative impact from foreign
currency translation of 1% partially offset by a positive impact
from selling price
and product mix of 2%.
The decline in volumes compared to 2018 was driven by compounding
conditions of weak automotive and
steel markets, a generally weaker overall industrial environment
in the region and some customer inventory corrections.
The
segment’s operating earnings
were $78.3 million, an increase of $15.6 million or 25%
compared to 2018.
The increase in segment
operating earnings reflects the inclusion of Houghton
net sales, partially offset by a lower gross margin
due to price and product mix,
including lower Houghton gross margins compared
to Legacy Quaker and higher SG&A, including Houghton
SG&A.
EMEA
EMEA represented approximately 25% of the Company’s
consolidated net sales in 2019.
The segment’s net
sales were $285.6
million, an increase of $68.6 million or 32% compared
to 2018.
The increase in net sales reflects the inclusion of Houghton
net sales
of $92.5 million.
Excluding Houghton net sales, the segment’s
net sales decrease year-over-year of 11%
was due to a negative impact
of foreign currency translation of 5%, lower volumes of
approximately 5% and a decrease from selling price and product
mix of 1%.
The foreign exchange impact was primarily due to the
weakening of the euro against the U.S. dollar as this exchange rate averaged
1.12 in 2019 compared to 1.18 in 2018.
The decline in volumes compared to 2018 was driven by a weak
automotive market and the
challenging overall industrial environment in the region,
as well as a decrease in volume associated with a specific piece
of business
which the Company stopped selling during the second
half of 2018 primarily due to its limited profitability.
This segment’s operating
earnings were $47.0 million, an increase of $10.9
million or 30% compared to 2018.
The increase in segment operating earnings
reflects the inclusion of Houghton net sales and
a slightly higher gross margin, partially offset by
higher SG&A, including Houghton
SG&A.
Asia/Pacific
Asia/Pacific represented approximately 22% of the
Company’s consolidated net
sales in 2019.
The segment’s net sales were
$247.8 million, an increase of $55.3 million or 29%
compared to 2018.
The increase in net sales reflects the inclusion of Houghton
net sales of $67.4 million.
Excluding Houghton net sales, the segment’s
net sales decreased 6% year-over-year due
primarily to the
negative impact of foreign currency translation of 3% and
lower volumes of approximately 3%.
The foreign exchange impact was
primarily due to the weakening of the Chinese renminbi
and India rupee against the U.S. dollar as these exchange rates
averaged 6.90
and 70.3, respectively,
in 2019 compared to 6.60 and 68.18, respectively,
in 2018.
The decline in volumes was driven by weak
automotive and steel markets and the challenging overall
industrial environment in the region.
This segment’s operating earnings
were $67.5 million, an increase of $13.8 million or 26%
compared to 2018.
The increase in segment operating earnings reflects the
inclusion of Houghton net sales, and relatively consistent gross margins,
partially offset by higher SG&A, including
Houghton SG&A.
Global Specialty Businesses
Global Specialty Businesses represented approximately
18% of the Company’s consolidated
net sales in 2019.
The segment’s net
sales were $208.0 million, an increase of $47.5 million
or 30% compared to 2018.
The increase in net sales reflects the inclusion of
Houghton and Norman Hay net sales of $49.4 million.
Excluding Houghton and Norman Hay net sales, the segment’s
net sales
decreased 1% year-over-year driven
by a decline in selling price and product mix of 5% and
a negative impact from foreign currency
translation of less than 1% partially offset by
an increase in volume of 4%.
This segment’s operating earnings
were $58.9 million, an
increase of approximately $15.9 million or 37% compared
to 2018.
The increase in segment operating earnings reflects the inclusion
of Houghton and Norman Hay net sales, and relatively
consistent gross margins, partially offset by
higher SG&A, including Houghton
and Norman Hay.
Environmental Clean-up Activities
The Company is involved in environmental clean-up
activities in connection with an existing plant location and former
waste
disposal sites.
This includes certain soil and groundwater contamination
the Company identified in 1992 at AC Products, Inc.
(“ACP”), a wholly owned subsidiary.
In voluntary coordination with the Santa Ana California Regional
Water Quality
Board, ACP
has been remediating the contamination.
In 2007, ACP agreed to operate two groundwater treatment systems,
so as to hydraulically
contain groundwater contamination emanating from ACP’s
site until such time as the concentrations of contaminants
are below the
current Federal maximum contaminant level for four
consecutive quarterly sampling events.
In 2014, ACP ceased operation at one of
its two groundwater treatment systems, as it had met the above
condition for closure.
In 2020, the Santa Ana Regional Water
Quality
Control Board asked that ACP conduct some additional
indoor and outdoor soil vapor testing on and near the ACP site to
confirm that
ACP continues to meet the applicable local standards
and ACP has begun the testing program.
As of December 31, 2020, ACP
believes it is close to meeting the conditions for closure of the
remaining groundwater treatment system, but continues to
operate this
system while in discussions with the relevant authorities.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company believes that the range of
potential-
known liabilities associated with the balance of the
ACP water remediation program is approximately $0.1 million to
$1.0 million.
The low and high ends of the range are based on the
length of operation of the treatment system as determined
by groundwater
modeling.
As a result of the closing of the Combination on August
1, 2019, the Company is party to environmental matters related
to certain
Houghton domestic and foreign properties currently or previously
owned.
Houghton’s Sao Paulo, Brazil site
was required under
Brazilian environmental, health and safety regulations to
perform an environmental assessment as part of a permit renewal process.
Initial investigations
identified soil and ground water contamination in select areas
of the site.
The site has conducted a multi-year soil
and groundwater investigation and corresponding
risk assessments based on the result of the investigations.
In 2017, the site had to
submit a new 5-year permit renewal request and was asked
to complete additional investigations to further delineate
the site based on
review of the technical data by the local regulatory agency,
Companhia Ambiental do Estado de São Paulo (“CETESB”).
Based on
review of the updated investigation data, CETESB issued a Technical
Opinion regarding the investigation and remedial actions taken
to date.
The site developed an action plan and submitted it to CETESB in 2018
based on CETESB requirements.
The site
intervention plan primarily requires the site, among
other actions, to conduct periodic monitoring for methane in
soil vapors, source
zone delineation, groundwater plume delineation, bedrock
aquifer assessment, update the human health risk assessment, develop
a
current site conceptual model and conduct a remedial feasibility
study and provide a revised intervention plan.
In December 2019, the
site submitted a report on the activities completed including
the revised site conceptual model and results of the remedial feasibility
study and recommended remedial strategy for the site.
Other Houghton environmental matters include participation in
certain
payments in connection with four currently active environmental
consent orders related to certain hazardous waste cleanup
activities
under the U.S. Federal Superfund statute.
Houghton has been designated a potentially responsible party (“PRP”)
by the
Environmental Protection Agency along with other PRPs depending
on the site, and has other obligations to perform cleanup
activities
at certain other foreign subsidiaries.
These environmental matters primarily require the
Company to perform long-term monitoring as
well as operating and maintenance at each of the applicable
sites.
The Company continually evaluates its obligations related
to such matters and, based on historical costs incurred and projected
costs to be incurred over the next 28 years, has estimated the present
value range of costs for all of the Houghton environmental
matters, on a discounted basis, to be between approximately
$5.5 million and $6.5 million as of December 31,
2020, for which $6.0
million is accrued within other accrued liabilities and
other non-current liabilities on the Company’s
Consolidated Balance Sheet as of
December 31, 2020.
Comparatively, as of
December 31, 2019, the Company had $6.6 million accrued
with respect to these matters.
The Company believes, although there can be no assurance
regarding the outcome of other unrelated environmental matters, that
it has made adequate accruals for costs associated with other
environmental problems of which it is aware.
Approximately $0.1
million and $0.2 million were accrued as of December
31, 2020 and 2019, respectively,
to provide for such anticipated future
environmental assessments and remediation costs.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Company cannot be
certain that future liabilities in the form of remediation expenses and
damages will not exceed amounts reserved.
See Note 26 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item
8 of this Report
General
See