Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is comprised of the following sections:
OVERVIEW
Loews Corporation is a holding company and has five reportable segments comprised of three individual consolidated operating subsidiaries, CNA Financial Corporation (“CNA”), Boardwalk Pipeline Partners, LP (“Boardwalk Pipelines”) and Loews Hotels Holding Corporation (“Loews Hotels & Co”); the Corporate segment and Diamond Offshore Drilling Inc. (“Diamond Offshore”). The Corporate segment is primarily comprised of Loews Corporation excluding its subsidiaries and the operations of Altium Packaging LLC (“Altium Packaging”). Diamond Offshore was deconsolidated during the second quarter of 2020. Each of the operating subsidiaries and Diamond Offshore are headed by a chief executive officer who is responsible for the operation of its business and has the duties and authority commensurate with that position.
On April 26, 2020 (the “Filing Date”), Diamond Offshore and certain of its direct and indirect subsidiaries filed voluntary petitions in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of Texas seeking relief under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code (the “Chapter 11 Filing”). As a result of the Chapter 11 Filing and applicable U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, Loews Corporation no longer controls Diamond Offshore for accounting purposes. Therefore, Diamond Offshore was deconsolidated from the Company’s consolidated financial statements, effective as of the Filing Date, resulting in the recognition of a loss of $1.2 billion ($957 million after tax) during the year ended December 31, 2020. Results of operations for Diamond Offshore through the Filing Date included an aggregate asset impairment charge of $774 million ($408 million after tax and noncontrolling interests) recognized in the first quarter of 2020. For further information see the Diamond Offshore section of this MD&A.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the term “Company” as used herein means Loews Corporation including its subsidiaries, the terms “Parent Company,” “we,” “our,” “us” or like terms as used herein mean Loews Corporation excluding its subsidiaries, the term “Net income (loss) attributable to Loews Corporation” as used herein means Net income (loss) attributable to Loews Corporation shareholders and the term “subsidiaries” means the Loews Corporation’s consolidated subsidiaries.
We rely upon our invested cash balances and distributions from our subsidiaries to generate the funds necessary to meet our obligations and to declare and pay any dividends to our shareholders. The ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends is subject to, among other things, the availability of sufficient earnings and funds in such subsidiaries, applicable state laws, including in the case of the insurance subsidiaries of CNA, laws and rules governing the payment of dividends by regulated insurance companies (see Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8) and compliance with covenants in their respective loan agreements. Claims of creditors of our subsidiaries will generally have priority as to the assets of such subsidiaries over our claims and those of our creditors and shareholders.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with Item 1A, Risk Factors, and Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K. For a discussion of changes in results of operations comparing the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 for Loews Corporation and its subsidiaries see Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 12, 2020.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Financial Results
The following table summarizes net income (loss) attributable to Loews Corporation by segment and net income (loss) per share attributable to Loews Corporation for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(a) Includes a net investment loss of $1.2 billion ($957 million after tax) caused by the write down of the carrying value of our interest in Diamond Offshore.
(b) Amounts presented for Diamond Offshore reflect the periods prior to deconsolidation. See Notes 2 and 20 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8.
2020 Compared with 2019
Net loss attributable to Loews Corporation for 2020 was $931 million, or $3.32 per share, compared to net income attributable to Loews Corporation of $932 million, or $3.07 per share, in 2019.
The net loss for 2020 was driven by six main factors: (i) an investment loss of $1.2 billion ($957 million after tax) caused by the write down of the carrying value of our interest in Diamond Offshore as a result of its deconsolidation upon its bankruptcy filing on April 26, 2020; (ii) drilling rig impairment charges at Diamond Offshore during the first quarter of 2020 when it was a consolidated subsidiary; (iii) operating losses in 2020 as compared to operating income in 2019 at Loews Hotels; (iv) a reduction in CNA’s and the parent company’s net investment income; (v) net investment losses at CNA in 2020 as compared to net investment gains in 2019; and (vi) lower property and casualty underwriting income at CNA caused mainly by higher catastrophe losses.
The economic disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and measures to mitigate the spread of the virus have significantly affected Loews’s results in 2020. The full impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s financial results will depend on the duration of mandated and voluntary containment efforts, related economic policies, the success of vaccination efforts in mitigating the pandemic, and other societal responses to the pandemic.
CNA Financial
The following table summarizes the results of operations for CNA for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 as presented in Note 20 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8. For further discussion of Net investment income and Investment gains (losses), see the Investments section of this MD&A.
2020 Compared with 2019
Net income attributable to Loews Corporation decreased $276 million for 2020 as compared with 2019. The decrease was primarily due to net catastrophe losses of $550 million ($388 million after tax and noncontrolling interests) for 2020 as compared to $179 million ($126 million after tax and noncontrolling interests) in 2019, lower net investment income and investment losses in 2020 as compared with investment gains in 2019. Net catastrophe losses for 2020 include $294 million primarily related to severe weather-related events, $195 million related to COVID-19 and $61 million related to civil unrest. The decrease in net investment income was driven by lower yields in the fixed income portfolio and lower limited partnership and common stock returns. Investment losses were driven by higher impairment losses and the unfavorable change in fair value of non-redeemable preferred stock, partially offset by higher gains on sales of fixed maturity securities. These decreases were partially offset by improved non-catastrophe current accident year underwriting results and a $74 million charge ($52 million after tax and noncontrolling interests) in the third quarter of 2020 as compared to a $216 million charge ($151 million after tax and noncontrolling interests) in the third quarter of 2019 related to recognition of a premium deficiency as a result of the gross premium valuation (“GPV”) review.
COVID-19 related conditions had a significant impact across CNA during 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, CNA experienced significant declines in the value of its investment portfolio. While financial markets broadly recovered by the end of 2020, CNA’s Net investment income and Investment gains (losses) are lower for 2020 as compared with 2019. CNA also recorded significant catastrophe losses during 2020 related to COVID-19 and recorded a reduction in its estimated audit premiums due to lower exposure. The Company’s 2020 consolidated financial statements reflect its best estimate of the impacts related to COVID-19.
CNA’s Property & Casualty and Other Insurance Operations
CNA’s commercial property and casualty insurance operations (“Property & Casualty Operations”) include its Specialty, Commercial and International lines of business. CNA’s Other Insurance Operations outside of Property & Casualty Operations include its long term care business that is in run-off, certain corporate expenses, including interest on CNA’s corporate debt, and certain property and casualty businesses in run-off, including CNA Re and asbestos and environmental pollution (“A&EP”). CNA’s products and services are primarily marketed through independent agents, brokers and managing general underwriters to a wide variety of customers, including small, medium and large businesses, insurance companies, associations, professionals and other groups. We believe the presentation of CNA as one reportable segment is appropriate in accordance with applicable accounting standards on segment reporting. However, for purposes of this discussion and analysis of the results of operations, we provide greater detail with respect to CNA’s Property & Casualty Operations and Other Insurance Operations to enhance the reader’s understanding and to provide further transparency into key drivers of CNA’s financial results.
On December 30, 2020, CNA entered into an agreement with Cavello Bay Reinsurance Limited (“Cavello”), a subsidiary of Enstar Group Limited, under which Cavello reinsured a legacy portfolio of excess workers’ compensation policies. The transaction closed on February 5, 2021 and is based on reserves in place as of January 1, 2020 and adjusted for any subsequent claim activity. This business will be reclassified from the Commercial business to Other Insurance Operations, better reflecting the manner in which CNA is organized for purposes of making operating decisions and assessing performance. The new classifications will be presented in the period ending March 31, 2021, and prior periods presented will conform to the new presentation. Further information on CNA’s retroactive reinsurance agreement is provided in Note 21 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8.
In assessing its insurance operations, CNA utilizes the core income (loss) financial measure. Core income (loss) is calculated by excluding from net income (loss), investment gains or losses and any cumulative effects of changes in accounting guidance. In addition, core income (loss) excludes the effects of noncontrolling interests. The calculation of core income (loss) excludes investment gains or losses because investment gains or losses are generally driven by economic factors that are not necessarily reflective of CNA’s primary insurance operations. Core income (loss) is deemed to be a non-GAAP financial measure and management believes this measure is useful for investors to evaluate its insurance operations.
Property & Casualty Operations
In evaluating the results of Property & Casualty Operations, CNA utilizes the loss ratio, the loss ratio excluding catastrophes and development, the expense ratio, the dividend ratio, the combined ratio and the combined ratio excluding catastrophes and development. These ratios are calculated using GAAP financial results. The loss ratio is the percentage of net incurred claim and claim adjustment expenses to net earned premiums. The loss ratio excluding catastrophes and development excludes net catastrophes losses and changes in estimates of claim and claim adjustment expense reserves, net of reinsurance, for prior years from the loss ratio. The expense ratio is the percentage of insurance underwriting and acquisition expenses, including the amortization of deferred acquisition costs, to net earned premiums. The dividend ratio is the ratio of policyholders’ dividends incurred to net earned premiums. The combined ratio is the sum of the loss, expense and dividend ratios. The combined ratio excluding catastrophes and development is the sum of the loss ratio excluding catastrophes and development, the expense ratio and the dividend ratio. In addition, renewal premium change, rate, retention and new business are also utilized in evaluating operating trends. Renewal premium change represents the estimated change in average premium on policies that renew, including rate and exposure changes. Rate represents the average change in price on policies that renew excluding exposure change. For certain products within Small Business, where quantifiable, rate includes the influence of new business as well. Exposure represents the measure of risk used in the pricing of the insurance product. Retention represents the percentage of premium dollars renewed in comparison to the expiring premium dollars from policies available to renew. Renewal premium change, rate and retention presented for the prior year are updated to reflect subsequent activity on policies written in the period. New business represents premiums from policies written with new customers and additional policies written with existing customers. Gross written premiums, excluding third party captives, excludes business which is ceded to third party captives, including business related to large warranty programs.
The following tables summarize the results of CNA’s Property & Casualty Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
2020 Compared with 2019
Total gross written premiums increased $695 million in 2020 as compared with 2019. Total net written premiums increased $432 million in 2020 as compared with 2019.
Gross written premiums, excluding third party captives, for Specialty increased $281 million in 2020 as compared with 2019 driven by strong rate and higher new business. Net written premiums for Specialty increased $192 million in 2020 as compared with 2019. The increase in net earned premiums in 2020 was consistent with the trend in net written premiums for Specialty.
Gross written premiums for Commercial increased $393 million in 2020 as compared with 2019 driven by strong rate and higher new business. Net written premiums for Commercial increased $250 million in 2020 as compared with 2019. The increase in net earned premiums in 2020 for Commercial was consistent with the trend in net written premiums partially offset by a reduction in estimated audit premiums as a result of the economic slowdown arising from COVID-19 and premium rate adjustments impacting certain general liability policies. For further information on the general liability premium rate adjustments see Note 19 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8.
Gross written premiums for International increased $22 million in 2020 as compared with 2019 driven by growth in Europe and Canada partially offset by the impact of the strategic exit from certain Lloyd’s business classes. Net written premiums decreased $10 million in 2020 as compared with 2019. The decrease in net earned premiums in 2020 was consistent with the trend in net written premiums for International.
Core income decreased $356 million in 2020 as compared with 2019 primarily due to higher net catastrophe losses and lower net investment income. These results were partially offset by improved non-catastrophe current accident year underwriting results.
Net catastrophe losses were $550 million in 2020 as compared with $179 million in 2019. Net catastrophe losses in 2020 include $294 million primarily related to severe weather-related events, $195 million related to COVID-19 and $61 million related to civil unrest. Specialty net catastrophe losses of $125 million in 2020 included $109 million related to the COVID-19 pandemic and $16 million primarily related to severe weather-related events. Specialty net catastrophe losses were $15 million in 2019. Commercial net catastrophe losses of $358 million in 2020 included $252 million primarily related to severe weather-related events, $58 million related to civil unrest and $48 million related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Commercial net catastrophe losses were $154 million in 2019. International net catastrophe losses of $67 million in 2020 included $38 million related to the COVID-19 pandemic, $26 million primarily related to severe weather-related events and $3 million related to civil unrest. International net catastrophe losses were $10 million in 2019.
The COVID-19 catastrophe losses represent CNA’s best estimate of ultimate insurance losses and loss adjustment expenses, including defense costs, resulting from the pandemic, mitigating actions and the consequent economic crisis. The losses were substantially driven by healthcare professional liability with additional impacts from workers’ compensation, management liability, commercial property, trade credit and surety. Due to the timing and fluidity of the events related to COVID-19, emergence pattern of claims and long tail nature of certain exposures the losses are substantially classified as incurred but not reported (“IBNR”) reserves. The COVID-19 catastrophe losses do not include the benefits of lower current accident year losses associated with lower loss frequency in certain lines of business as a result of shelter in place restrictions. Those benefits are modest and are partially offset by the impact of a reduction in the estimated audit premiums and an increase in the credit allowance for premium receivables resulting from depressed economic conditions.
Favorable net prior year loss reserve development of $20 million and $73 million was recorded in 2020 and 2019. In 2020 and 2019, Specialty recorded favorable net prior year loss reserve development of $61 million and $92 million, Commercial recorded unfavorable net prior year loss reserve development of $43 million as compared with favorable net prior year loss reserve development of $2 million and International recorded favorable net prior year loss reserve development of $2 million as compared with unfavorable net prior year loss reserve development of $21 million. Further information on net prior year loss reserve development is included in Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8.
Specialty’s combined ratio increased 3.3 points in 2020 as compared with 2019 primarily due to a 4.6 point increase in the loss ratio partially offset by a 1.2 point improvement in the expense ratio. The increase in the loss ratio was primarily due to higher net catastrophe losses, which were 4.3 points of the loss ratio in 2020, as compared with 0.5 points of the loss ratio in 2019. The improvement in the expense ratio was driven by lower underwriting expenses and higher net earned premiums.
Commercial’s combined ratio increased 6.1 points in 2020 as compared with 2019 due to an increase in the loss ratio. The increase in the loss ratio was driven by higher net catastrophe losses, which were 10.7 points of the loss ratio in 2020, as compared with 4.9 point of the loss ratio in 2019, and unfavorable net prior year loss reserve development in 2020. The expense ratio in 2020 was consistent with 2019 as higher acquisition expenses were offset by higher net earned premiums and lower underwriting expenses.
International’s combined ratio increased 0.6 points in 2020 as compared with 2019 due to a 2.8 point increase in the loss ratio, partially offset by a 2.2 point improvement in the expense ratio. The increase in the loss ratio was driven by higher net catastrophe losses, which were 7.1 points of the loss ratio in 2020, as compared with 1.1 points of the loss ratio in 2019, partially offset by favorable net prior year loss reserve development in the current year. The improvement in the expense ratio was driven by lower acquisition and underwriting expenses.
Other Insurance Operations
The following table summarizes the results of CNA’s Other Insurance Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
2020 Compared with 2019
Core loss improved $112 million in 2020 as compared with 2019. Core loss in 2020 included a $59 million charge related to the recognition of an active life reserve premium deficiency for long term care policies primarily driven by actions taken on discount rate assumptions. The normative risk free rate (the projection of the 10-year U.S. Treasury rate in the long term) was lowered by 100 basis points to 2.75% and the time period to grade up to the normative rate was extended from 6 years to 10 years. Core loss in 2020 also included a $36 million charge related to an increase in the structured settlement claim reserves and a $30 million benefit related to a reduction in long term care claim reserves, both resulting from the annual claim reserve reviews in the third quarter of 2020. Core loss in 2019 included a $170 million charge related to the recognition of an active life reserve premium deficiency and a $44 million benefit related to a reduction in long term care claim reserves resulting from the annual claim reserve reviews in the third quarter of 2019. Excluding the impacts of the GPV and claim reserve reviews, core results in 2020 were favorable, driven by better than expected morbidity in the long term care business and higher net investment income. The increase in net investment income was driven by the allocation of a portion of limited partnership income to Other Insurance Operations beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020. Further, during 2020, relative to expectations, CNA experienced lower new claim frequency, higher claim terminations and more favorable claim severity amid the effects of COVID-19. Given the uncertainty of these trends, CNA increased its IBNR reserves in anticipation of increased claim activity as the COVID-19 pandemic abates.
Non-GAAP Reconciliation of Core Income to Net Income
The following table reconciles core income to net income attributable to Loews Corporation for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Boardwalk Pipelines
Overview
Boardwalk Pipelines operates in the midstream portion of the natural gas and natural gas liquids (“NGLs”) industry, providing transportation and storage for those commodities. Boardwalk Pipelines is not in the business of buying and selling natural gas and NGLs other than for system management purposes, but changes in natural gas and NGLs prices may impact the volumes of natural gas or NGLs transported and stored by customers on its systems. Due to the capital-intensive nature of its business, Boardwalk Pipelines’ operating costs and expenses typically do not vary significantly based upon the amount of products transported, with the exception of fuel consumed at its compressor stations and not included in a fuel tracker.
Current Events
In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and measures to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 significantly impacted the world and the United States. An excess supply of energy products also led to disruptions in the energy sector and volatility in energy prices early in 2020, with a partial recovery of prices and demand occurring in the latter half of 2020. Boardwalk Pipelines’ operations are considered essential critical infrastructure under current Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency guidelines, which allowed Boardwalk Pipelines to remain open during the pandemic. As a result, the impacts from COVID-19 and the volatile energy prices have not been significant to Boardwalk Pipelines’ business, though some of its customers have been and continue to be directly impacted by COVID-19 and the volatility in commodity prices. In 2020, Boardwalk Pipelines transported approximately 3.2 Tcf of natural gas, or an 8% increase from 2019.
Firm Agreements
A substantial portion of Boardwalk Pipelines’ transportation and storage capacity is contracted for under firm agreements. For the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately 90% of Boardwalk Pipelines’ revenues were derived from capacity reservation fees under firm contracts. The table below shows a rollforward of operating revenues under committed firm agreements in place as of December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, including agreements for transportation, storage and other services, over the remaining term of those agreements:
(a) Reflects an increase of $91 million in Boardwalk Pipelines’ actual 2020 revenues recognized from fixed fees under firm agreements as compared with its expected 2020 revenues from fixed fees under firm agreements, including agreements for transportation, storage and other services as of December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase from contract renewals that occurred in 2020.
During 2020, Boardwalk Pipelines entered into approximately $1.3 billion of new firm agreements, of which approximately 55% were from new growth projects executed in 2020, but will not be placed into commercial service until 2024 or later years. As of December 31, 2020, Boardwalk Pipelines’ top ten customers holding firm capacity under firm agreements comprised approximately 40% of its total projected operating revenues. Additionally, the credit profile associated with Boardwalk Pipelines’ customers comprising the total projected operating revenues under firm agreements as of December 31, 2020 was 75% rated as investment grade, 4% rated as non-investment grade and 21% not rated.
Contract Renewals
Each year a portion of Boardwalk Pipelines’ firm transportation and storage agreements expire. The rates Boardwalk Pipelines is able to charge customers are heavily influenced by market trends (both short and longer term), including the available supply, geographical location of natural gas production, the competition between producing basins, competition with other pipelines for supply and markets, the demand for gas by end-users such as power plants, petrochemical facilities and LNG export facilities and the price differentials between the gas supplies and the market demand for the gas (basis differentials). Boardwalk Pipelines’ storage rates are additionally impacted by natural gas price differentials between time periods, such as winter to summer (time period price spreads), and the volatility in time period price spreads. Demand for firm service is primarily based on market conditions which can vary across Boardwalk Pipelines’ pipeline systems. While Boardwalk Pipelines has not seen a decrease in the demand for its transportation services as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic or the volatility in energy prices during 2020, if these conditions were to remain for an extended period of time or worsen, Boardwalk Pipelines could see a decline in the demand for its services. Boardwalk Pipelines focuses its marketing efforts on enhancing the value of the capacity that is up for renewal and works with customers to match gas supplies from various basins to new and existing customers and markets, including aggregating supplies at key locations along its pipelines to provide end-use customers with attractive and diverse supply options. If the market perceives the value of Boardwalk Pipelines’ available capacity to be lower than its long term view of the capacity, Boardwalk Pipelines may seek to shorten contract terms until market perception improves.
Over the past several years, as a result of market conditions, Boardwalk Pipelines has renewed some expiring contracts at lower rates or for shorter terms than in the past. In addition to normal contract expirations, in the 2018 to 2020 timeframe, transportation agreements associated with its significant pipeline expansion projects that were placed into service in the 2007-2009 timeframe, have expired. A substantial portion of the capacity associated with the pipeline expansion projects was recontracted, usually at lower rates or lower volumes, which has negatively impacted Boardwalk Pipelines’ operating revenues. The last of the contract expirations associated with the 2007-2009 pipeline expansion projects have occurred and the associated impacts on operating revenues have been and will continue to be realized. Historically, Boardwalk Pipelines had delivered the majority of production volumes from these pipeline expansion projects to other pipelines. Over the past several years, Boardwalk Pipelines has focused on diversifying its deliveries to end-use markets through utilizing available capacity from contract expirations and the capacity created from its growth projects. Boardwalk Pipelines has diversified deliveries such that almost 75% of Boardwalk Pipelines’ projected future firm reservation revenues, from firm agreements in place as of December 31, 2020, are for deliveries to end-use customers.
Pipeline System Maintenance
Boardwalk Pipelines incurs substantial costs for ongoing maintenance of its pipeline systems and related facilities, including those incurred for pipeline integrity management activities, equipment overhauls, general upkeep and repairs. These costs are not dependent on the amount of revenues earned from its transportation services. PHMSA has developed regulations that require transportation pipeline operators to implement integrity management programs to comprehensively evaluate certain areas along pipelines and take additional measures to protect pipeline segments located in highly populated areas. These regulations have resulted in an overall increase in Boardwalk Pipelines’ ongoing maintenance costs, including maintenance capital and maintenance expense. In 2019, PHMSA issued the first part of its gas Mega Rule, which became effective on July 1, 2020. This regulation imposed numerous requirements, including MAOP reconfirmation through re-verification of all historical records for pipelines in service, which re-certification process may require natural gas pipelines installed before 1970 (previously excluded from certain pressure testing obligations) to be pressure tested, the periodic assessment of additional pipeline mileage outside of HCAs (in MCAs as well as Class 3 and Class 4 areas), the reporting of exceedances of MAOP and the consideration of seismicity as a risk factor in integrity management. The remaining rulemakings comprising the gas Mega Rule have not been published yet and Boardwalk Pipelines cannot predict when they will be finalized, however, they are expected to include revised pipeline repair criteria as well as more stringent corrosion control requirements. It is expected that these new rules will cause Boardwalk Pipelines to incur increased capital and operating costs, experience operational delays and result in potential adverse impacts to its ability to reliably serve its customers as described under Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Report.
Maintenance costs may be capitalized or expensed, depending on the nature of the activities. For any given reporting period, the mix of projects that Boardwalk Pipelines undertakes will affect the amounts we record as property, plant and equipment on the Consolidated Balance Sheets or recognize as expenses, which impacts earnings. In 2021, Boardwalk Pipelines expects to spend approximately $370 million to maintain its pipeline systems, of which approximately $150 million is expected to be maintenance capital. In 2020, Boardwalk Pipelines spent $361 million to maintain its pipeline systems, of which $149 million was recorded as maintenance capital.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes the results of operations for Boardwalk Pipelines for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 as presented in Note 20 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8:
2020 Compared with 2019
Total revenues increased $2 million in 2020 as compared with 2019. Including the effect of items in fuel and transportation expense and excluding net proceeds of approximately $34 million in 2020 and $26 million in 2019 as a result of drawing on letters of credit due to customer bankruptcies in 2020 and 2019, operating revenues decreased $11 million driven by contract expirations that were recontracted at overall lower average rates, partially offset by revenues from recently completed growth projects and higher storage and parking and lending revenues due to favorable market conditions.
Operating expenses increased $15 million in 2020 as compared with 2019. Excluding items offset with operating revenues, operating expenses increased $11 million, primarily due to an increased asset base from recently completed growth projects and the expiration of property tax abatements, partially offset by lower maintenance project spending and employee-related costs. Interest expense decreased $9 million in 2020 as compared with 2019 primarily due to lower average interest rates.
Loews Hotels & Co
The following table summarizes the results of operations for Loews Hotels & Co for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 as presented in Note 20 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8:
2020 Compared with 2019
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to mitigate the spread of the virus, beginning in March of 2020, Loews Hotels & Co temporarily suspended operations at the majority of its owned and/or operated hotels. Since then, most hotels have resumed operations, but occupancy rates remain considerably lower than those from the prior year, or even occupancy rates prior to March of 2020. As such, Loews Hotels & Co has actively managed the operations of its hotel portfolio, in partnership with each hotel’s stakeholders, to minimize the financial loss at each property and accommodate available demand. Although Loews Hotels & Co has enacted significant measures to adjust the operating cost structure of each hotel during suspensions of operations, deferred most capital expenditures and reduced the operating costs of its management company, these measures could not offset the impact of significant lost revenues. Loews Hotels & Co has therefore incurred significant operating losses since the start of the pandemic.
The resumption of operations for the hotels that currently have suspended operations, the potential for hotels that are operational to suspend operations, as well as occupancy levels for hotels that are operational will depend on numerous factors, many of which are outside Loews Hotels & Co’s control including government capacity restrictions, travel restrictions and the duration and scope of the COVID-19 pandemic. While the duration and period to period severity of the COVID-19 outbreak and related financial impact cannot be estimated at this time, Loews Hotels & Co’s results of operations, financial condition and cash flows were materially adversely affected during 2020, and will continue to be materially adversely impacted into 2021. In addition, once the COVID-19 outbreak is mitigated or contained, whenever that may be, historical travel patterns, both domestic and international, may continue to be disrupted either on a temporary basis or with longer term effects. These factors have contributed to impairment charges in 2020, and may lead to additional impairment charges in future periods.
Reduced occupancy and average daily rates caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting mitigation efforts and operating cost reduction measures are the primary reasons for the decrease in operating revenues of $411 million and operating expenses of $220 million in 2020 as compared with 2019. Equity losses from joint ventures was $73 million in 2020 as compared to equity income of $69 million in 2019, also driven primarily by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Loews Hotels & Co considers events or changes in circumstances that indicate the carrying amount of its assets may not be recoverable. In 2020, Loews Hotels & Co recorded impairment charges of $36 million to reduce the carrying value of certain assets to their estimated fair value compared to impairment charges of $99 million in 2019.
Gain on sale of assets of $37 million in 2020 related to an owned hotel and an office building.
Interest expense for 2020 increased $11 million as compared with 2019 primarily due to the increase in aggregate debt balances and less capitalized interest related to hotel development projects.
Corporate
Corporate operations consist primarily of investment income at the Parent Company, operating results of Altium Packaging, Parent Company interest expense and other Parent Company administrative costs. Investment income includes earnings on cash and short term investments held at the Parent Company to meet current and future liquidity needs, as well as results of limited partnership investments and the trading portfolio held at the Parent Company.
The following table summarizes the results of operations for Corporate for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 as presented in Note 20 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8:
2020 Compared with 2019
Net investment income for the Parent Company decreased $171 million in 2020 as compared with 2019 as a result of the significant decline in the performance of equity based and short term investments in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and related containment measures.
Investment loss of $1.2 billion ($957 million after tax) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to the loss recognized upon deconsolidation of Diamond Offshore as a result of its Chapter 11 Filing.
Operating revenues and other include Altium Packaging revenues of $1,022 million and $932 million for 2020 and 2019. The increase of $90 million in 2020 as compared with 2019 reflects an increase of $63 million related to the full year impact of acquisitions in 2019, an acquisition in November of 2020, higher volumes and higher year-over-year resin prices. Altium Packaging’s contracts with its customers provide for price adjustments for changes in resin prices on a prospective basis. Due to fluctuations in resin prices, over time resin raw material costs are generally offset by the change in revenues, so that Altium Packaging’s gross margins return to the same level as prior to the change in prices.
Operating and other expenses include Altium Packaging operating expenses of $992 million and $913 million for 2020 and 2019, which include depreciation and amortization expense. The increase in operating expenses of $79 million in 2020 as compared with 2019 is primarily due to $56 million for the full year impact of acquisitions in 2019 and an acquisition in November of 2020, higher depreciation and amortization expenses and the increase in resin prices.
Corporate Operating and other expenses were $106 million and $91 million for 2020 and 2019. The increases of $15 million in 2020 as compared with 2019 are primarily due to legal and other corporate overhead expenses.
Interest expenses increased $12 million in 2020 as compared with 2019 due to the issuance in May of 2020 of the Parent Company’s $500 million aggregate principal amount of 3.2% senior notes due May 15, 2030 and incremental borrowings by Altium Packaging to fund its 2019 acquisitions.
Diamond Offshore
Contract drilling revenues were $287 million and $935 million for 2020 and 2019. Contract drilling expenses were $254 million and $793 million for 2020 and 2019. Results for 2020 included in our Consolidated Financial Statements reflect only the period through the April 26, 2020 deconsolidation. Operating and other expenses for 2020 include an aggregate asset impairment charge of $774 million ($408 million after tax and noncontrolling interests) recognized in the first quarter of 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Parent Company
Parent Company cash and investments, net of receivables and payables, totaled $3.5 billion at December 31, 2020 as compared to $3.3 billion at December 31, 2019. In 2020, we received $947 million in dividends from our subsidiaries, including a special dividend from CNA of $485 million. Cash outflows included the payment of $923 million to fund treasury stock purchases, $70 million of cash dividends to our shareholders, $151 million of cash contributions to Loews Hotels & Co and $19 million to purchase common shares of CNA. On February 3, 2021, we received a $199 million dividend from Altium Packaging. In March of 2021, we will receive dividends of $275 million from CNA. As a holding company we depend on dividends from our subsidiaries and returns on our investment portfolio to fund our obligations. We also have an effective Registration Statement on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) registering the future sale of an unlimited amount of our debt and equity securities from time to time. We are not responsible for the liabilities and obligations of our subsidiaries and there are no Parent Company guarantees.
In May of 2020, we completed a public offering of $500 million aggregate principal amount of 3.2% senior notes due May 15, 2030. The proceeds of this offering are available for general corporate purposes.
Depending on market and other conditions, we may purchase our shares and shares of our subsidiaries outstanding common stock in the open market or otherwise. In 2020, we purchased 22.0 million shares of Loews Corporation common stock and 564,430 shares of CNA common stock. As of February 5, 2021, we had purchased an additional 2.2 million shares of Loews Corporation common stock in 2021 at an aggregate cost of $100 million. As of February 5, 2021, there were 267,046,558 shares of Loews Corporation common stock outstanding.
Loews Corporation has a corporate credit and senior debt rating of A with a stable outlook from S&P Global Ratings (“S&P”), a senior debt rating of A3 with a stable outlook from Moody’s Investors Service (“Moody’s”) and a senior debt rating of A with a stable outlook from Fitch Ratings Inc. (“Fitch”).
Future uses of our cash may include investing in our subsidiaries, new acquisitions, dividends and/or repurchases of our and our subsidiaries’ outstanding common stock. The declaration and payment of future dividends to holders of our common stock will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend on many factors, including our earnings, financial condition and business needs.
Subsidiaries
CNA’s cash provided by operating activities was $1.8 billion in 2020 and $1.1 billion in 2019. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was driven by an increase in premiums collected, lower net claim payments and lower income taxes paid, partially offset by a lower level of distributions from limited partnerships.
CNA paid dividends of $3.48 per share on its common stock, including a special dividend of $2.00 per share in 2020. On February 5, 2021, CNA’s Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.38 per share and a special dividend of $0.75 per share payable March 11, 2021 to shareholders of record on February 22, 2021. CNA’s declaration and payment of future dividends is at the discretion of its Board of Directors and will depend on many factors, including CNA’s earnings, financial condition, business needs and regulatory constraints. The payment of dividends by CNA’s insurance subsidiaries without prior approval of the insurance department of each subsidiary’s domiciliary jurisdiction is limited by formula. Dividends in excess of these amounts are subject to prior approval by the respective state insurance departments.
In August of 2020, CNA completed a public offering of $500 million aggregate principal amount of its 2.1% senior notes due August 15, 2030 and used the net proceeds to redeem the entire $400 million outstanding aggregate principal balance of its 5.8% senior notes due August 15, 2021 and for general corporate purposes. CNA has an effective shelf registration statement on file with the SEC under which it may publicly issue debt, equity or hybrid securities from time to time.
On February 5, 2021, in connection with the closing of the retroactive reinsurance transaction with Cavello, CNA transferred approximately $630 million of cash into a collateral trust account as security for Cavello’s obligations under the terms of the agreement. See Note 21 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8 for further information on the retroactive reinsurance transaction with Cavello.
Dividends from Continental Casualty Company (“CCC”), a subsidiary of CNA, are subject to the insurance holding company laws of the State of Illinois, the domiciliary state of CCC. Under these laws, ordinary dividends, or dividends that do not require prior approval by the Illinois Department of Insurance (the “Department”), are determined based on the greater of the prior year’s statutory net income or 10% of statutory surplus as of the end of the prior year, as well as the timing and amount of dividends paid in the preceding 12 months. Additionally, ordinary dividends may only be paid from earned surplus, which is calculated by removing unrealized gains from unassigned surplus. As of December 31, 2020, CCC was in a positive earned surplus position. The maximum allowable dividend CCC could pay during 2021 that would not be subject to the Department’s prior approval is $1,070 million, less dividends paid during the preceding twelve months measured at that point in time. CCC paid dividends of $975 million in 2020. The actual level of dividends paid in any year is determined after an assessment of available dividend capacity, holding company liquidity and cash needs as well as the impact the dividends will have on the statutory surplus of the applicable insurance company.
CNA has a financial strength rating of A and senior debt rating of bbb+ from A.M. Best Company (“A.M. Best”), a financial strength rating of A2 and senior debt rating of Baa2 from Moody’s, a financial strength rating of A+ and senior debt rating of A- from S&P and financial strength rating of A+ and senior debt rating of BBB+ from Fitch. A.M. Best, Moody’s, S&P and Fitch maintain stable outlooks across CNA’s financial strength and senior debt credit ratings.
Boardwalk Pipelines’ cash provided by operating activities decreased $21 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the change in net income and the timing of receivables.
For 2020 and 2019, Boardwalk Pipelines’ capital expenditures were $438 million and $429 million, consisting primarily of a combination of growth and maintenance capital. Boardwalk Pipelines expects total capital expenditures to be approximately $340 million in 2021, including approximately $150 million for maintenance capital and $190 million related to growth projects.
Boardwalk Pipelines anticipates that its existing capital resources, including its revolving credit facility and cash flows from operating activities, will be adequate to fund its operations and capital expenditures for 2021. Boardwalk Pipelines may seek to access the debt markets to fund some or all capital expenditures for growth projects, acquisitions or for general corporate purposes. During 2020, Boardwalk Pipelines utilized the remaining capacity under its effective shelf registration statement, and it plans to file with the SEC and expects to have declared effective in the first quarter of 2021 a $1.0 billion shelf registration statement under which it may publicly issue debt securities, warrants or rights from time to time.
In November of 2020, Boardwalk Pipelines paid a distribution of $102 million to the Company.
Boardwalk Pipelines has a senior debt rating of BBB- with a stable outlook from S&P, a senior debt rating of Baa3 with a stable outlook from Moody’s and a senior debt rating of BBB- with a positive outlook from Fitch.
Certain of the hotels wholly or partially owned by Loews Hotels & Co are financed by debt facilities, with a number of different lenders. Each of the loan agreements underlying these facilities contain a variety of financial and operational covenants. As a result of the impacts of COVID-19, Loews Hotels & Co has proactively requested certain lenders, where applicable, to (1) temporarily waive certain covenants to avoid an event of default and/or further restriction of the hotel’s cash balances through the establishment of lockboxes and other measures; (2) temporarily allow funds previously restricted directly or indirectly under the hotel’s underlying loan agreement for the renewal, replacement and addition of building improvements, furniture and fixtures to be used instead for hotel operations and maintenance; and/or (3) defer certain interest and/or principal payments while the hotels operations are temporarily suspended or significantly impacted by a decline in occupancy. Loews Hotels & Co also continues to work with lenders on loans that are being reviewed for extension. These discussions with lenders are ongoing and may require Loews Hotels & Co to make principal paydowns or provide guaranties of a subsidiary’s debt to otherwise avoid an event of default. Through the date of this Report, Loews Hotels & Co is not in default on any of its loans.
Additionally, due to temporary suspension of operations and lost revenues in certain joint venture entities, Loews Hotels & Co has received capital call notices in accordance with the underlying joint venture agreements to support the properties’ operations. Through December 31, 2020, Loews Hotels & Co funded approximately $51 million to these joint ventures in 2020.
In 2020 Loews Hotels & Co received capital contributions of $151 million from Loews Corporation to fund working capital and growth projects. Due to the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to the travel and hospitality industry, Loews Hotels & Co will require additional funding from Loews Corporation during 2021. The amount needed will depend on numerous factors, including how quickly properties are able to return to sustainable operating levels.
On February 3, 2021, Altium Packaging issued a $1.05 billion seven-year secured term loan. The term loan is a variable rate facility which bears interest at a floating rate equal to the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus an applicable margin of 2.75%, subject to a 0.5% LIBOR floor. The proceeds were used to pay the outstanding principal balances of its variable rate term loans and lending facility and pay a dividend of $200 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, neither we nor any of our subsidiaries had any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual payment obligations are as follows:
(a) Includes estimated future interest payments.
(b) The claim and claim adjustment expense reserves reflected above are not discounted and represent CNA’s estimate of the amount and timing of the ultimate settlement and administration of gross claims based on its assessment of facts and circumstances known as of December 31, 2020. See the Insurance Reserves section of this MD&A for further information.
(c) The future policy benefit reserves reflected above are not discounted and represent CNA’s estimate of the ultimate amount and timing of the settlement of benefits net of expected premiums, and are based on its assessment of facts and circumstances known as of December 31, 2020. Additional information on future policy benefit reserves is included in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8.
Further information on our commitments, contingencies and guarantees is provided in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8.
INVESTMENTS
Investment activities of our non-insurance subsidiaries primarily consist of investments in fixed income securities, including short term investments. The Parent Company portfolio also includes equity securities, including short sales and derivative instruments, and investments in limited partnerships. These types of investments generally have greater volatility, less liquidity and greater risk than fixed income investments and are included within Results of Operations - Corporate.
The Parent Company enters into short sales and invests in certain derivative instruments that are used for asset and liability management activities, income enhancements to its portfolio management strategy and to benefit from anticipated future movements in the underlying markets. If such movements do not occur as anticipated, then significant losses may occur. Monitoring procedures include senior management review of daily reports of existing positions and valuation fluctuations to seek to ensure that open positions are consistent with the portfolio strategy.
Credit exposure associated with non-performance by counterparties to derivative instruments is generally limited to the uncollateralized change in fair value of the derivative instruments recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We mitigate the risk of non-performance by monitoring the creditworthiness of counterparties and diversifying derivatives by using multiple counterparties. We occasionally require collateral from derivative investment counterparties depending on the amount of the exposure and the credit rating of the counterparty.
Insurance
CNA maintains a large portfolio of fixed maturity and equity securities, including large amounts of corporate and government issued debt securities, residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities, other asset-backed securities and investments in limited partnerships which pursue a variety of long and short investment strategies across a broad array of asset classes. CNA’s investment portfolio supports its obligation to pay future insurance claims and provides investment returns which are an important part of CNA’s overall profitability.
Net Investment Income
The significant components of CNA’s net investment income are presented in the following table. Fixed income securities, as presented, include both fixed maturity securities and non-redeemable preferred stock.
CNA’s net investment income decreased $183 million in 2020 as compared with 2019 driven by lower yields in the fixed income portfolio and lower limited partnership and common stock returns.
Investment Gains (Losses)
The components of CNA’s investment gains (losses) are presented in the following table:
CNA’s investment gains (losses) decreased $84 million in 2020 as compared with 2019. The decrease was driven by higher impairment losses and the unfavorable change in fair value of non-redeemable preferred stock partially offset by higher net realized investment gains on sales of fixed maturity securities.
Further information on CNA’s investment gains and losses is set forth in Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8.
Portfolio Quality
The following table presents the estimated fair value and net unrealized gains (losses) of CNA’s fixed maturity securities by rating distribution:
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, 1% of CNA’s fixed maturity portfolio was rated internally. AAA rated securities included $1.8 billion and $1.5 billion of pre-funded municipal bonds as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following table presents CNA’s available-for-sale fixed maturity securities in a gross unrealized loss position by ratings distribution:
The following table presents the maturity profile for these available-for-sale fixed maturity securities. Securities not due to mature on a single date are allocated based on weighted average life:
Duration
A primary objective in the management of CNA’s investment portfolio is to optimize return relative to the corresponding liabilities and respective liquidity needs. CNA’s views on the current interest rate environment, tax regulations, asset class valuations, specific security issuer and broader industry segment conditions as well as domestic and global economic conditions, are some of the factors that enter into an investment decision. CNA also continually monitors exposure to issuers of securities held and broader industry sector exposures and may from time to time adjust such exposures based on its views of a specific issuer or industry sector.
A further consideration in the management of CNA’s investment portfolio is the characteristics of the corresponding liabilities and the ability to align the duration of the portfolio to those liabilities and to meet future liquidity needs, minimize interest rate risk and maintain a level of income sufficient to support the underlying insurance liabilities. For portfolios where future liability cash flows are determinable and typically long term in nature, CNA segregates investments for asset/liability management purposes. The segregated investments support the long term care and structured settlement liabilities in Other Insurance Operations.
The effective durations of CNA’s fixed income securities and short term investments are presented in the following table. Amounts presented are net of payable and receivable amounts for securities purchased and sold, but not yet settled.
CNA’s investment portfolio is periodically analyzed for changes in duration and related price risk. Certain securities have duration characteristics that are variable based on market interest rates, credit spreads and other factors that may drive variability in the amount and timing of cash flows. Additionally, CNA periodically reviews the sensitivity of the portfolio to the level of foreign exchange rates and other factors that contribute to market price changes. A summary of these risks and specific analysis on changes is included in the Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk included under