Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the discussion under “Selected Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, based on current expectations and related to future events and our future financial performance, that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many important factors, including those set forth under the caption “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
CytRx Corporation
CytRx Corporation (“CytRx”) is a biopharmaceutical research and development company specializing in oncology and rare diseases. The Company’s focus has been on the discovery, research and clinical development of novel anti-cancer drug candidates that employ novel linker technologies to enhance the accumulation and release of cytotoxic anti-cancer agents at the tumor. During 2017, CytRx’s discovery laboratory, located in Freiburg, Germany, synthesized and tested over 75 rationally designed drug conjugates with highly potent payloads, culminating in the creation of two distinct classes of compounds. Four lead candidates (LADR-7 through LADR-10) were selected based on in vitro and animal preclinical studies, stability, and manufacturing feasibility. In 2018, additional animal efficacy and toxicology testing of these lead candidates was conducted. In addition, a novel albumin companion diagnostic, ACDx™, was developed to identify patients with cancer who are most likely to benefit from treatment with these drug candidates.
On June 1, 2018, CytRx launched Centurion BioPharma Corporation (“Centurion”), a private subsidiary, and transferred all of its assets, liabilities and personnel associated with the laboratory operations in Freiburg, Germany. In connection with said transfer, the Company and Centurion entered into a Management Services Agreement whereby the Company agreed to render advisory, consulting, financial and administrative services to Centurion, for which Centurion shall reimburse the Company for the cost of such services plus a 5% service charge. The Management Services Agreement may be terminated by either party at any time. Centurion is focused on the development of personalized medicine for solid tumor treatment. On December 21, 2018, CytRx announced that Centurion had concluded the pre-clinical phase of development for its four LADR drug candidates, and for its albumin companion diagnostic (ACDx™). As a result of completing this work, operations taking place at the pre-clinical laboratory in Freiburg, Germany would no longer be needed and, accordingly, the lab was closed at the end of January 2019.
We are a Delaware corporation, incorporated in 1985. Our corporate offices are located at 11726 San Vicente Boulevard, Suite 650, Los Angeles, California 90049, and our telephone number is (310) 826-5648. Our web site is located at http://www.cytrx.com. We do not incorporate by reference into this Annual Report the information on, or accessible through, our website, and you should not consider it as part of this Annual Report.
LADR Drug Discovery Platform and Centurion
Centurion’s LADR™ (Linker Activated Drug Release) technology platform is a discovery engine combining our expertise in linker chemistry and albumin biology to create a pipeline of anti-cancer molecules that will avoid unacceptable systemic toxicity while delivering highly potent agents directly to the tumor. They have created a “toolbox” of linker technologies that have the ability to significantly increase the therapeutic index of ultra-high potency drugs (10-1,000 times more potent than traditional cytotoxins) by controlling the release of the drug payloads and improving drug-like properties.
Centurion’s efforts were focused on two classes of ultra-high potency albumin-binding drug conjugates. These drug conjugates combine the proprietary LADR™ linkers with novel derivatives of the auristatin and maytansinoid drug classes. These payloads historically have required a targeting antibody for successful administration to humans. Their drug conjugates eliminate the need for a targeting antibody and provide a small molecule therapeutic option with potential broader applicability.
Centurion’s postulated mechanism of action for the albumin-binding drug conjugates is as follows:
● after administration, the linker portion of the drug conjugate forms a rapid and specific covalent bond to the cysteine-34 position of circulating albumin;
● circulating albumin preferentially accumulates at the tumors, bypassing concentration in other non-tumor sites, including the heart, liver and gastrointestinal tract due to a mechanism called “Enhanced Permeability and Retention”;
● once localized at the tumor, the acid-sensitive linker is cleaved due to the specific conditions within the tumor and in the tumor microenvironment; and
● free active drug is then released into the tumor.
Centurion’s novel companion diagnostic, ACDx™ (albumin companion diagnostic), was developed to identify patients with cancer who are most likely to benefit from treatment with the four LADR lead assets.
CytRx and Centurion have been working on identifying partnership opportunities for LADR™ ultra-high potency drug conjugates and its albumin companion diagnostic. However, no partnerships or any source of financing has become available after two years of effort.
Business Strategy for LADR™ Platform
Currently the Company and Centurion continue to work on identifying partnership or financing opportunities for LADR™ ultra-high potency drug conjugates and their albumin companion diagnostic. We have concluded all research and development on LADR and its companion diagnostic and continue to focus on identifying these partnership or financing opportunities.
Aldoxorubicin
Until July 2017, we were focused on the research and clinical development of aldoxorubicin, our modified version of the widely-used chemotherapeutic agent, doxorubicin. Aldoxorubicin combines the chemotherapeutic agent doxorubicin with a novel linker-molecule that binds specifically to albumin in the blood to allow for delivery of higher amounts of doxorubicin (3½ to 4 times) without several of the major dose-limiting toxicities seen with administration of doxorubicin alone.
On July 27, 2017, we entered into an exclusive worldwide license with ImmunityBio, Inc. (formerly known as NantCell, Inc.) (“ImmunityBio”), granting to ImmunityBio the exclusive rights to develop, manufacture and commercialize aldoxorubicin in all indications, and our company is no longer working on development of aldoxorubicin (ImmunityBio has recently merged with NantKwest, Inc.). As part of the license, ImmunityBio made a strategic investment of $13 million in CytRx common stock at $6.60 per share, a premium of 92% to the market price on that date. We also issued ImmunityBio a warrant to purchase up to 500,000 shares of common stock at $6.60, which expired on January 26, 2019. We are entitled to receive up to an aggregate of $343 million in potential milestone payments, contingent upon achievement of certain regulatory approvals and commercial milestones. We are also entitled to receive ascending double-digit royalties for net sales for soft tissue sarcomas and mid to high single digit royalties for other indications.
Aldoxorubicin is a conjugate of the commonly prescribed cytotoxin agent doxorubicin that binds to circulating albumin in the bloodstream and is believed to concentrate the drug at the site of the tumor. Aldoxorubicin has been tested in over 600 patients with various types of cancer. Specifically, it is comprised of (6-maleimidocaproyl) hydrazine, an acid-sensitive molecule that is conjugated to doxorubicin. The initial indication for aldoxorubicin is for patients with advanced soft tissue sarcomas (STS). ImmunityBio lists a randomized Phase 2 and a randomized Phase 3 study, as well as an aldoxorubicin and ifosfamide Phase 1/2 study in its solid tumor platform and is currently reviewing options in STS.
Aldoxorubicin has received Orphan Drug Designation (ODD) by the U.S. FDA for the treatment of STS. ODD provides several benefits including seven years of market exclusivity after approval, certain R&D related tax credits, and protocol assistance by the FDA. European regulators granted aldoxorubicin Orphan designation for STS which confers ten years of market exclusivity among other benefits.
In addition to STS, ImmunityBio has expanded aldoxorubicin’s use by combining it with immunotherapies and cell-based treatments, in advanced and metastatic pancreatic cancer, in advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck, in triple negative breast cancer and in colorectal cancer. ImmunityBio has submitted for a randomized metastatic pancreatic study with the FDA.
In order to fund our business and operations, we have relied primarily upon sales of our equity securities, including proceeds from the exercise of stock options and common stock purchase warrants and we recently secured long-term financing. We also have received limited funding from our strategic partners and licensees.
Molecular Chaperone Assets (Orphayzme)
In 2011, CytRx sold the rights to arimoclomol and iroxanadine, based on molecular chaperone regulation technology, to Orphazyme A/S (formerly Orphazyme ApS) in exchange for a one-time, upfront payment and the right to receive up to a total of $120 million (USD) in milestone payments upon the achievement of certain pre-specified regulatory and business milestones, as well as royalty payments based on a specified percentage of any net sales of products derived from arimoclomol. Orphazyme is testing arimoclomol in four indications, including Niemann-Pick disease Type C (NPC), Gaucher disease, Inclusion Body Myositis (IBM) and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). Orphazyme has announced it expects read-outs for its registrational trials in IBM and ALS in the first half of 2021. Orphazyme has highlighted positive Phase 2/3 clinical trial data in patients with NPC and have submitted a New Drug Application (NDA) with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which is currently under Priority Review by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) with a target action date of June 17, 2021. It also submitted a Marketing Authorization Application (MAA) with the European Medicines Agency (EMA). Orphazyme has established an Early Access Program in the U.S. as well as other select European countries. Orphazyme has also received FDA Breakthrough Therapy Designation for arimoclomol for NPC. Orphazyme recently announced its intention that arimoclomol will be marketed globally under the tradename MIPLYFFA™. CytRx will be entitled to a milestone payment of $6 million upon FDA approval, $4 million upon EMA approval and $2 million upon approval in Japan, along with royalties from potential sales and potential additional milestone payments, although there can be no assurance that such milestones will be achieved.
Research and Development
Expenditures for research and development activities related to continuing operations were $0.8 million in 2020 and $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 or approximately 12% and 5%, respectively, of our total expenses.
Research and development expenses are further discussed below under “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” and “Results of Operations.”
We do not currently project incurring any material research and development expenditures in 2021. Should the Company’s subsidiary, Centurion BioPharma be successful in raising capital to further develop its LADR compounds along with a companion diagnostic, only then would the Company incur research and development expenditures.
All of our product candidates in development must be approved by the FDA or corresponding foreign governmental agencies before they can be marketed. The process for obtaining FDA and foreign government approvals is both time-consuming and costly, with no certainty of a successful outcome. A discussion of these and other risks and uncertainties associated with our business is set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report.
Discontinued Operations
On December 21, 2018, the Company announced that its pre-clinical lab operations had successfully completed its objectives - namely, it has developed four lead compounds, LADR 7, LADR-8, LADR-9 and LADR 10 along with a companion diagnostic (ACDx™). Accordingly, the Company terminated the contracts of all its employees at its Freiburg location and closed the lab at the end of January 2019. The results of these discontinued operations are presented separately on the Company’s Consolidated Statement of Operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates, including those related to stock options, impairment of long-lived assets, including accrued liabilities and certain expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report. We believe the following critical accounting policies are affected by our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
Revenue consists of license fees from strategic alliances with pharmaceutical companies, as well as service and grant revenues. Service revenue consists of contract research and laboratory consulting. Grant revenues consist of government and private grants.
The Company accounts for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Update 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606).
The guidance provides for a five-step analysis of transactions to determine when and how revenue is recognized. Other major provisions include capitalization of certain contract costs, consideration of the time value of money in the transaction price, and allowing estimates of variable consideration to be recognized before contingencies are resolved in certain circumstances. The guidance also requires enhanced disclosures regarding the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from an entity’s contracts with customers.
Additionally, CytRx is eligible to receive tiered high single to low double-digit royalties on product sales. The royalty term is determined on a licensed-product-by-licensed-product and country-by-country basis and begins on the first commercial sale of a licensed product in a country and ends on the expiration of the last to expire of specified patents or regulatory exclusivity covering such licensed product in such country or, with a customary royalty reduction, ten years after the first commercial sale if there is no such exclusivity. These revenues will be recognized when earned.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred for direct and overhead-related research expenses and are expensed as incurred. Costs to acquire technologies, including licenses, that are utilized in research and development and that have no alternative future use are expensed when incurred. Technology developed for use in our product candidates is expensed as incurred until technological feasibility has been established.
Clinical Trial Expenses
Clinical trial expenses, which are included in research and development expenses, include obligations resulting from our contracts with various contract research organizations, or CROs, in connection with conducting clinical trials of our product candidates. We recognize expenses for these activities based on a variety of factors, including actual and estimated labor hours, clinical site initiation activities, patient enrollment rates, estimates of external costs and other activity-based factors. We believe that this method is the best measure of the efforts expended on a clinical trial with the expenses we record. We adjust our rate of clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates. If our estimates prove to be incorrect, clinical trial expenses recorded in any particular period could vary.
Stock-based Compensation
The fair value of the Company’s stock option and restricted stock grants is estimated using the Black-Scholes-Merton Option Pricing model, which uses certain assumptions related to risk-free interest rates, expected volatility, expected life of the stock options or restricted stock, and future dividends. Compensation expense is recorded based upon the value derived from the Black-Scholes-Merton Option Pricing model and based on actual experience. The assumptions used in the Black-Scholes-Merton Option Pricing model could materially affect compensation expense recorded in future periods.
Net Loss Per Share
Basic net loss per common share attributable to common shareholders is computed using the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding. Diluted net loss per common share is computed using the weighted-average number of common shares and common share equivalents outstanding. Potentially dilutive stock options and warrants to purchase approximately 3.4 million and 7.9 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively, were excluded from the computation of diluted net loss per share, because the effect would be anti-dilutive.
Potential Strategic Alternatives
From time to time, we may consider strategic alternatives available to us to enhance shareholder value. Strategic alternatives could include the acquisition of or strategic partnership with one or more parties or the licensing of some of our proprietary technologies. See “Item 1A - Risk Factors - The impact and results of our exploration of strategic alternatives are uncertain and may not be successful.”
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
In order to fund our business and operations, we have relied primarily upon sales of our equity securities, including proceeds from the exercise of stock options and common stock purchase warrants and long-term loan financing. We also have received limited funding from our strategic partners and licensees. At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $10.0 million. Management believes that our current resources will be sufficient to fund our operations for the foreseeable future. This estimate is based, in part, upon our currently projected expenditures for 2021 and the first three months of 2022 of approximately $6.1 million (unaudited) to fund operating activities. These projected expenditures are also based upon numerous other assumptions and subject to many uncertainties, and actual expenditures may be significantly different from these projections. While these projections represent our current expected expenditures, we have the ability to reduce the amounts and alter the timing of research and development expenditures as needed to manage our liquidity needs while still advancing our research and development objectives. We will ultimately be required to obtain additional funding in order to execute our long-term business plans, although we do not currently have commitments from any third parties to provide us with long term debt or capital. We cannot assure that additional funding will be available on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to obtain additional funding when needed, we may not be able to execute our business plans and our business may suffer, which would have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
If ImmunityBio obtains marketing approval and successfully commercializes aldoxorubicin, we anticipate it will take two years, and possibly longer, for us to generate significant recurring revenue, and we will be dependent on future financing until such time, if ever, as we can generate significant recurring revenue. There are also no certainties that Orphazyme will be successful in obtaining FDA and EMA approval for arimoclomol or choose to commercialize arimoclomol. We have no commitments from third parties to provide us with any additional financing, and we may not be able to obtain future financing on favorable terms, or at all. Failure to obtain adequate financing would adversely affect our ability to operate as a going concern. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, dilution to stockholders may result and new investors could have rights superior to holders of the shares issued in this offering. In addition, debt financing, if available, may include restrictive covenants. If adequate funds are not available to us, we may have to liquidate some or all of our assets or to delay or reduce the scope of or eliminate some portion or all of our development programs or clinical trials.
Discussion of Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.7 million, and cash used for operating activities for that period was $6.1 million. The net loss reflects $0.3 million of stock option and warrant expense.
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $7.2 million, and cash used for operating activities for that period was $5.7 million. The net loss reflects $2.0 million of stock option and warrant expense.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, $25,900 was used for the purchase of equipment and furnishings.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we received $0.5 million from the sale of fixed assets held for sale, and $24,700 was used for the purchase of equipment and furnishings.
The Company received $39,000 from the exercise of stock options, which was the only financing activity for the year ended December 31, 2020.
There were no financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have a material current effect or that are reasonably likely to have a material future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
We acquire assets still in development and enter into research and development arrangements with third parties that often require milestone and royalty payments to the third-party contingent upon the occurrence of certain future events linked to the success of the asset in development. Milestone payments may be required, contingent upon the successful achievement of an important point in the development life-cycle of the pharmaceutical product (e.g., approval of the product for marketing by a regulatory agency). We also typically have to make royalty payments based upon a percentage of the sales of the pharmaceutical product in the event that regulatory approval for marketing is obtained. Because of the contingent nature of these payments, they are not included in the table of contractual obligations.
These arrangements may be material individually, and in the event that multiple milestones are reached in the same period, the aggregate charge to expense could be material to the results of operations in any one period. In addition, these arrangements often give us the discretion to unilaterally terminate development of the product, which would allow us to avoid making the contingent payments; however, we are unlikely to cease development if the compound successfully achieves clinical testing objectives.
Our current contractual obligations that will require future cash payments are as follows (in thousands):
(1) Operating leases are primarily our facility lease obligations, as well as equipment and software lease obligations with third party vendors.
(2) Employment agreements include management contracts that provide for minimum salary levels, adjusted periodically at the discretion of our Compensation Committee, as well as minimum bonuses and employee benefits, in some cases.
We apply the disclosure provisions of ASC 460, Guarantees (“ASC 460”), to our contractual guarantees and indemnities. We have provided contractual indemnities to other parties against possible losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified parties in connection with various types of third-party claims, as well as indemnities to our officers and directors against third party claims arising from the services they provide to us. To date, we have not incurred material costs as a result of these indemnities, and we do not expect to incur material costs in the future; further, we maintain insurance to cover certain losses arising from these indemnities. Accordingly, we have not accrued any liabilities related to these indemnities.
Results of Operations
We incurred a net loss of $6.7 million and $7.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
During 2020 and 2019, we recognized no service revenue and earned an immaterial amount of license fees and grant revenue. All future licensing fees under our current licensing agreements are dependent upon successful development milestones being achieved by our licensees
Due to the nature of research and development, our operating results may fluctuate from period to period, and the results of prior periods should not be relied upon as predictive of the results in future periods.
Research and Development from Continuing Operations
Research expenses are expenses incurred by us in the discovery of new information that will assist us in the creation and the development of new drugs or treatments. Development expenses are expenses incurred by us in our efforts to commercialize the findings generated through our research efforts.
Research and development expenses during 2020 totaled $800,000. Research and development expenses incurred during 2019 totaled $403,000 and related primarily to licensing fees.
General and Administrative from Continuing Operations
General and administrative expenses include all administrative salaries and general corporate expenses, including legal expenses associated with the prosecution of our intellectual property. Our general and administrative expenses, excluding common stock, stock options and warrants issued, were $5.7 million and $5.4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020, the general and administrative expenses increased marginally by just over 4%, due to an increase in professional fees and public company costs, offset by a decrease in salaries due to a reduction in headcount, and an additional reduction in overall general and administrative expenses.
From time to time, we issue shares of our common stock or warrants or options to purchase shares of our common stock to consultants and other service providers in exchange for services. For financial statement purposes, we value these shares of common stock, stock options, and warrants at the fair value of the common stock, stock options or warrants granted, or the services received whichever we can measure more reliably. In 2020, we had no such expense as compared to $0.1 million of such expenses in the 2019 year. We recorded employee stock option expense of $0.3 million and $2.0 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were approximately $29,000 and $21,000, respectively. The depreciation expense reflects the depreciation of our equipment and furnishings.
Interest Income
Interest income was $0.1 million in 2020 and $0.4 million in 2019. The variance between years is attributable primarily to the amount of funds available for investment each year and, to a lesser extent, changes in prevailing market interest rates.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Credit Losses - Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASC 326”). The standard significantly changes how entities will measure credit losses for most financial assets, including accounts and notes receivables. The standard will replace today’s “incurred loss” approach with an “expected loss” model, under which companies will recognize allowances based on expected rather than incurred losses. Entities will apply the standard’s provisions as a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the first reporting period in which the guidance is effective. The standard is effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019. The adoption of ASU 2016-13 is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
Other recent authoritative guidance issued by the FASB (including technical corrections to the ASC), the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) did not, or are not expected to, have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.