ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Safe Harbor Statement Under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995
Forward-Looking Statements
This document (including information incorporated by reference) contains, and future oral and written statements by us and our management may contain, forward-looking statements, within the meaning of such term in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, with respect to our financial condition, results of operations, plans, objectives, future performance and business. Forward-looking statements, which may be based upon beliefs, expectations and assumptions of our management and on information currently available to management, are generally identifiable by the use of words such as “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “plan,” “intend,” “estimate,” “may,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “should” or other similar expressions. Additionally, all statements in this document, including forward-looking statements, speak only as of the date they are made, and we undertake no obligation to update any statement in light of new information or future events.
Our ability to predict results or the actual effect of future plans or strategies is inherently uncertain. Factors which could have a material adverse effect on operations and future prospects by us and our subsidiaries include, but are not limited to, the following:
● The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including its potential effects on the economic environment, our customers and our operations as well as any changes to federal, state or local government laws, regulations or orders in connection with the pandemic.
● The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results, including possible lost revenue and increased expenses (including the cost of capital), as well as possible goodwill impairment charges.
● The strength of the United States economy in general and the strength of the local economies in which we conduct our operations, including the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on such economies, which may be less favorable than expected and may result in, among other things, a deterioration in the credit quality and value of our assets.
● The effects of, and changes in, federal, state and local laws, regulations and policies affecting banking, securities, consumer protection, insurance, tax, trade and monetary and financial matters.
● The effects of changes in interest rates (including the effects of changes in the rate of prepayments of our assets) and the policies of the Federal Reserve including on our net interest income and the value of our securities portfolio.
● Our ability to compete with other financial institutions due to increases in competitive pressures in the financial services sector.
● Our inability to obtain new customers and to retain existing customers.
● The timely development and acceptance of products and services.
● Technological changes implemented by us and by other parties, including third-party vendors, which may be more difficult to implement or more expensive than anticipated or which may have unforeseen consequences to us and our customers.
● Our ability to develop and maintain secure and reliable electronic systems.
● The effectiveness of our risk management framework.
● The occurrence of fraudulent activity, breaches or failures of our information security controls or cybersecurity-related incidents and our ability to identify and address such incidents.
● Interruptions involving our information technology and telecommunications systems or third-party servicers.
● Changes in and uncertainty related to the availability of benchmark interest rates used to price our loans and deposits, including the expected elimination of LIBOR and the development of a substitute.
● The effects of severe weather, natural disasters, widespread disease or pandemics, and other external events.
● Our ability to retain key executives and employees and the difficulty that we may experience in replacing key executives and employees in an effective manner.
● Consumer spending and saving habits which may change in a manner that affects our business adversely.
● Our ability to successfully integrate acquired businesses and future growth.
● The costs, effects and outcomes of existing or future litigation.
● Changes in accounting policies and practices, as may be adopted by state and federal regulatory agencies and the FASB, such as the implementation of CECL.
● The economic impact of past and any future terrorist attacks, acts of war or threats thereof, and the response of the United States to any such threats and attacks.
● Our ability to effectively manage our credit risk.
● Our ability to forecast probable loan losses and maintain an adequate allowance for loan losses.
● The effects of declines in the value of our investment portfolio.
● Our ability to raise additional capital if needed.
● The effects of declines in real estate markets.
● The effects of fraudulent activity on the part of our employees, customers, vendors, or counterparties.
These risks and uncertainties should be considered in evaluating forward-looking statements, and undue reliance should not be placed on such statements. Additional information concerning us and our business, including other factors that could materially affect our financial results, is included in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
CORPORATE PROFILE AND OVERVIEW
Landmark Bancorp, Inc. is a financial holding company incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware and is engaged in the banking business through its wholly-owned subsidiary, Landmark National Bank and in the insurance business through its wholly-owned subsidiary, Landmark Risk Management, Inc. The Company is listed on the Nasdaq Global Market under the symbol “LARK.” The Bank is dedicated to providing quality financial and banking services to its local communities. Our strategy includes continuing a tradition of quality assets while growing our commercial, commercial real estate and agriculture loan portfolios. We are committed to developing relationships with our borrowers and providing a total banking service.
The Bank is principally engaged in the business of attracting deposits from the general public and using such deposits, together with borrowings and other funds, to originate one-to-four family residential real estate, construction and land, commercial real estate, commercial, agriculture, municipal and consumer loans. Although not our primary business function, we do invest in certain investment and mortgage-related securities using deposits and other borrowings as funding sources.
Our results of operations depend generally on net interest income, which is the difference between interest income from interest-earning assets and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest income is affected by regulatory, economic and competitive factors that influence interest rates, loan demand and deposit flows. In addition, we are subject to interest rate risk to the degree that our interest-earning assets mature or reprice at different times, or at different speeds, than our interest-bearing liabilities. Our results of operations are also affected by non-interest income, such as service charges, loan fees, gains from the sale of newly originated loans and gains or losses on investments, and certain other non-interest related items. Our principal operating expenses, aside from interest expense, consist of, among others, compensation and employee benefits, occupancy costs, professional fees, amortization of intangibles expense, federal deposit insurance costs, data processing expenses and provision for loan losses.
We are significantly impacted by prevailing economic conditions including federal monetary and fiscal policies and federal regulations of financial institutions. The Bank’s markets have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which has had and continues to have a complex and significant impact on the economy. Deposit balances are influenced by numerous factors such as competing investments, the level of income and the personal rate of savings within our market areas. Factors influencing lending activities include the demand for housing and the interest rate pricing competition from other lending institutions.
Currently, our business consists of ownership of the Bank, with its main office in Manhattan, Kansas and twenty-nine additional branch offices in central, eastern, southeast and southwest Kansas, and our ownership of Landmark Risk Management, Inc. Landmark Risk Management, Inc. is a Nevada-based captive insurance company.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Critical accounting policies are those that are both most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations, and require our management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Our critical accounting policies relate to the allowance for loan losses, the valuation of investment securities, accounting for goodwill and the accounting for income taxes, all of which involve significant judgment by our management.
We perform periodic and systematic detailed reviews of our lending portfolio to assess overall collectability. The level of the allowance for loan losses reflects our estimate of the collectability of the loan portfolio. While these estimates are based on substantive methods for determining allowance requirements, actual outcomes may differ significantly from estimated results. Additional explanation of the methodologies used in establishing this allowance is provided in the “Asset Quality and Distribution” section.
The Company has classified its investment securities portfolio as available-for-sale. Available-for-sale securities are recorded at fair value with unrealized gains and losses excluded from earnings and reported as a separate component of stockholders’ equity, net of taxes. The Company obtains market values from a third party on a monthly basis in order to adjust the securities to fair value. The Company performs quarterly reviews of the investment portfolio to evaluate investment for other-than-temporary impairment. The Company’s assessment of other-than-temporary impairment is based on its judgment of the specific facts and circumstances impacting each individual security at the time such assessments are made. The Company reviews and considers all factual information, including expected cash flows, the structure of the security, the credit quality of the underlying assets and the current and anticipated market conditions. Any credit-related impairment on debt securities is recorded through a charge to earnings. Impairment related to other factors is recognized in other comprehensive income. However, if the Company intends to sell or it is more likely than not that it will be required to sell a security in an unrealized loss position before recovery of its amortized costs basis, the entire impairment is recorded through a charge to earnings.
We have completed several business and asset acquisitions since 2002, which have generated significant amounts of goodwill. The initial value assigned to goodwill is the residual of the purchase price over the fair value of all identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized; however, it is tested for impairment at each calendar year end or more frequently when events or circumstances dictate. The impairment test compares the carrying value of goodwill to an implied fair value of the goodwill, which is based on a review of the Company’s market capitalization adjusted for appropriate control premiums as well as an analysis of valuation multiples of recent, comparable acquisitions. The Company considers the result from each of these valuation methods to determine the implied fair value of its goodwill. A goodwill impairment would be recorded for the amount that the carrying value exceeds the implied fair value. The Company performed a step one impairment test as of December 31, 2020 by comparing the implied fair value of the Company’s single reporting unit to its carrying value. Fair value was determined using observable market data, including the Company’s market capitalization, with control premiums and valuation multiples, compared to recent financial industry acquisition multiples for similar institutions to estimate the fair value of the Company’s single reporting unit. The Company’s step one impairment test indicated that its goodwill was not impaired. The Company can make no assurances that future impairment tests will not result in goodwill impairments.
The objective of accounting for income taxes is to recognize the taxes payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in an entity’s financial statements or tax returns. Judgment is required in assessing the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in financial statements or tax returns. The Company recognizes an income tax position only if it is more likely than not that it will be sustained upon examination by the Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”), based upon its technical merits. Once that standard is met, the amount recorded will be the largest amount of benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The Company recognizes interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as a component of income tax expense in our consolidated statements of earnings. The Company assesses its deferred tax assets to determine if the items are more likely than not to be realized and a valuation allowance is established for any amounts that are not more likely than not to be realized. Changes in estimates regarding the actual outcome of these future tax consequences, including the effects of IRS examinations and examinations by other state agencies, could materially impact our financial position and results of operations.
IMPACT OF COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic in the United States has had and continues to have a complex and significant adverse impact on the economy, the banking industry and the Company, all subject to a high degree of uncertainty for future periods.
Effects on Our Market Areas. Our commercial and consumer banking products and services are offered primarily in Kansas, where individual and governmental responses to the COVID-19 pandemic led to a broad curtailment of economic activity beginning in March 2020, as a result of a stay-at-home order, which was lifted on May 3, 2020, with economic and social gatherings reopening in a phased-in approach since then. The re-opening of the economy in Kansas has resulted in increased cases of COVID-19, and additional restrictions have been put in place to slow the spread. These measures have had an impact on the economy of and customers located in Kansas. The Bank and its branches have remained open during these orders because banks have been deemed essential businesses. The Bank is currently serving its customers through its digital banking platforms and drive-thru services, with most branch lobbies re-opened to customers. Based on the current environment, it is unclear if the State of Kansas will tighten or relax its stay-at-home and social distancing policies going forward. The Bank will continue to monitor the situation to protect the safety and well-being of our customers and associates.
Across the United States, as a result of stay-at-home orders and other continuing restrictions, many states have experienced a dramatic increase in unemployment levels as a result of the curtailment of business activities. The unemployment rate in Kansas was 4.7% in December 2020, which is an increase from 3.1% in December 2019. The unemployment rate peaked at 12.6% in April 2020 as a result of economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Policy and Regulatory Developments. Federal, state and local governments and regulatory authorities have enacted and issued a range of policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the following:
● The Federal Reserve decreased the range for the federal funds target rate by 0.5% on March 3, 2020, and by another 1.0% on March 16, 2020, reaching a current range of 0.0 - 0.25%.
● On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed the CARES Act, which established a $2.0 trillion economic stimulus package, including cash payments to individuals, supplemental unemployment insurance benefits and a $349 billion loan program administered through the SBA, referred to as the PPP. The Bank participates as a lender in the PPP. After the initial $349 billion in funds for the PPP was exhausted, an additional $310 billion in funding for PPP loans was authorized. In addition, on December 27, 2020, President Trump signed the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, a $900.0 billion COVID-19 relief package that includes an additional $284.5 billion in PPP funding, and on March 11, 2021, President Biden signed into law an additional $1.9 trillion Federal stimulus bill in response to COVID-19.
● The CARES Act, as extended by the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act (a part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021), also provides financial institutions the option to temporarily suspend certain requirements under GAAP related to TDRs for a limited period of time to account for the effects of COVID-19. In addition, on April 7, 2020, federal banking regulators issued a revised Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions, which, among other things, encouraged financial institutions to work prudently with borrowers who are or may be unable to meet their contractual payment obligations because of the effects of COVID-19, and stated that institutions generally do not need to categorize COVID-19-related modifications as TDRs and that the agencies will not direct supervised institutions to automatically categorize all COVID-19 related loan modifications as TDRs.
Effects on Our Business. The COVID-19 pandemic and the specific developments referred to above have had, and are expected to continue to have, a significant impact on our business. In particular, we anticipate that a significant portion of the Bank’s borrowers in the retail, restaurant, hospitality and agriculture industries will continue to endure significant economic distress, which may cause them to draw on their existing lines of credit and adversely affect their ability to repay existing indebtedness, and the COVID-19 pandemic is expected to adversely impact the value of collateral. These developments, together with economic conditions generally, are also expected to impact our commercial real estate portfolio, particularly with respect to real estate with exposure to these industries, our one-to-four family residential real estate loan business and loan portfolio, and the value of certain collateral securing our loans. As a result, we anticipate that our financial condition, capital levels and results of operations will be significantly adversely affected, as described in further detail below.
Our Response. We have taken numerous steps in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the following:
● We established a pandemic response team, which has been meeting as needed since mid-March to address changes resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. We have a significant portion of our associates working from home, and for those that remain in our bank facilities, we have enhanced safety precautions in place for their safety. We have repositioned associates to support our customer care call center to handle increased volumes of customer requests and to support our customers’ access to our digital banking platforms.
● As a preferred lender with the SBA, we were able and prepared to immediately respond to help existing and new clients access the PPP authorized by the CARES Act. As of September 30, 2020, we funded 1,095 PPP loans totaling approximately $131.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $100.1 million of PPP loans outstanding. We are actively working with the PPP loan borrowers through the SBA’s forgiveness process. In addition, we are a participating lender in the second round of PPP lending. From January 1, 2021 through March 10, 2021, we funded an additional 613 PPP loans totaling approximately $43.4 million.
● As of December 31, 2020, we entered into short-term forbearance plans and short-term repayment plans on 3 one-to-four family residential mortgage loans totaling $366,000. We continue to work with our customers by offering loan forbearance and modifications to those impacted by COVID-19.
● As of December 31, 2020, we had 6 loan modifications on outstanding loan balances of $7.2 million in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic that had not yet returned to contractual terms. These modifications consisted of payment deferrals that were applied to either the full loan payment or just the principal component.
● With the safety and well-being of our customers and associates foremost in mind, we initially limited access to our bank lobbies while keeping our drive-thru lanes open and encouraging our customers to use our online and mobile banking applications or call our customer care call center. Currently our bank lobbies are open to customers, but we continue to evaluate this option as the number of COVID-19 cases fluctuate in our communities.
We currently have no plans to change our dividend strategy given our current capital and liquidity positions. However, while we have achieved a strong capital base and expect to continue operating profitably, this is dependent upon the projected length and depth of any economic recession and effects on our operations, profitability and capital positions in future periods, which we continue to monitor closely. In addition, we will not be permitted to make capital distributions (including for dividends and repurchases of stock) or pay discretionary bonuses to executive officers without restriction if we do not maintain 2.5% in Common Equity Tier 1 Capital attributable to a capital conservation buffer.
COMPARISON OF OPERATING RESULTS FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 AND DECEMBER 31, 2019
SUMMARY OF PERFORMANCE. Net earnings for 2020 increased $8.8 million, or 82.8%, to $19.5 million as compared to $10.7 million for 2019. The increase in net earnings was primarily driven by an $8.8 million increase in gains on sales of loans as low mortgage rates fueled a robust housing market and refinancing activity.
Net interest income for 2020 increased $6.1 million to $36.5 million, or 20.2% higher than the $30.4 million recorded for 2019. Our net interest margin, on a tax equivalent basis, increased from 3.48% during 2019 to 3.72% in 2020. The increase in net interest margin was primarily a result of lower interest expense and the growth in loans within the asset mix. The increase in average loan balances included an average balance of $88.5 million in PPP loans, which generated interest income of $3.0 million in 2020.
We distributed a 5% stock dividend for the 20th consecutive year in December 2020. All per share and average share data in this section reflect the 2020 and 2019 stock dividends.
Interest Income. Interest income for 2020 increased $2.1 million to $39.3 million, an increase of 5.8% as compared to 2019. Interest income on loans increased $4.1 million, or 14.9%, to $31.8 million for 2020 as compared to $27.7 million in 2019, due primarily to the increase in our average loan balances from $518.0 million during 2019 to $668.3 million during 2020. Our average loan balances benefited from the origination of PPP loans in 2020. While the maturities of PPP loans are two or five years, we anticipate a significant amount will be forgiven during 2021, which will increase the yield on loans and reduce average loan balances. Partially offsetting the higher average balances were lower yields on loans, which decreased from 5.35% in 2019 to 4.76% in 2020. The Federal Reserve decreased the target federal funds interest rate by 25 basis points in each of August, September and October of 2019. In addition, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Reserve decreased the target federal funds interest rate by a total of 150 basis points in March 2020. These decreases impacted yields on loans between 2019 and 2020. In addition, the yield on PPP loans is lower than our typical commercial loans, resulting in a lower average yield on loans in 2020. We anticipate that our yield on loans will be adversely affected in future periods as a result originating PPP loans, to the extent the loans are not forgiven and remain on our books, and the impact of loans repricing lower in the current rate environment. Interest income on investment securities decreased $2.0 million, or 21.0%, to $7.5 million during 2020, as compared to $9.4 million in 2019. The decrease in interest income on investment securities was the result of lower average balances, which decreased from $381.8 million in 2019 to $320.7 million in 2020, and lower rates, which decreased from 2.70% in 2019 to 2.58% in 2020.
Interest Expense. Interest expense during 2020 decreased $4.0 million, or 59.0%, to $2.8 million as compared to 2019. Interest expense on interest-bearing deposits decreased $3.2 million, or 60.6%, to $2.1 million for 2020 as compared to $5.3 million in 2019. Our total cost of interest-bearing deposits decreased from 0.83% during 2019 to 0.31% during 2020 as a result of lower rates paid on money market and checking accounts that have rates that reprice based on market indexes and lower rates on our certificates of deposit. Our decline in deposit rates during 2020 reflected the decreased federal funds interest rate and other market interest rates. As these rates are now near zero, we do not expect significant reductions in our cost of deposits in future periods. Partially offsetting the lower interest rates was an increase in average interest-bearing deposit balances, which increased from $646.8 million in 2019 to $673.2 million in 2020. Interest expense on borrowings decreased $752,000, or 53.1%, to $664,000 during 2020 as compared to $1.4 million in 2019. Contributing to lower interest expense on borrowings were lower average outstanding borrowings, which decreased from $51.3 million in 2019 to $38.8 million during 2020, as well as lower rates paid on borrowings, which decreased from 2.76% in 2019 to 1.71% in 2020.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income represents the difference between income derived from interest-earning assets and the expense incurred on interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest income is affected by both the difference between the rates of interest earned on interest-earnings assets and the rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities (“interest rate spread”) as well as the relative amounts of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we originated approximately $131.0 million of PPP loans during 2020. These loans have an interest rate of 1.00% plus the amortization of the origination fee, which resulted in a yield of 3.40% on PPP loans in 2020. The maturity date of these loans is two or five years unless the borrower’s loan is forgiven, in which case the loan would be repaid sooner. While the cost of our funds is lower than the yield on these loans, the interest rate spread is lower than we generally have received on other loans. As a result of the origination of PPP loans and our participation in the second round of PPP funding in 2021, to the extent PPP loans we originate are not forgiven, our net interest income may increase in future periods, but our net interest margin may be negatively affected by the lower interest rates on PPP loans. The balance of PPP loans was $100.1 million at December 31, 2020, after a portion of the loans had been forgiven. The average balance of PPP loans during 2020 was $88.5 million which generated interest income of $3.0 million. There were $2.0 million of origination fees remaining to be accreted into income at December 31, 2020. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has slowed our origination of new loans, which may lead to lower net interest income and net interest margin in future periods as a result of lower loan volumes. The decline in market interest rates will adversely impact our net interest income and net interest margin as a result of lower yields on loans and investment securities exceeding the benefit of a lower cost of funds.
During 2020, net interest income increased $6.1 million, or 20.2%, to $36.5 million compared to $30.4 million in 2019. Our net interest margin, on a tax-equivalent basis, increased to 3.72% during 2020 from 3.48% during 2019. The increase in net interest income was primarily due to a 11.7% increase in our average interest-earning assets from $900.5 million in 2019 to $1.0 billion in 2020 and also due to decreases in deposit rates that caused deposit expense to decline. We may not be able to continue to increase our net interest margin if our loan growth slows or the yields on our interest-earning assets decline faster than our cost of interest-bearing liabilities.
Provision for Loan Losses. We maintain, and our Board of Directors monitors, an allowance for losses on loans. The allowance is established based upon management’s periodic evaluation of known and inherent risks in the loan portfolio, review of significant individual loans and collateral, review of delinquent loans, past loss experience, adverse situations that may affect the borrowers’ ability to repay, current and expected market conditions, and other factors management deems important. Determining the appropriate level of reserves involves a high degree of management judgment and is based upon historical and projected losses in the loan portfolio and the collateral value or discounted cash flows of specifically identified impaired loans. Additionally, allowance policies are subject to periodic review and revision in response to a number of factors, including current market conditions, actual loss experience and management’s expectations.
During 2020, we recorded a provision for loan losses of $3.3 million compared to $1.4 million in 2019. We recorded net loan charge-offs of $992,000 during 2020 compared to net loan charge-offs of $698,000 during 2019. The increase in the provision for loan losses reflected loan growth and uncertainty in the economic environment considering the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. As the economic outlook evolves and our pandemic-related loss experience develops, Landmark will adjust the allowance for loan losses and provisioning will be adjusted accordingly.
Non-interest Income. Total non-interest income was $27.4 million in 2020, an increase of $11.5 million, or 73.1%, compared to 2019. The increase in non-interest income was primarily the result of increases of $8.8 million in gains on sales of loans, and $354,000 in fees and service charges. Also contributing to the increase in non-interest income was $2.4 million in gains on sales of investment securities due to approximately $61 million of mortgage-backed investment securities sold during 2020. A loss of $177,000 was recorded on sales of investment securities during 2019. Partially offsetting the increases in non-interest income was a decrease of $141,000 in bank owned life insurance income. The increase in gains on sales of loans was driven by higher volumes of one-to-four family residential real estate loans originated, due to the decline in mortgage interest rates that have fueled a robust housing market and refinancing activity. The higher fees and service charges were primarily due to higher fee income on deposit accounts. The decrease in bank owned life insurance income was due to a death claim payment received in 2019.
Non-interest Expense. Non-interest expense increased $3.6 million, or 11.1%, to $36.3 million in 2020 compared to $32.6 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $2.9 million, or 16.1%, in compensation and benefits as a result of increases in mortgage lending incentives and as well as general increases in compensation. Also contributing to higher non-interest expense were increases of $396,000 in amortization of intangibles due to the accelerated prepayments on mortgage servicing rights and $185,000 in data processing due to the increase in the number of accounts and products that are offered. Our federal deposit insurance premiums increased $162,000 as a result of utilizing the FDIC assessment credits in 2019 and the first quarter of 2020. Partially offsetting those increases in non-interest expense was a decrease of $99,000 in professional fees due to a decrease in costs associated with an external audit of our internal controls over financial reporting which is no longer required as we no longer qualify as an accelerated filer by the rules of the SEC.
INCOME TAXES. During 2020, we recorded income tax expense of $4.8 million compared to income tax expense of $1.5 million in 2019. The effective tax rate increased from 12.0% in 2019 to 19.7% in 2020, primarily due to an increase in earnings before income taxes, while tax-exempt income declined over the comparable periods. In addition, income tax expense included the recognition of $229,000 and $558,000 in 2020 and 2019, respectively, of previously unrecognized tax benefits, reducing the effective tax rate in both periods.
COMPARISON OF OPERATING RESULTS FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019 AND DECEMBER 31, 2018
For a discussion of the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to Item 7 of the Company’s 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on March 12, 2020, which is incorporated herein by reference.
QUARTERLY RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(1) All per share amounts have been adjusted to give effect to the 5% stock dividends paid during December 2020 and 2019.
FINANCIAL CONDITION. Economic conditions in the United States deteriorated during 2020 as the impact of COVID-19 caused portions of the economy to shut down or be subject to operating restrictions. On March 28, 2020, a stay at home order was issued for the entire state of Kansas, which expanded previously issued local orders. This stay at home order was lifted on May 3, 2020 with a phased approach to reopening the Kansas economy, but the effects of the stay at home order and reopening restrictions continue to have an effect on the economies in our market areas. As the economy has reopened, the State of Kansas has experienced an increase in the number of COVID-19 cases. The State of Kansas and the geographic markets in which the Company operates have been significantly impacted by this pandemic. The Company’s allowance for loan losses included estimates of the economic impact of COVID-19 on our loan portfolio. COVID-19 will likely continue to cause an increase in our delinquent and non-accrual loans as the economic slowdown impacts our customers. However, our loan portfolio is diversified across various types of loans and collateral throughout the markets in which we operate. Aside from a few problem loans that management is working to resolve, our asset quality has remained strong over the past few years. While we anticipate further increases in problem assets as a result of COVID-19, management believes its efforts to run a high quality financial institution with a sound asset base will continue to create a strong foundation for continued growth and profitability in the future.
Asset Quality and Distribution. Our primary investing activities are the origination of one-to-four family residential real estate, construction and land, commercial real estate, commercial, agriculture, municipal and consumer loans and the purchase of investment securities. Total assets increased $189.6 million, or 19.0%, to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $998.5 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in our total assets was primarily the result of a $170.6 million, or 32.1%, increase in net loans, excluding loans held for sale, which increased to $702.8 million at December 31, 2020 from $532.2 million at December 31, 2019. Our loan growth in 2020 was primarily due to the origination of PPP loans which totaled $100.1 million at December 31, 2020. Investment securities available-for-sale decreased $65.7 million from $363.0 million at December 31, 2019 to $297.3 million at December 31, 2020.
The allowance for loan losses is established through a provision for loan losses based on our evaluation of the risk inherent in the loan portfolio and changes in the nature and volume of our loan activity. This evaluation, which includes a review of all loans with respect to which full collectability may not be reasonably assured, considers the fair value of the underlying collateral, economic conditions, historical loan loss experience, level of classified loans and other factors that warrant recognition in providing for an appropriate allowance for loan losses. If the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors cause economic declines in excess of our estimations, or if the pandemic lasts longer than currently projected, our provision for loan losses may remain elevated or increase in future period. We will continue to monitor our allowance for loan losses in light of changing economic conditions related to COVID-19. At December 31, 2020, our allowance for loan losses totaled $8.8 million, or 1.23% of gross loans outstanding, as compared to $6.5 million, or 1.20% of gross loans outstanding, at December 31, 2019. The allowance for loan losses to gross loans outstanding was impacted by the $100.1 million of PPP loans which are guaranteed by the SBA and have no allowance allocated as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, approximately $25.2 million and $18.1 million, respectively, of loans were considered classified and assigned a risk rating of special mention, substandard or doubtful. The increase in classified loans was primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 and weakness in the agriculture industry, which deteriorated further due to the pandemic. COVID-19 has also impacted our commercial and commercial real estate portfolios, with borrowers in the restaurant, accommodations and hotel industries experiencing the largest declines in revenues. These ratings indicate that the loans identified as potential problem loans have more than normal risk which raised doubts as to the ability of the borrower to comply with present loan repayment terms. Even though these borrowers were experiencing moderate cash flow problems as well as some deterioration in collateral value, management believed the general allowance was sufficient to cover the risks and probable incurred losses related to such loans at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Loans past due 30-89 days and still accruing interest totaled $1.5 million, or 0.22% of gross loans, at December 31, 2020, compared to $3.4 million, or 0.64% of gross loans, at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, $10.5 million of loans were on non-accrual status, or 1.47% of gross loans, compared to $5.5 million, or 1.03% of gross loans, at December 31, 2019. The increase in non-performing loans primarily related to two commercial real estate loan relationships totaling $5.5 million. Non-accrual loans consist of loans 90 or more days past due and certain impaired loans. There were no loans 90 days delinquent and accruing interest at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Our impaired loans totaled $12.5 million December 31, 2020 compared to $8.7 million at December 31, 2019. The difference in the Company’s non-accrual loan balances and impaired loan balances at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was related to TDRs that were accruing interest but still classified as impaired.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had nine loan relationships consisting of 21 outstanding loans totaling $3.9 million that were classified as TDRs compared to nine relationships consisting of thirteen outstanding loans totaling $3.6 million that were classified as TDRs at December 31, 2019.
During 2020, the Company modified the payment terms on an agriculture loan totaling $156,000 and classified the restructuring as a TDR. The loans relating to a $1.6 million loan relationship, consisting of two one-to-our family loans, one construction and land loan, two commercial real estate loans and one commercial loan, were classified as TDRs during 2020 after negotiating restructuring agreements with the borrowers. The restructuring included a charge-off of $50,000. The loans relating to one commercial loan relationship, with five loans totaling $742,000, were classified as TDRs during 2020, after the payments were modified to interest only. All of the loans classified as TDRs were experiencing financial difficulties prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. An agriculture loan, commercial real estate loan and a one-to-four family residential real estate loan previously classified as TDRs in 2017, 2015 and 2016, respectively, paid off during 2020.
The Company did not classify any loans as TDRs during 2019. A commercial real estate loan previously classified as a TDR in 2014 paid off during 2019.
During 2018, the Company classified an agriculture loan totaling $64,000 as a TDR after originating a loan to an existing loan relationship that was classified as a TDR in 2016. As part of the restructuring, the borrower paid off three loans previously classified as TDRs. Since the agriculture loan relationship was adequately secured, no impairments were recorded against the principal as of December 31, 2020. The Company also classified a $36,000 commercial loan as a TDR after extending the maturity of the loan during 2018. The commercial loan had a $8,000 impairment recorded against the principal balance as of December 31, 2020. An agriculture loan relationship consisting of two loans that were originally classified as TDRs during 2015 and a municipal loan that was classified as a TDR in 2010 were both paid off in 2018.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had 6 loan modifications on outstanding loan balances of $7.2 million in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic that had not yet returned to contractual terms that, per regulatory guidance, are not deemed to be TDRs. These modifications consisted of payment deferrals that were applied to either the full loan payment or just the principal component. One commercial real estate loan totaling $3.7 million that was modified was also on non-accrual status as of December 31, 2020. Consistent with the CARES Act and Joint Interagency Regulatory Guidance, the Company also entered into short-term forbearance plans and short-term repayment plans on three one-to-four family residential mortgage loans totaling $366,000 as of December 31, 2020, which were not classified as TDRs.
As part of our credit risk management, we continue to manage the loan portfolio to identify problem loans and have placed additional emphasis on commercial real estate and construction and land relationships. We are working to resolve the remaining problem credits or move the non-performing credits out of the loan portfolio. At December 31, 2020, we had $1.8 million of real estate owned compared to $290,000 at December 31, 2019. The increase in real estate owned as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 was primarily due to obtaining the collateral securing non-performing commercial real estate and one-to-four family residential real estate loans. As of December 31, 2020, real estate owned consisted of commercial buildings, undeveloped land and residential real estate. The Company is currently marketing all of the remaining properties in real estate owned.
Liability Distribution. Our primary ongoing sources of funds are deposits, FHLB borrowings, proceeds from principal and interest payments on loans and investment securities and proceeds from the sale of mortgage loans and investment securities. While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans are a predictable source of funds, deposit flows and mortgage prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates and economic conditions. We experienced an increase of $181.0 million, or 21.7% in total deposits during 2020, to $1.0 billion at December 31, 2020, from $835.0 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in deposits was primarily due to deposit growth in all categories of deposits with the exception of time deposits. The increase in deposits was related to PPP loan proceeds, government stimulus payments and customers increasing their liquidity positions. Additionally, checking account balances increased as a result of customers migrating from repurchase agreements to checking account products providing FDIC insurance coverage on higher balances. The decrease in time deposits was associated with the lower public funds balances.
Total borrowings decreased $14.2 million, or 33.6%, to $28.0 million at December 31, 2020, from $42.2 million at December 31, 2019. The decline in borrowings was the result of a $3.0 million decrease in our FHLB line of credit borrowings from $3.0 million at December 31, 2019 to no FHLB borrowings at December 31, 2020 and lower repurchase agreement balance as customers have migrated to other deposit accounts.
Non-interest-bearing deposits at December 31, 2020, were $264.9 million, or 26.1% of deposits, compared to $182.7 million, or 21.9% of deposits, at December 31, 2019. Money market and checking accounts were 48.3% of our deposit portfolio and totaled $491.3 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $405.7 million, or 48.6% of deposits, at December 31, 2019. Savings accounts increased to $126.1 million, or 12.4% of deposits, at December 31, 2020, from $99.5 million, or 11.9% of deposits, at December 31, 2019. Certificates of deposit totaled $133.7 million, or 13.2% of deposits, at December 31, 2020, compared to $147.1 million, or 17.6% of deposits, at December 31, 2019. Competition for deposits may affect our ability to continue to increase deposit balances and could result in a decrease in our deposit balances in future periods.
Certificates of deposit at December 31, 2020, scheduled to mature in one year or less totaled $112.3 million. Historically, maturing deposits have generally remained with the Bank, and we believe that a significant portion of the deposits maturing in one year or less will remain with us upon maturity in some type of deposit account.
CASH FLOWS. During 2020, our cash and cash equivalents increased by $71.1 million. Our operating activities provided net cash of $14.8 million in 2020, which is primarily the result of net earnings and sales of one-to-four family residential mortgage loans. Our investing activities used net cash of $104.6 million during 2020, primarily as a result of increases in loans. Our financing activities provided net cash of $160.9 million during 2020, primarily as a result of an increase in deposits.
Liquidity. Our most liquid assets are cash and cash equivalents and investment securities available-for-sale. The levels of these assets are dependent on the operating, financing, lending and investing activities during any given year. These liquid assets totaled $382.1 million at December 31, 2020 and $376.7 million at December 31, 2019. During periods in which we are not able to originate a sufficient amount of loans and/or periods of high principal prepayments, we generally increase our liquid assets by investing in short-term, high-grade investments.
Liquidity management is both a daily and long-term function of our strategy. Excess funds are generally invested in short-term investments. Excess funds are typically generated as a result of increased deposit balances, while uses of excess funds are generally deposit withdrawals and loan advances. In the event we require funds beyond our ability to generate them internally, additional funds are generally available through the use of brokered deposits, FHLB advances, a line of credit with the FHLB, other borrowings or through sales of investment securities. At December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding balance against our line of credit with the FHLB. At December 31, 2020, we had collateral pledged to the FHLB that would allow us to borrow $56.4 million, subject to FHLB credit requirements and policies. At December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings through the Federal Reserve discount window, while our borrowing capacity with the Federal Reserve was $103.8 million. We also have various other federal funds agreements, both secured and unsecured, with correspondent banks totaling approximately $30.0 million in available credit under which we had no outstanding borrowings at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020, we had subordinated debentures totaling $21.7 million and other borrowings of $6.4 million, which consisted of repurchase agreements. At December 31, 2020, the Company had no borrowings against a $7.5 million line of credit from an unrelated financial institution that matures on November 1, 2021, with an interest rate that adjusts daily based on the prime rate less 0.25%. This line of credit has covenants specific to capital and other financial ratios, which the Company was in compliance with at December 31, 2020. The Company is eligible to pledge PPP loans to the Federal Reserve’s Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility for additional liquidity, but the Company has not utilized this facility to date.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS. As a provider of financial services, we routinely issue financial guarantees in the form of financial and performance standby letters of credit. Standby letters of credit are contingent commitments issued by us generally to guarantee the payment or performance obligation of a customer to a third party. While these standby letters of credit represent a potential outlay by us, a significant amount of the commitments may expire without being drawn upon. We have recourse against the customer for any amount the customer is required to pay to a third party under a standby letter of credit. The letters of credit are subject to the same credit policies, underwriting standards and approval process as loans made by us. Most of the standby letters of credit are secured, and in the event of nonperformance by the customers, we have the right to the underlying collateral, which could include commercial real estate, physical plant and property, inventory, receivables, cash and marketable securities. The contract amount of these standby letters of credit, which represents the maximum potential future payments guaranteed by us, was $2.2 million at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, we had outstanding loan commitments, excluding standby letters of credit, of $145.1 million. We anticipate that sufficient funds will be available to meet current loan commitments. These commitments consist of unfunded lines of credit and commitments to finance real estate loans.
CAPITAL. Current regulatory capital regulations require financial institutions (including banks and bank holding companies) to meet certain regulatory capital requirements. The Company and the Bank are subject to the Basel III Rule that implemented the Basel III regulatory capital reforms from the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and certain changes required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The Basel III Rule is applicable to all U.S. banks that are subject to minimum capital requirements, as well as to bank and savings and loan holding companies other than “small bank holding companies” (generally, non-public bank holding companies with consolidated assets of less than $3.0 billion).
The Basel III Rule requires a common equity Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets minimum ratio of 4.5%, a Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets minimum ratio of 6.0%, a Total Capital to risk-weighted assets minimum ratio of 8.0%, and a Tier 1 leverage minimum ratio of 4.0%. A capital conservation buffer, equal to 2.5% common equity Tier 1 capital, is also established above the regulatory minimum capital requirements (other than the Tier 1 leverage ratio). At December 31, 2020, the Bank maintained a leverage ratio of 10.47% and a total risk-based capital ratio of 17.50%. As shown by the following table, the Bank’s capital exceeded the minimum capital requirements in effect at December 31, 2020, including the capital conservation buffers.
(1) The minimum required percent includes a capital conservation buffer of 2.5%.
We believe the Company has adequate capital to withstand the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and any economic downturn on our asset quality and net earnings. The Company performs stress tests on the loan portfolio to measure the impact of severe economic recessions on its capital levels to help it monitor capital levels in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Banks and bank holding companies are generally expected to operate at or above the minimum capital requirements. The Company’s and the Bank’s ratios above are well in excess of regulatory minimums. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company and the Bank also exceeded the “well capitalized” thresholds, which is the highest rating available. There are no conditions or events that management believes have changed the Company’s and the Bank’s category as of the date of this report. We have $21.7 million in trust preferred securities which, in accordance with current capital guidelines, have been included in capital as of December 31, 2020. Cash distributions on the securities are payable quarterly, are deductible for income tax purposes and are included in interest expense in the consolidated financial statements.
DIVIDENDS
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid quarterly cash dividends of $0.19 per share to our stockholders, as adjusted to give effect to 5% stock dividend, which we distributed for the 20th consecutive year in December 2020. The 2019 quarterly cash dividends were $0.18 per share as adjusted to give effect to 5% stock dividends.
The payment of dividends by any financial institution or its holding company is affected by the requirement to maintain adequate capital pursuant to applicable capital adequacy guidelines and regulations. As described above, the Bank exceeded its minimum capital requirements under applicable guidelines as of December 31, 2020. The National Bank Act imposes limitations on the amount of dividends that a national bank may pay without prior regulatory approval. Generally, the amount is limited to the bank’s current year’s net earnings plus the adjusted retained earnings for the two preceding years. As of December 31, 2020, $19.9 million was available to be paid as dividends to the Company by the Bank without prior regulatory approval.
Additionally, our ability to pay dividends is limited by the subordinated debentures associated with the trust preferred securities that are held by three business trusts that we control. Interest payments on the debentures must be paid before we pay dividends on our capital stock, including our common stock. We have the right to defer interest payments on the debentures for up to 20 consecutive quarters. However, if we elect to defer interest payments, all deferred interest must be paid before we may pay dividends on our capital stock.
EFFECTS OF INFLATION
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying footnotes have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), which generally require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without consideration for changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The impact of inflation can be found in the increased cost of our operations because our assets and liabilities are primarily monetary, and interest rates have a greater impact on our performance than do the effects of inflation.