ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes, each included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those anticipated in or implied by these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A and elsewhere in this Annual Report. See “Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report.
Overview
nLIGHT, Inc., is a leading provider of high-power semiconductor and fiber lasers for industrial, microfabrication, and aerospace and defense applications. Headquartered in Vancouver, Washington, we design, develop and manufacture the critical elements of our lasers, and believe our vertically integrated business model enables us to rapidly introduce innovative products, control our costs and protect our intellectual property.
In November 2019, we acquired Nutronics, Inc. (Nutronics), based in Longmont, Colorado, a leading developer of coherently combined lasers and beam control systems (BCS) for high-energy laser (HEL) systems serving the defense market. Since the
acquisition of Nutronics, we have operated in two reportable segments consisting of the Laser Products segment and the Advanced Development segment. Our primary end markets have not changed since the acquisition. Sales of our semiconductor lasers, fiber lasers and directed energy products are included in the Laser Products segment, while revenue earned from research and development contracts are included in the Advanced Development segment. The consolidated financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020 include the full year results of Nutronics, and therefore may not be directly comparable to the corresponding period of 2019, which does not include the full year results of Nutronics. See Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Revenues increased to $222.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $176.6 million in the same period of 2019 as a result of higher revenue from the Aerospace and Defense market, including Nutronics, offset partially by lower revenues from the Microfabrication market. We generated a net loss of $20.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a net loss of $12.9 million for the same period of 2019. The higher net loss in 2020 was driven by an increase in stock-based compensation and amortization of intangible assets from the Nutronics acquisition.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a pandemic. COVID-19 continues to spread throughout the United States and the world, including in geographies in which we and our customers operate. Our first priority is the health and safety of our employees and our communities. As of the date of this report, all our U.S. operating locations have been deemed essential and all of our global manufacturing facilities are fully operational. Our Shanghai manufacturing facility was closed for an additional week following the Chinese New Year in 2020, due to COVID-19, but has since remained open. All of our facilities have implemented a variety of policies and procedures, including additional cleaning, social distancing, wearing masks, staggered shifts and prohibiting or significantly restricting on-site visitors, to minimize the risk to our employees.
The impact from the rapidly changing U.S. and global market and economic conditions due to the COVID-19 pandemic is uncertain, with disruptions to the business of our customers and suppliers, which may materially adversely impact our business, operations, demand for our products and coincidentally our consolidated results of operations and financial condition in the future. In response to the global pandemic, some of our non-manufacturing personnel outside of China have been primarily working from home since March 2020. While we have not incurred significant disruptions to our manufacturing or to our supply chain thus far from the COVID-19 pandemic, we may experience decreased demand from certain customers. We are unable to accurately predict the impact COVID-19 will have due to numerous uncertainties, including the severity of the disease, the duration of the pandemic, potential resurgence of outbreaks in locations where outbreaks have previously been contained, actions that may be taken by governmental authorities, the impact to our customers’ and suppliers’ businesses and other factors identified in the “Risk Factors” section of this report. We are continuing to evaluate closely the nature and extent of the impact to our business, consolidated results of operations, and financial condition.
Demand for our Semiconductor and Fiber Laser Solutions
In order to continue to grow our revenues, we must continue to achieve design wins for our semiconductor and fiber lasers. We consider a design win to occur when a customer notifies us that it has selected one of our products to be incorporated into a product or system under development by such customer. For the foreseeable future, our operations will continue to depend upon capital expenditures by customers in the Industrial and Microfabrication markets, which, in turn, depend upon the demand for these customers’ products or services. In addition, in the Aerospace and Defense market, our business depends in large part on continued investment in laser technology by the U.S. government and its allies, and our ability to continue to successfully develop leading technology in this area and commercialize that technology in the future.
Erosion of average selling prices, or ASPs, of established products is typical in our industry, and the ASPs of our products generally decrease as our products mature. We may also negotiate discounted selling prices from time to time with certain customers that purchase higher volumes, or to penetrate new markets or applications. Historically, we have been able to offset decreasing ASPs by introducing new and higher value products, increasing the sales of our existing products, expanding into new applications and reducing our manufacturing costs. Although we anticipate further increases in product volumes and the continued introduction of new and higher value products, ASP reduction may cause our revenues to decline or grow at a slower rate.
Technology and New Product Development
We invest heavily in the development of our semiconductor, fiber laser and directed energy technologies to provide solutions to our current and future customers. We anticipate that we will continue to invest in research and development to achieve our technology and product roadmap. Our product development is targeted to specific sectors of the market where we believe the power and performance requirements of our products can provide the most benefit. We believe our close coordination with our customers regarding their future product requirements enhances the efficiency of our research and development expenditures.
Manufacturing Costs and Gross Margins
Our Product gross profit, in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenues, is impacted by our product sales mix, sales volumes, changes in ASPs, production volumes, the corresponding absorption of manufacturing overhead expenses, production costs and manufacturing yields. Our product sales mix can affect gross profits due to variations in profitability related to product- configurations and cost profiles, customer volume pricing, availability of competitive products in various markets, and new product introductions, among other factors. Capacity utilization affects our gross margin because we have a high fixed cost base due to our vertically integrated business model. Increases in sales and production volumes drive favorable absorption of fixed costs, improved manufacturing efficiencies and lower production costs. Gross margins may fluctuate from period to period depending on product mix and the level of capacity utilization.
Our Development gross profit varies with the type and terms of contracts, contract volume, project mix, and progress on projects during the period. Most of our Development contracts are structured as cost plus fixed fee (CPFF) due to the technical complexity of the research and development services.
Seasonality
Our quarterly revenues can fluctuate with general economic trends, holidays in foreign countries such as Chinese New Year in the first quarter of our fiscal year, the timing of capital expenditures by our customers, and general economic trends. In addition, as is typical in our industry, we tend to recognize a larger percentage of our quarterly revenues in the last month of the quarter, which may impact our working capital trends.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our operating results as a percentage of revenues for the periods indicated (which may not add up due to rounding):
Revenues by Segment
Our revenues by segment were as follows for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
The increase in Laser Products revenue for 2020 compared to 2019 was driven by higher revenue and demand from the Industrial and Aerospace and Defense markets, offset partially by lower revenue from the Microfabrication market. The increase in Advanced Development revenue for 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily due to the acquisition of Nutronics in November 2019.
The decrease in Laser Products revenue for 2019 compared to 2018 was driven by lower revenue in the Industrial and Microfabrication markets, offset partially by higher revenue in the Aerospace and Defense market. Prior to the acquisition of Nutronics in November 2019 we operated as a single operating segment.
Revenues by End Market
Our revenues by end market were as follows for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
The increase in Industrial market revenue for 2020 compared to 2019 was driven by increased unit sales and change in sales mix toward high-power fiber lasers. The decrease in Microfabrication market revenue for 2020 compared to 2019 was driven primarily by lower unit sales to customers for consumer electronics and semiconductors. The increase in Aerospace and Defense market revenue for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to the acquisition of Nutronics, and an increase in unit sales to new and existing customers for defense applications.
The decrease in Industrial market revenue for 2019 compared to 2018 was driven by price reductions in China, partially offset by increased unit sales and increased sales outside of China. The decrease in Microfabrication market revenue for 2019 compared to 2018 was driven primarily by lower unit sales to customers for consumer electronics and semiconductors. The increase in Aerospace and Defense market revenue for 2019 compared to 2018 was attributable to higher volumes on our existing customer contracts.
Revenues by Geographic Region
Our revenues by geographic region were as follows for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
Geographic revenue information is based on the location to which we deliver our products and services. The increase in North America revenue for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by the acquisition of Nutronics and increased sales in the Aerospace and Defense market, partially offset by decreased sales in the Microfabrication market. The increase in China revenue for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to increased sales in the Industrial market. There was no significant change in Rest of World revenue for 2020 compared to 2019.
Changes in revenue by geographic region for 2019 compared to 2018 were driven by decreased revenue from the Industrial end market in China, and decreased revenue from the Microfabrication market in North America and Rest of World, partially offset by increased revenue from the Aerospace and Defense market in North America.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of Laser Products revenue consists primarily of manufacturing materials, payroll, shipping and handling costs, tariffs and manufacturing-related overhead. We order materials and supplies based on backlog and forecasted customer orders. We expense all warranty costs and inventory provisions as cost of revenues. Cost of Advanced Development revenue consists of materials, labor, subcontracting costs, an allocation of indirect costs including overhead and general and administrative.
Our gross profit and gross margin were as follows for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
The increase in Laser Products gross margin for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to product cost improvements, higher production volume and factory utilization, and lower import duty costs, offset partially by overall price reductions in the Industrial market, increased reserve charges, and changes in sales mix. Changes in Advanced Development gross margin are driven by changes in project mix since the acquisition of Nutronics in November 2019. Most of the Advanced Development segment revenue in 2020 was generated from cost plus fixed fee research and development projects.
The decrease in gross margin in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to price reductions in the Industrial market, lower production volume and factory utilization, and the negative impact of higher tariff costs, offset partially by product cost improvements. Since we operated only in the Laser Products segment prior to the acquisition of Nutronics in November 2019, no segment breakout is presented for the comparative period in 2018.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses were as follows for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
Research and Development
The increase in research and development expense for 2020 compared to 2019 was driven primarily by increases in stock-based compensation costs of $6.4 million; purchased intangible amortization of $2.4 million from the Nutronics and OPI acquisitions in November 2019 and July 2020, respectively; and increased project-related costs to support our development efforts. The increase in research and development expense for 2019 compared to 2018 was driven primarily by increases in stock-based compensation of $2.0 million, increased headcount costs and higher project-related expenses to support our development efforts.
Sales, General and Administrative
The increase in sales, general and administrative expense for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by an increase in stock-based compensation costs of $8.9 million, partially offset by a decrease in executive cash compensation, lower professional fees and decreased marketing and travel costs due to COVID-19. The increase in sales, general and administrative expense for 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily driven by increased stock-based compensation of $2.2 million, increased compensation costs, acquisition costs, higher business insurance, increased professional fees, and other cost increases related to operating as a public company.
Interest Income, net
The decrease in interest income, net, for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to lower balances in our money market funds coupled with a decrease in the market rates on those funds.
The increase in interest income, net, for 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to interest income generated on the cash we received from our initial and follow-on public offerings in 2018, and a reduction in interest expense on our loan facilities, which were paid off as of December 31, 2018.
Other Income (Expense), net
The decrease in other income (expense), net, in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to changes in net realized and unrealized foreign exchange transactions resulting from currency rate fluctuations. The increase in other income (expense), net for 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to an increase in gain on sales of assets and lower net unrealized and realized foreign currency exchange losses.
Income Tax Expense
The decrease in tax expense for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily related to recording a valuation allowance against our China deferred tax assets due to uncertainty with respect to their ultimate realizability in 2019, offset partially in 2020 by changes in the mix of earnings by tax jurisdiction, and the recording of a purchase accounting adjustment in 2020 related to not making a tax election to treat the Nutronics share purchase as an asset purchase for tax purposes. Our 2020 tax expense is impacted by the geographic location of our pre-tax book income and is primarily related to our operations in Finland and foreign withholding taxes on undistributed earnings. Our effective tax rate may vary from period to period based on changes in estimated taxable income or loss by jurisdiction, changes to the valuation allowance, changes to U.S. federal, state or foreign tax laws, future expansion into areas with varying country, state, and local income tax rates, deductibility of certain costs and expenses by jurisdiction.
The increase in tax expense for 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily related to recording a valuation allowance against our China deferred tax assets due to uncertainty with respect to their ultimate realizability, and driven by the change in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which reflects an increase in income from our U.S. operations compared to a decrease in foreign earnings. There is limited tax expense associated with our operations in the U.S. as we maintain a full valuation allowance against our U.S. deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had cash and cash equivalents of $102.3 million and $117.3 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our principal uses of liquidity were to acquire plant and equipment, including a commercial property in Camas, Washington, and fund our working capital needs. Our principal sources of liquidity for the year ended December 31, 2020 have been the cash flows from operations. In addition, $15 million of proceeds was drawn from our revolving line of credit in the first quarter of 2020 and repaid in full during the third quarter of 2020.
We believe our existing sources of liquidity will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next 12 months. However, we may raise additional capital to expand the commercialization of our products, fund our operations, further our research and development activities or for other corporate purposes. Our future capital requirements may vary materially from period to period and will depend on many factors, including the timing and extent of spending on research and development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the continuing market acceptance of our products and ongoing investments to support the growth of our business. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, technologies and intellectual property rights. From time to time, we may explore additional financing sources which could include equity, equity-linked and debt financing arrangements.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $13.0 million, which was primarily driven by $20.9 million of net loss reported for the period, and non-cash adjustments of $42.1 million related to depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, and other items. These items were partially offset by a $6.9 million increase in inventory and changes in other operating assets and liabilities. The increase in inventory supported new product introductions, decreased customer lead times and increased safety stock.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $4.2 million, which was primarily driven by $12.9 million of net loss reported in the period, and non-cash adjustments of $21.9 million related to depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, and other items. These items were partially offset by an increase in inventory of $10.7 million and changes in other operating assets and liabilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash provided by operating activities was $3.4 million, which was primarily driven by $13.9 million of net income reported in the period, and non-cash adjustments of $11.8 million related to depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, and other items. These items were offset by increases of $13.7 million in accounts receivable, $6.1 million in inventory, and $2.5 million in prepaids and other current assets.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $24.5 million, including $23.4 million of capital expenditures primarily related to acquisition of commercial property in Camas, Washington, and investments in manufacturing equipment for our worldwide operations.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $30.4 million, which included $17.4 million for the acquisition of Nutronics, and $13.6 million of capital expenditures related to investments in manufacturing equipment for our worldwide operations, and investments in our patent portfolio.
During the year ended December 31, 2018 net cash used in investing activities was $11.7 million, which was primarily due to capital expenditures related to investments in manufacturing equipment and facilities, as well as investments in our patent portfolio.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $3.8 million, which was primarily driven by $6.4 million of withholding tax payments related to vesting of restricted stock awards, partially offset by $2.8 million of proceeds from stock options exercised and employee stock plan purchases. In addition, the $15.0 million in proceeds from our revolving line of credit drawn in the first quarter of 2020 was paid in full during the third quarter of 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $2.5 million, which was primarily driven by $3.0 million of proceeds from stock options exercised and employee stock plan purchases, partially offset by $0.5 million of withholding tax payments related to vesting of restricted stock awards.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash provided by financing activities was $121.3 million, which was primarily driven by $138.3 million of net proceeds related to our initial and follow-on public offerings.
Credit Facilities
We have a $40.0 million revolving line of credit with Pacific Western Bank, which is secured by our assets and expires in September 2021. Interest on the line of credit is based primarily on the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), or an alternative rate such as the prime rate, plus or minus, respectively, a margin based on certain liquidity levels. The loan agreement contains restrictive and financial covenants and bears an unused credit fee of 0.20% on an annualized basis. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, no amounts were outstanding under the line of credit, and we were in compliance with all covenants under the loan agreement.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth a summary of our significant contractual obligations to make future payments in cash as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States and include our accounts and the accounts of our wholly owned subsidiaries. All intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated in consolidation. The preparation of these financial statements requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these judgments and estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. We believe that our significant accounting policies, which are discussed in the footnotes to our consolidated financial statements, and the accounting policies discussed below, involve a greater degree of complexity, involving management's judgments and estimates. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are critical to understanding our financial condition and historical and future results of operations:
•revenue recognition
•inventory; and
•income taxes
Revenue Recognition
We adopted ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) and related amendments, using the cumulative effect method with a date of initial application of January 1, 2019. As such, the comparative period information from 2018 has not been adjusted and continues to be reported under ASC 605 “Revenue Recognition.” The impact of adoption was immaterial, and we expect the impact of the adoption of the new standard to be immaterial to the consolidated financial statements on an ongoing basis. A majority of our revenue continues to be recognized at a point in time when control transfers based on the terms of the underlying contract. Revenue from our cost plus fixed fee research and development contracts are recognized over time.
We recognize revenue upon transferring control of products and services, and the amounts recognized reflect the consideration we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these products and services. We consider customer purchase orders, which in some cases are governed by master sales agreements, to be the contracts with a customer. As part of our consideration of the contract, we evaluate certain factors, including the customer's ability to pay (or credit risk). For each contract, we consider the promise to transfer products, each of which is distinct, as the identified performance obligations.
We allocate the transaction price to each distinct product based on its relative standalone selling price. Master sales agreements or purchase orders from customers could include a single product or multiple products. Regardless, the contracted price with the customer is agreed to at the individual product level outlined in the customer contract or purchase order. We do not bundle
prices; however, we do negotiate with customers on pricing for the same products based on a variety of factors (e.g., level of contractual volume). We have concluded that the prices negotiated with each individual customer are representative of the stand-alone selling price of the product.
We often receive orders with multiple delivery dates that may extend across several reporting periods. We allocate the transaction price of the contract to each delivery based on the product standalone selling price and invoice for each scheduled delivery upon shipment or delivery and recognize revenues for such delivery at that point, assuming transfer of control has occurred. Rights of return generally are not included in customer contracts. Accordingly, product revenue is recognized upon shipment or delivery, as applicable, and transfer of control. Rights of return are evaluated as they occur.
Revenues recognized at a point in time consist of sales of semiconductor lasers, fiber lasers and other related products. Revenues recognized over time generally consist of development arrangements that are structured based on our costs incurred. Because control transfers over time, revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. We generally use the cost-to-cost measure of progress for our contracts because it best depicts the transfer of control to the customer. Billing under these arrangements generally occurs within one month after the work is completed.
Inventory
Inventory is stated at the lower of average cost (principally standard cost, which approximates actual cost on a first-in, first-out basis) and net realizable value. Inventory includes raw materials and components that may be specialized in nature and subject to obsolescence. On a quarterly basis, we review inventory quantities on hand in comparison to our past consumption, recent purchases, and other factors to determine what inventory quantities, if any, may not be sellable. Based on this analysis, we write down the affected inventory value for estimated excess and obsolescence charges. At the point of loss recognition, a new, lower-cost basis for that inventory is established, and subsequent changes in facts and circumstances do not result in the restoration or increase in that newly established cost basis.
Income Taxes
The determination of our tax provision is dependent upon the geographic composition of worldwide earnings and tax regulations governing each region. The calculation of tax liabilities involves judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. We believe we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome for these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences may impact the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made. We provide a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets when we do not consider realization of such assets to be more likely than not. Due to uncertainty with respect to ultimate realizability of U.S. and China deferred tax assets driven by our historical net operating losses in those regions, we have a full valuation allowance against the U.S. and China deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
We file income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction, various states and various foreign jurisdictions. At December 31, 2020, our tax years 2017 through 2020, 2016 through 2020, and 2010 through 2020, remain open for examination in the federal, state and foreign jurisdictions, respectively. However, to the extent allowed by law, the taxing authorities may have the right to examine prior periods where net operating losses and credits were generated and carried forward, and make adjustments up to the net operating loss and credit carryforward amounts. We are not currently under federal, state, or foreign examination by any tax authority.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since inception, we have not had any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for another contractually narrow or limited purpose.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. If our costs were to become subject to significant inflationary pressures, we may not be able to fully offset such higher costs through price increases. Our inability or failure to do so could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.