ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis provides information that Luminar’s management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of Luminar’s consolidated results of operations and financial condition. The discussion should be read together with “Selected Historical Consolidated Financial and Operating Data of Luminar” and the historical audited annual consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the related notes thereto, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon Luminar’s current expectations, estimates and projections that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements due to, among other considerations, the matters discussed under “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this subsection to “Luminar” refer to the business of Luminar Technologies, Inc., a Delaware corporation, and its subsidiaries prior to the consummation of the Business Combination, which will be the business of the Post-Combination Company and its subsidiaries following the consummation of the Business Combination.
Overview
Our vision is to make autonomous transportation safe and ubiquitous. As a global leader in lidar autonomous driving technology, we are enabling the world’s first autonomous solutions for automotive series production in passenger cars and commercial trucks.
Founded in 2012 by President and Chief Executive Officer Austin Russell, we built a new type of lidar from the chip-level up, with technological breakthroughs across all core components. As a result, we have created what we believe is the only lidar sensor that meets the demanding performance, safety, and cost requirements for Level 3 through Level 5 autonomous vehicles in production, bypassing the traditional limitations of legacy lidar technology, while also enabling Level 0 through Level 2 (Advanced Driving Assistance Systems (“ADAS”) and/or Luminar Proactive Safety) with our Proactive Safety solution. Integrating this advanced hardware with our custom developed software stack enables a turn-key autonomous solution to accelerate widespread adoption across automakers at series production scale.
Our lidar hardware and software products help set the standard for safety in the industry, and are designed to enable accurate and reliable detections of some of the most challenging “edge cases” that autonomous vehicles can encounter on a regular basis. This is achieved by advancing existing lidar range and resolution to new levels, ensuring hard-to-see objects like a tire on the road ahead or a child that runs into the street are not missed, as well as our software to interpret the data and inform autonomous and assisted driving decisions.
Our full-stack hardware and software autonomy solution for cars and trucks as well as our standalone lidar technology offerings have made us one of the leading partners for the world’s top OEMs. We are currently partnering with eight of the top-ten global automakers, by sales, and have the goal of being the first lidar company to produce highway self-driving and next-generation Proactive Safety systems for series production. With approximately 400 employees across eight global locations, we have scaled to over 50 partners in the last two years, including the first industry-wide automotive series production award in the autonomous space, awarded by Volvo Cars in May 2020, with series production expected to commence in 2022. We subsequently entered into a strategic partnership with Daimler Truck AG in October 2020 and with Mobileye Vision Technologies Ltd (“Mobileye”) in November 2020.
The automotive industry is among the largest in the world and features an estimated total addressable market opportunity (“TAM”) for ADAS and autonomous solutions (Level 0 through Level 5) expected to exceed $150 billion by 2030. Our model to capture this opportunity is to directly partner with top established automotive companies in order to power their autonomous future. Correspondingly, we have successfully established partnerships with over 50 companies across three primary application verticals: passenger vehicles, commercial trucks, and robo-taxis. We have multiple levers for sustained growth, including significant industry tailwinds, a strong five-year product roadmap in production and development, a robust series production and standardization pipeline with anticipated long-term contracts and substantial new, adjacent market opportunities. Powered by breakthrough technology, our solutions are ready to enable autonomous vehicles to be safe and ubiquitous.
Business Combination and Public Company Costs
On August 24, 2020, we entered into certain Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with Gores Metropoulos, Inc. (“Gores”). On December 2, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), the previously announced business combination was consummated. Upon the consummation of the business combination, First Merger Sub, a newly formed subsidiary of Gores, merged with and into Luminar, with Luminar surviving (the “First Merger”). Immediately following the consummation of the First Merger and as part of the same overall transaction as the First Merger, Luminar, as the surviving corporation, merged with and into Second Merger Sub, a newly formed subsidiary of Gores, with Second Merger Sub continuing as the surviving entity (the “Second Merger” and, in combination with the First Merger and the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, the “Business Combination”). Luminar is deemed the accounting predecessor and the post-combination Company
is the successor SEC registrant, which means that Luminar’s financial statements for previous periods will be disclosed in the registrant’s future periodic reports filed with the SEC.
The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization. Under this method of accounting, Gores was treated as the acquired company for financial statement reporting purposes. The most significant change in the post-combination Company’s reported financial position and results was an increase in cash of $380.6 million. We paid $17.2 million in transaction costs relating to the merger with Gores. We recorded a liability related to the Public and Private Warrants of $102.4 million in the consolidated balance sheet on Closing Date.
As a consequence of the Business Combination, we became the successor to an SEC-registered and Nasdaq-listed company which requires us to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting and legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
COVID-19 Impact
The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has adversely affected some of our customers’ business operations, which has impacted our revenue in 2020 as well as resulted in the impairment of inventory. The extent of the continued impact of the coronavirus pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on various future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak and impact on our customers, suppliers, and employees, all of which is uncertain at this time. We expect the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic to adversely impact our revenue and results of operations, but we are unable to predict at this time the size and duration of this adverse impact. During this pandemic, we are observing a larger trend of automakers shifting course in “make vs. buy” decisions as it relates to autonomous solutions and software systems. As cash flows tighten, more automakers are looking to limit the potentially massive investments required to develop autonomous software and systems for which they do not necessarily have substantial expertise. As a result, several are more open to and accepting of a model to incorporate full-stack hardware and software solutions from suppliers, which for autonomy is particularly relevant for us. For more information on our operations and risks related to health epidemics, including the COVID-19 pandemic, see Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Form 10-K.
Key Factors Affecting Luminar’s Operating Results
We believe that our future performance and success depends to a substantial extent on our ability to capitalize on the following opportunities, which in turn is subject to significant risks and challenges, including those discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Form 10-K.
Technologically Advanced Product Portfolio
Our Iris sensing and software platform was architected to exceed all performance requirements of OEMs needed to safely unlock Level 0 through Level 5 autonomous driving, with an initial focus on Level 3/4 highway autonomy. Currently commercialized vehicle autonomy technology only incorporates basic Level 0, 1 and 2 ADAS, or partial automation made possible with cameras and radar, and enhanced by lidar. Iris is expected to become a commercially viable long-range lidar for automotive applications in all levels of vehicle autonomy, including full highway autonomy and urban and suburban autonomous driving. Our lidar is built from the chip-level up with a differentiated lidar architecture and a full stack hardware and software autonomy solution for cars and trucks, protected by 93 issued and 84 pending or allowed patents as of February 2021. This integration of the lidar technology allows for quality control throughout the development phase of production and continued innovation at each component level while maintaining the flexibility necessary to position us as the lidar partner of choice for the world’s top OEMs. Building certain critical components in-house or through exclusive supplier arrangements rather than using off-the-shelf commodity components more commonly used in Level 0, 1 and 2 lidar technology provides for protectable and sustainable technology differentiation from lidar competitors or alternative technologies not yet pushing into Level 3 through Level 5 technology solutions. We anticipate driving deeper integration with OEM partners through our development of best-in-class perception software. This integration will generate greater content value which will ultimately lead to more widespread adoption of autonomous programs.
Future success will be dependent on our ability to continue to execute against our product roadmap, which includes milestones to put Iris into series production.
While we believe it is best positioned to address advanced autonomous solutions in series production for consumer vehicles and commercial trucks, potential competition may exist for the ADAS market from other lower-performance providers of lidar technology, which could impact sales of products. We expect to tap into the ADAS market and differentiate ourselves from camera, radar, and lower performing lidar solutions by providing the same high-performance lidar hardware used for autonomy, but paired with proactive safety software to provide the necessary faster and longer distance high confidence
detections of objects. This can enable an effective automated emergency braking response and proactive collision avoidance at all speeds, with the goal of ultimately preventing the majority of forward collisions.
Commercialization and Partnerships
We have over 50 partner engagements, including with eight of the top-ten global automakers, by sales, and most major autonomous trucking and robo-taxi programs currently in development, reflecting the significant commercial interest in lidar. Currently, we have entered into a contract with Volvo to integrate our lidar hardware and software for autonomy in Volvo’s SPA2 vehicle platform. In October 2020, we entered into a strategic partnership with Daimler Truck AG related to Daimler’s production program to deliver autonomous commercial trucks globally and in November 2020, we entered into an agreement with Intel’s Mobileye to integrate our product into Mobileye’s Autonomous Vehicle (AV) Series solution.
Our ability to achieve profitability is dependent upon progression of existing partnerships and production programs, in order to meet required volumes and economies of scale to cover overhead. Delays of autonomy programs from OEMs that we are currently or will be working with could result in us being unable to achieve our revenue targets and profitability in the time frame we anticipate. Having a lead series production program substantially de-risks future OEM autonomy programs and better enables our technology to successfully realize economies of scale that have yet to be achieved in the industry. We also have a significant number of advanced development partners, in which we see an opportunity to convert into series production awards through 2022. The successful progression of such customers to series production is expected to result in multi-year series production programs that scale each year after start of production. Should our assumptions about the commercialization of our lidar platform prove overly optimistic or if we are unable to develop, obtain or progress partnerships into series production, we may fail to generate operating cash flow and may incur delays in our ability to achieve profitability. This may also lead us to make changes in our commercialization plans, which could result in unanticipated production delays or cost overruns, which could in turn adversely impact margins and cash flows.
We believe that our business model will also considerably reduce the execution risk typically associated with the scaling of lidar manufacturing. Our 50-plus partner engagements are expected to provide us with a robust series production and standardization pipeline. We employ an advanced manufacturing team in Orlando, Florida, that develops blueprints for how to successfully manufacture our products to scale. Prior to series production, we anticipate efficiently scaling by transferring our internally developed sensor manufacturing blueprint and final sensor assembly for series production to an International Automotive Task Force-certified plant in Mexico in order to reduce costs and risk. This strategy leverages the best of insource advanced manufacturing and outsource series production manufacturing. The realization of reduced overhead and lower unit pricing utilizing a contract manufacturing partner is still subject to successfully selecting and transitioning the processes and procedures to manufacture our sensors at commercial production levels.
Market Trends and Uncertainties
We anticipate robust demand for our Iris platform. We estimate the TAM for ADAS and autonomous driving technology, to grow from less than $5 billion currently to $150 billion or more in 2030. Further, we have multiple levers for sustained growth and adjacent market opportunities, with a core strategy to focus on attractive markets with significant growth and profitability potential. Specifically, the markets of focus include passenger cars, commercial trucks, and robo-taxi fleets. Each such market is potentially a significant global opportunity, and these markets have historically been underserved by inferior technology or not served at all. We are positioned as the only company with deeply integrated hardware and software products that currently meet the OEM specification requirements for safe Level 0 to Level 5 autonomy, which constitutes a significant portion of the TAM.
Changes in suppliers of products embedded in development programs as well as series production platforms that meet the OEM requirements are not common in the automotive industry. Our future growth and financial performance is highly dependent on integrating into customer development programs and vehicle platforms with a lead time of two to three years before series production. We see our existing partner base as a substantial competitive advantage, as we can leverage the same solution expected to be produced for Volvo in 2022 and similar production arrangements with other partners, such as Daimler Trucks and Mobileye.
Our most immediate market focus is on passenger and commercial vehicle autonomy on highways and ADAS applications. We believe there is significant room for improvement with regard to standard ADAS and crash avoidance. ADAS volumes are primarily driven by both the European and North American markets which have increasingly stringent safety regulations and consumer preference for safety. We are well positioned to capitalize on the increased ADAS demand in response to these increased safety regulations as our proactive safety software could increase the current reported collision avoidance rates by up to seven times. Although increasing automotive performance requirements may generate higher demand, we may not be able to take advantage of demand if we are unable to anticipate regulatory changes and adapt quickly enough to meet new regulatory standards or requirements. Market acceptance of active safety technology depends upon many factors,
including driver preference and perception, safety performance, cost and regulatory requirements related to such technologies. These factors may impact the market acceptance of ADAS and autonomous driving technologies.
We view international expansion as an important element of the strategy to profitability and continue to position ourselves in geographic markets that will serve as important sources of future growth. With an existing presence in the United States, Israel, Sweden, Japan and Germany through internal resources and partnerships, we anticipate robust demand for our Iris platform. We intend to expand our presence in these regions as well as into other countries in the coming years.
Expanded global reach may expose us to additional foreign currency risk, legal obligations and potentially additional operational costs, risks and challenges that may impact the ability to meet projected sales volumes and margins.
Margin Improvements
We believe we have the opportunity to establish high margin unit economics when operating at scale. Our future performance will depend on our ability to deliver on these economies of scale with lower product costs to enable widespread industry adoption. We believe our business model is positioned for scalability due to the ability to leverage the same product platform across our partner base, reduced labor and other costs from contract manufacturing, and operating leverage from a predominantly fixed cost base and overhead structure. Further, by utilizing contract manufacturing for the assembly of our product, we can leverage available capacity and greatly reduce our upfront capital investment. Exponential improvements from scale are expected to decrease the core Iris bill of materials per unit and assuming achievement of the reduction of bill of materials to the targeted threshold per unit, we anticipate having positive operating cash flow and operating income around 2024. Achievement of cash flow generation is dependent on order volume, which will dictate pricing and margin. Achieving this scale is further dependent on converting partnerships into series production contracts.
Starting in 2023, substantially all of our revenue is expected to be generated from series production programs via three solutions offered to customers: (1) a lidar hardware-only solution, (2) an integrated lidar hardware and software solution for proactive safety systems, and (3) an integrated hardware and software solution for highway autonomy systems. With higher margin expected on software solutions, changes to the relative share of overall revenue from each of the solutions may impact our overall margin and profitability.
While we expect to achieve and maintain high margins on hardware and software sold for highway autonomy applications, emergence of competition in advanced assisted driving sensing and software technologies may negatively impact pricing, margins, and market share. Although pricing pressure and lower margins are typically associated with commodity hardware products in the automotive industry, we believe our unique technology provides a compelling value proposition for favorable margins and unit economics in the industry. We expect our gross margin to improve in the near term as fixed manufacturing, supplier tooling, and other overhead costs are absorbed over larger production volumes and other economies of scale are achieved. If we do not generate the margins we expect upon commercialization of our lidar platform, we may be required to raise additional debt or equity capital, which may not be available or may only be available on terms that are onerous and adverse to our existing stockholders.
Basis of Presentation
We currently conduct our business through two operating segments: (i) Autonomy Solutions and (ii) Component Sales.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue producing activities can be viewed as two separate and distinct operating segments: (i) Autonomy Solutions and (ii) Component Sales.
The Autonomy Solutions segment is engaged in design, manufacturing and sale of lidar sensors as well as related perception and autonomy enabling software solutions catering mainly to the original equipment manufacturers in the automobile, commercial vehicle, robo-taxi and adjacent industries. The Autonomy Solutions segment has historically entered into Strategic Partner Programs (“SPP”) with leading automotive partners and other customers. An SPP is a contract under which we deliver our product to a specified customer at a fixed price under customary terms and conditions, usually in collaboration on an autonomous vehicle development program. With many major automakers having signed SPP contracts, we are shifting our focus from entering into SPPs with new partners to converting existing SPPs and relationships with our partners into series production programs. Once Volvo’s series production is launched, the primary sources of revenue are expected to shift from prototype sales and services revenue to sales of lidar hardware, perception software and autonomy enabling software for series production vehicles.
The Component Sales segment provides designing, testing and consulting services for non-standard integrated circuits to U.S. customers, including government agencies and defense contractors generally for purposes unrelated to autonomous vehicles. Fixed fee arrangements are satisfied over time and utilize the input method based on costs incurred. Accordingly,
revenue is recognized on a percentage of completion basis. Contracts are also structured as time and materials and billed at cost of time incurred plus a markup. We anticipate more closely aligning and integrating our Component Sales segment operations with portions of our Autonomy Solutions segment, specifically in relation to lidar solutions for the defense and other adjacent markets.
Cost of sales and gross profit (loss)
Cost of sales of the Autonomy Solutions segment includes the fixed and variable manufacturing cost of our lidar sensors, which primarily consists of personnel-related costs (including certain engineering personnel), including stock-based compensation, directly associated with our manufacturing organization, and material purchases from third-party contract manufacturers and suppliers. Cost of sales also includes depreciation and amortization for manufacturing fixed assets or equipment, cost of component inventory, product testing costs, costs of providing services, an allocated portion of overhead, facility and IT costs, excess and obsolete inventory and shipping costs.
Cost of sales of the Component Sales segment includes the cost of providing products and services as well as an allocated portion of overhead, facility and IT costs.
Gross profit (loss) equals revenue less cost of sales. Our cost of sales is expected to increase as our revenue continues to grow.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development (R&D)
Our R&D efforts are focused on enhancing and developing additional functionality for our existing products and on new product development, including new releases and upgrades to our lidar sensors and integrated software solutions. R&D expenses consist primarily of:
•Personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense, for personnel in our research and engineering functions;
•Expenses related to materials, software licenses, supplies and third-party services;
•Prototype expenses;
•An allocated portion of facility and IT costs and depreciation; and
•Component Sales services provided to Luminar are accounted for as R&D by Luminar.
R&D costs are expensed as incurred. We expect our R&D costs to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development activities to achieve our product roadmap.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist of personnel and personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation of our business development team as well as advertising and marketing expenses. These include the cost of marketing programs, trade shows, promotional materials, demonstration equipment, an allocated portion of facility and IT costs and depreciation. We expect to increase our sales and marketing activities, mainly in order to continue to build out our geographic presence to be closer to our partners and better serve them. We also expect that our sales and marketing expenses will increase over time as we continue to hire additional personnel to scale our business.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel and personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation of our executive, finance, human resources, information systems and legal departments as well as legal and accounting fees for professional and contract services. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we scale headcount with the growth of our business, and as a result of operating as a public company, including compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC, legal, audit, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities, and other administrative and professional services.
Change in Fair Value of SAFEs and Warrants
Change in fair value of Simple Agreements for Future Equity (the “SAFEs”) and warrants are non-cash changes and primarily consists of changes in fair value related to the SAFEs and warrant liabilities. The SAFEs and warrant liabilities are classified as marked-to-market liabilities pursuant to ASC 480 and the corresponding increase or decrease in value impacts our net loss.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt primarily consists of the settlement of the repayment of venture debt as we transitioned to a public company on December 2, 2020.
Interest Income and other, and Interest Expense
Interest income and other consists primarily of income earned on our cash equivalents and marketable securities. These amounts will vary based on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances, and also with market rates. It also includes realized gains and losses related to the marketable securities, as well as impact of gains and losses related to foreign exchange transactions. Interest expense consisted primarily of interest on our senior secured term loan facility, which was repaid upon consummation of the Business Combination.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in this report. The following table sets forth Luminar’s consolidated results of operations data for the periods presented (in thousands):
Revenue
The increase in revenue for 2020 compared to 2019 was driven by increased revenue from our Autonomy Solutions segment offset by a decrease in revenue from our Component Sales segment. The breakdown of our revenue by these segments for the periods presented was as follows (in thousands):
The increase in revenue of our Autonomy Solutions segment in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by $8.9 million in sales to a customer related to customization of our sensor and software for future series production, offset by fewer sensor sales related to our test and development programs.
The decrease in revenue of our Component Sales segment in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a timing delay in the fabrication schedule on two projects.
Cost of Sales and Gross Loss
The increase in cost of sales was primarily due to increased costs to execute a won contract and increased inventory obsolescence costs associated with the transition to a new, upgraded sensor platform. The total cost of completing the requirements of the won contract in 2020 was $9.7 million. The expenses were primarily employee-related and subcontractor costs. The expenses associated with the contract were not incurred as cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2019 but were instead included as an R&D expense because a formal agreement was not executed in 2019 and the primary focus of our efforts was on developing our products and solutions. Additionally, there was an increase in inventory write-downs of $3 million. Cost of sales for 2020 also included a $1.1 million charge to obtain a release from our purchase commitment from a supplier. These increases in cost of sales were offset by lower product cost driven by lower revenue.
The increase in gross loss in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to the reasons discussed above.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
The increase in research and development expenses for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase in personnel-related costs resulting from increased headcount and consultancy fees in relation to new products that are being developed of $8.5 million. Additionally, infrastructure related costs increased by $1.0 million. These increases were offset by $7.8 million related to a shift in focus of internal resources that were previously focused on research and development to fulfill a customer contract in 2020, which resulted in the costs of those resources being recorded to cost of sales in 2020, as discussed in the “Cost of Sales and Gross Loss” section above. We anticipate continued investment in research and development activities to develop future models as well as customize our solutions under future partner contracts.
Sales and Marketing
The increase in sales and marketing expenses in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a $1.2 million increase in personnel-related costs including stock-based compensation costs, driven mainly by increased headcount and a higher fair value of equity awards, a $1.7 million increase outside services for marketing of our products, a $0.8 million increase in facilities and related costs. These increases were offset by a $0.5 million reduction in travel related costs.
General and Administrative
The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to a $7.1 million increase in professional services due to increased spending on legal, accounting and auditing services in connection with our preparation to become a public company, including $1.1 million of expenses related to regulatory filings and a $4.6 million increase in personnel-related costs including stock-based compensation costs, driven mainly by increased headcount and a higher fair value of equity awards. The $4.6 million increase in personnel-related costs included $3.0 million of charge resulting from the conversion of certain shares from Class A common stock to Class B common stock. Additionally, infrastructure related costs increased by $0.7 million.
Change in Fair Value of SAFE Notes
The change in fair value of SAFE notes in 2019 related to the increase in the fair value prior to the settlement of SAFE notes in cash and convertible preferred stock in June 2019.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
The change in fair value of warrant liabilities was due to the increase in the estimated fair value of 2017 Warrants, 2018 Warrants, 2020 Warrants, and Public and Private Warrants.
Pursuant to the Business Combination, the 2017 Warrants, 2018 Warrants and 2020 Warrants were exercised on December 2, 2020. Prior to the exercise, the fair value of the warrants was calculated using the closing stock price on December 2, 2020, and the increase in the fair value was recorded.
Further, subsequent to the Business Combination, we had 13,333,309 Public Warrants and 6,666,666 Private Warrants outstanding as of December 31, 2020. The increase in the fair value of the Public and Private Warrants was $241.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
The $4.0 million loss on extinguishment of debt in 2020 related to the termination and prepayment of the senior secured term loan. The $6.1 million loss on extinguishment of debt in 2019 related to the settlement of the Bridge Note into Series A-11 convertible preferred stock.
Segment Operating Profit or Loss
Segment profit or loss is defined as income or loss before taxes. Our segment profit or loss breakdown is as follows (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Our capital requirements will depend on many factors, including lidar and software sales volume, the timing and extent of spending to support R&D efforts, investments in information technology systems, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, and market adoption of new and enhanced products and features. Until we can generate sufficient revenue from lidar sensors and software to cover our operating expenses, working capital and capital expenditures, we expect the funds raised in the Series X Financing and the Business Combination, net of the repayment of our senior secured term loan facility (required by the terms of the merger agreement), to fund cash needs. If we are required to raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, dilution to stockholders would result. Any equity securities issued may also provide for rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of holders of our common stock. If we raise funds by issuing debt securities, these debt securities may have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of holders of our common stock. The terms of debt securities or borrowings could impose significant restrictions on our operations. The credit market and financial services industry have in the past, and may in the future, experience periods of uncertainty that could impact the availability and cost of equity and debt financing.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents totaling $208.9 million and marketable securities of $276.7 million. To date, our principal sources of liquidity have been proceeds received from issuances of debt and equity.
On April 22, 2020, we received $7.8 million in aggregate loan proceeds pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program established under the CARES Act (the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) of 2020. The loan accrued interest at 1%. The loan was completely repaid, including interest, on August 20, 2020.
In August, September and October 2020, we received $183.9 million of gross proceeds as consideration for the issuance of Series X Preferred Stock.
On December 2, 2020, the Business Combination with Gores was consummated. The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization. Under this method of accounting, Gores was treated as the acquired company for financial statement reporting purposes. The most significant change in the post-combination Company’s reported financial position and results was increase in cash of $380.6 million. We paid $17.2 million in transaction costs relating to the merger with Gores.
We had obtained a senior secured term loan facility pursuant to which amounts were funded from August 2017 through December 2018, which was refinanced with a new senior secured term loan facility pursuant to which an aggregate principal amount of $30.0 million was funded from March through June 2020. Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, the full balance of the senior secured term loan was repaid at the closing of the Business Combination.
We have not generated positive cash flows from operating activities and have incurred significant losses from operations in the past as reflected in its accumulated deficit of $584.5 million as of December 31, 2020. We expect to continue to incur operating losses for at least the foreseeable future due to continued R&D investments that we intend to make in our business and, as a result, we may require additional capital resources to grow our business. We believe that current cash, cash equivalents, and the net proceeds from the Business Combination will be sufficient to continue to execute our business strategy over the next two years and until we expect to begin series production.
Cash Flow Summary
The following table summarizes Luminar’s cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $75.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in operating activities was due to our net loss of $362.3 million adjusted for non-cash items of $288.6 million, primarily consisting of $268.3 million of change in fair value of warrant liabilities, $8.7 million of stock-based compensation, $4.4 million of inventory write-down, $4.0 million of loss on extinguishment of debt and $2.5 million of depreciation and amortization, offset by use of cash for operating assets and liabilities of $1.9 million due to the timing of cash payments to vendors and cash receipts from customers.
Net cash used in operating activities was $60.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in operating activities was due to our net loss of $94.7 million adjusted for non-cash items of $37.0 million, primarily consisting of $24.5 million of change in fair value of SAFE liabilities, $6.1 million of loss on extinguishment of debt, $2.7 million of stock-based compensation, $2.3 million of depreciation and amortization and $1.4 million of inventory write-down, offset by use of cash for operating assets and liabilities of $2.5 million due to the timing of cash payments to vendors and cash receipts from customers.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 was $271.8 million compared to $7.8 million in 2019. Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 was comprised of $315.9 million related to purchases of marketable investments and $2.2 million in capital expenditures, offset by $29.0 million and $16.8 million, respectively, of cash proceeds from sale and maturities of marketable investments, and $0.6 million of proceeds from refundable security deposits.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2019 was comprised of $6.9 million related to purchases of marketable investments and $1.5 million in capital expenditures, offset by $0.4 million of cash proceeds from disposal of property and equipment and $0.2 million of cash proceeds from sales of marketable securities.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $529.9 million, compared to $85.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by financing activities of $529.9 million primarily related to $363.4 million of net cash received from merger with Gores, $178.1 million of cash received from the issuance of Series X convertible preferred stock, offset by $11.4 million of net cash paid for repayment of debt.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 of $85.5 million related to cash proceeds of $68.7 million and $37.4 million, respectively, from the issuance of Series A convertible preferred stock and SAFE notes, offset by cash payments of $14.9 million of cash paid for repayment of debt and $5.6 million repayment of SAFEs not converted to our convertible preferred stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K, such as the use of unconsolidated subsidiaries, structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can significantly impact the amounts we report as assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and the related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance as these policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize the cost of stock-based awards granted to our employees and directors based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards. Cost is recognized on a straight-line basis over the service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. We have elected to recognize the effect of forfeitures in the period they occur. We determine the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which is impacted by the following assumptions:
•Expected Term-We use the simplified method when calculating the expected term due to insufficient historical exercise data.
•Expected Volatility-Our stock was not publicly traded prior to December 3, 2020. The volatility used in stock grants made prior to that date was based on a benchmark of comparable companies within the automotive and energy storage industries.
•Expected Dividend Yield-The dividend rate used is zero as we have never paid any cash dividends on our common stock and do not anticipate doing so in the foreseeable future.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate-The interest rates used are based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with an equivalent remaining term equal to the expected life of the award.
The grant date fair value of our common stock issued prior to December 3, 2020, was determined with the assistance of an independent third-party valuation specialist. The grant date fair value of our common stock was determined using valuation methodologies which utilized certain assumptions, including probability weighting of events, volatility, time to liquidation, a risk-free interest rate, and an assumption for a discount for lack of marketability (Level 3 inputs).
Based on our early stage of development and other relevant factors, we determined that an Option Pricing Model (“OPM”) was the most appropriate method for allocating our enterprise value to determine the estimated fair value of our common stock. Application of the OPM involves the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses, and cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies, and the probability of future events. Specifically, we have historically used the OPM back solve analysis to estimate the fair value of our common stock, which derives the implied equity value for one type of equity security from a contemporaneous transaction involving another type of security, shares of our convertible preferred stock in this instance.
Revenue
We adopted the requirements of the new revenue recognition standard, known as ASC 606, effective January 1, 2019, utilizing the modified retrospective method of transition. Revenue from product sales is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those products and services. For service projects, revenue is recognized as services are performed and amounts are earned in accordance with the terms of a contract at estimated collectible amounts.
Revenues related to custom products are recognized over time using the cost input method. In using this input method, we generally apply the cost-to-cost method of accounting where sales and profits are recorded based on the ratio of costs incurred to estimated total costs at completion. Recognition of profit on these contracts requires estimates of the total contract value, the total cost at completion, and the measurement of progress towards completion. Significant judgment is required when estimating total contract costs and progress to completion on the arrangements, as well as whether a loss is expected to be incurred on the contract. If circumstances arise that change the original estimates of revenues, costs, or extent of progress toward completion, revisions to the estimates are made. These revisions may result in increases or decreases in estimated revenues or costs, and such revisions are reflected in income in the period in which the circumstances that gave rise to the revision become known to us. We perform ongoing profitability analysis of our contracts accounted for under this method in order to determine whether the latest estimates of revenues, costs, and profits require updating. If at any time these estimates indicate that the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the remainder of the contract is recorded immediately.
We enter into contracts that can include various combinations of products and services, which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations; however, determining whether products or services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may sometimes require significant judgment. Transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price (SSP) basis. Judgment is required to determine SSP for each distinct performance obligation. We use a range of amounts to estimate SSP when products and services are sold separately. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, we determine SSP using information that may include other observable inputs available to it.
Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the timing or amount of revenue recognition.
Public and Private Warrants
As part of Gores’ initial public offering on February 5, 2019, Gores issued to third party investors 40.0 million units, consisting of one share of Class A common stock of Gores and one-third of one warrant, at a price of $10.00 per unit. Each whole warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share (the “Public Warrants”). Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, Gores completed the private sale of 6.667 million warrants to Gore’s sponsor at a purchase price of $1.50 per warrant (the “Private Warrants”). Each Private Warrant allows the sponsor to purchase one share of Class A common stock at $11.50 per share. Subsequent to the Business Combination, 13,333,309 Public Warrants and 6,666,666 Private Warrants remained outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
The Private Warrants and the shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Warrants are not transferable, assignable or salable until after the completion of a Business Combination, subject to certain limited exceptions. Additionally, the Private Warrants are exercisable for cash or on a cashless basis, at the holder’s option, and are non-redeemable so long as they are held by the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees. If the Private Warrants are held by someone other than the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees, the Private Warrants will be redeemable by us and exercisable by such holders on the same basis as the Public Warrant.
We evaluated the Public and Private Warrants under ASC 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity, and concluded that they do not meet the criteria to be classified in stockholders’ equity. Specifically, the exercise of the Public and Private Warrants may be settled in cash upon the occurrence of a tender offer or exchange that involves 50% or more of our Class A shareholders. Because not all of the shareholders need to participate in such tender offer or exchange to trigger the potential cash settlement and we do not control the occurrence of such an event, we concluded that the Public Warrants and Private Warrants do not meet the conditions to be classified in equity. Since the Public and Private Warrants meet the definition of a derivative under ASC 815, we recorded these warrants as liabilities on the balance sheet at fair value, with subsequent changes in their respective fair values recognized in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income (loss) at each reporting date. Because the Public Warrants were publicly traded and thus had an observable market price, and the Private Warrants were effectively valued similar to the Public Warrants, as described in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements, while the changes in the fair value of the Public Warrants and Private Warrants may be material to our future operating results, there is no significant judgment involved in measuring the fair value of such Warrants.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Section 102(b)(1) of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”) exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can choose not to take advantage of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies, and any such election to not take advantage of the extended transition period is irrevocable.
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, and have elected to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period for new or revised financial accounting standards. Following the consummation of the Business Combination, our Post-Combination Company will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which the market value of our common stock that held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the end of that year’s second fiscal quarter, (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we achieve total annual gross revenue of $1.07 billion or more during such fiscal year (as indexed for inflation), (iii) the date on which we issue more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt in the prior three-year period or (iv) December 31, 2024. We expect to continue to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period, although we may decide to early adopt such new or revised accounting standards to the extent permitted by such standards. This may make it difficult or impossible to compare our financial results with the financial results of another public company that is either not an emerging growth company or is an emerging growth company that has chosen not to take advantage of the extended transition period exemptions because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 in Item 8. of this Form 10-K for information related to recent accounting pronouncements.