Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Part I, including matters set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Form 10-K, and our Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto, included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Forward Looking Statements
Certain statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (including but not limited to this Item 7 - “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”) constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements other than statements of historical facts included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including, without limitation, statements regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition and the measures the Company has taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company’s future financial position, business strategy, budgets, projected costs and plans and objectives of management for future operations, are “forward-looking” statements. Forward-looking statements generally can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “seek,” “estimate” or “continue” or the negative of such words or variations of such words and similar expressions. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions, which are difficult to predict. Therefore, actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed or forecasted in such forward-looking statements and the Company can give no assurance that such forward-looking statements will prove to be correct. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements, or “cautionary statements,” include, but are not limited to:
● the ultimate effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition, including whether sales growth will continue at the same rate or at all, and whether the Company’s sales may ultimately decline, meaning that, in the long term, COVID-19 could result in a net negative impact on the business;
● the availability of financing to the Company and its customers;
● fuel shortages, or high prices for fuel;
● the wellbeing, as well as the continued popularity and reputation for quality, of the Company’s manufacturers, particularly, Thor Industries, Inc. (including Tiffin Motorhomes), Winnebago Industries, Inc., and Forest River, Inc.
● any change, non-renewal, unfavorable renegotiation or termination of the Company’s supply arrangements for any reason;
● general economic conditions in the Company’s markets, including ongoing economic and financial uncertainties that cause a decline in consumer spending;
● the Company’s ability to attract and retain customers.
● competition in the market for services, protection plans and products targeting the RV lifestyle or RV enthusiast;
● risks associated with the Company’s expansion into new, unfamiliar markets presents, including delays in opening or acquiring new retail locations;
● unforeseen expenses, difficulties, and delays encountered in connection with expansion through acquisitions;
● failure to maintain the strength and value of the Company’s brands;
● failure to successfully procure and manage its inventory to reflect consumer demand in a volatile market and anticipate changing consumer preferences and buying trends;
● fluctuation of the Company’s same store sales (meaning they are not a meaningful indicator of future performance);
● the cyclical nature of the Company’s business, which could result in operating losses during downturns;
● seasonality of the Company’s business, leading to fluctuations in sales and revenues;
● unfavorable conditions in its local markets, even if those conditions are not prominent nationally;
● inability to satisfy its debt obligations upon the occurrence of a change in control under its credit facility;
● availability of adequate capital;
● the Company’s credit facility’s restrictive covenants may impair the Company’s ability to access sufficient capital and operate its business;
● natural disasters, whether or not caused by climate change, unusual weather conditions, epidemic outbreaks, terrorist acts and political events;
● the Company’s relationships with third party providers of services, protection plans, products and resources;
● financing, insurance and extended service contracts that depend on third party lenders and insurance companies;
● the Company’s ability to meet its labor needs;
● the Company’s inability to maintain its leases or locate alternative sites for retail locations in its target markets and on terms that are acceptable to it;
● federal, state and local regulations, including regulations applicable to the sale of extended service contracts and climate change legislation or regulations restricting emission of “greenhouse gases” that could result in increased operating costs and reduced demand for the RVs the Company sells;
● the risk that if state dealer laws are repealed or weakened, the Company’s dealerships will be more susceptible to termination, non-renewal or renegotiation of dealer agreements;
● inability to enforce its intellectual property rights and/or the Company infringing the intellectual property rights of third parties;
● inability to protect, maintain or upgrade its information technology systems or to convert to alternate systems in an efficient and timely manner;
● any disruptions to the Company’s information technology systems or breaches of the Company’s network security;
● product liability claims if people or property are harmed by the products the Company sells, and manufacturer safety recalls;
● Ineffectiveness of the Company’s risk management policies and procedures;
● asset impairment charges for goodwill, intangible assets or other long-lived assets;
● stock price declines as a result of the Company’s outstanding convertible preferred stock, warrants and options, and future resales of the shares of common stock of the Company issued to the stockholders and the investors in the PIPE Investment;
● stockholder dilution as a result of issuance of options under existing or future incentive plans, the issuance of stock under the ESPP or the issuance of common stock as a result of acquisitions or otherwise, or as a result of the conversion of Series A Preferred Stock into Company common stock;
● the fact that holders of Series A Preferred Stock own a large portion of the voting power of the Company common stock and have the right to nominate and elect two members to the Company’s board of directors, meaning that they influence the composition of the board of directors of the Company and future actions taken by the board of directors of the Company;
● the fact that holders of the Series A Preferred Stock have certain rights that may not allow the Company to take certain actions;
Business Overview
The amounts set forth below are in thousands unless otherwise indicated except for unit (including the average selling price per unit), share, and per share data.
How The Company Generates Revenue
The Company derives its revenues from sales of new units, sales of pre-owned units, and other revenue. Other revenue consists of RV parts, service and repairs, commissions earned on sales of third-party financing and insurance products, Tampa campground and food facilities revenue, and other revenues. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company derived its revenues from these categories in the following percentages:
New and pre-owned RV sales accounted for approximately 89% and 88% of total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. These revenue contributions have remained relatively consistent year over year.
Key Performance Indicators
Gross Profit and Gross Margins (excluding depreciation and amortization). Gross profit is total revenue less total costs applicable to revenue excluding depreciation and amortization. The vast majority of the cost applicable to revenues is related to the cost of vehicles. New and pre-owned vehicles have accounted for 97% and 96% of the cost of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Gross margin is gross profit as a percentage of revenue. Gross profit and gross margin are GAAP metrics commonly used (including by Company management) to compare results between periods and entities.
The Company’s gross profit is variable in nature and generally follows changes in revenue. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, gross profit was $179.0 and $132.2 million, respectively, and gross margin was 21.9% and 20.5%, respectively. Last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) adjustments did not have a material impact on the variance in the Company’s gross margin during the periods presented.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, gross margins were also impacted by other revenue, including finance and insurance revenues and parts, service, and accessories revenue. The Company’s margins on these lines of business typically carry higher gross margin percentages than new and pre-owned vehicle sales, and contributed a smaller portion of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 than for the prior year. These combined other revenues were 10.7% and 12.0%, respectively, of total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
SG&A as a percentage of Gross Profit. Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses consist primarily of wage-related expenses, selling expenses related to commissions and advertising, lease expenses and corporate overhead expenses. Historically, salaries, commissions and benefits represent the largest component of the Company’s total SG&A expense and averages approximately 50-60% of SG&A. SG&A expenses do not include transaction costs, stock-based compensation, finance lease interest and depreciation and amortization. SG&A expenses as a percentage of gross profit allows the Company to monitor its overhead expenses relative to profitability over a period of time.
The Company calculates SG&A expenses as a percentage of gross profit by dividing SG&A expenses for the period by total gross profit. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, SG&A as a percentage of gross profit was 65.8% and 78.0%, respectively. The decrease in this percentage reflects the fact that the growth in gross profit exceeded the growth in SG&A costs, driven primarily by the overall growth of the business, improving fixed costs operating leverage, as well as overhead cost reductions implemented in April 2020.
In addition, as the Company executes its growth strategy, the Company may acquire property, plant, and equipment and intangible assets, and the related depreciation and amortization expense may negatively impact our net income or loss in future periods.
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA is not a U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principle (“GAAP”) financial measure, but it is one of the primary non-GAAP measures management uses to evaluate the financial performance of the business. Adjusted EBITDA is also frequently used by analysts, investors, and other interested parties to evaluate companies in the recreational vehicle industry. The Company uses Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin to supplement GAAP measures of performance as follows:
● as a measurement of operating performance to assist in comparing the operating performance of the Company’s business on a consistent basis, and remove the impact of items not directly resulting from the Company’s core operations;
● for planning purposes, including the preparation of the Company’s internal annual operating budget and financial projections;
● to evaluate the performance and effectiveness of the Company’s operational strategies; and
● to evaluate the Company’s capacity to fund capital expenditures and expand the business.
The Company believes Adjusted EBITDA can provide a more complete understanding of the underlying operating results and trends and an enhanced overall understanding of financial performance and prospects for the future. The Company defines Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) excluding depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, non-floor plan interest expense, amortization of intangible assets, income tax expense, stock-based compensation, transaction costs and other supplemental adjustments which for the periods presented includes LIFO adjustments, severance costs and other one-time charges and gain (loss) on sale of property and equipment. The Company believes Adjusted EBITDA, when considered along with other performance measures, is a useful measure as it reflects certain operating drivers of the business, such as sales growth, operating costs, selling and administrative expense and other operating income and expense.
Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be a measure of liquidity or cash flows from operations, or a measure comparable to net income as it does not take into account certain requirements such as non-recurring gains and losses which are not deemed to be a normal part of the underlying business activities. The Company’s measure of Adjusted EBITDA is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled captions of other companies due to different methods of calculation. The Company strives to compensate for these limitations by using Adjusted EBITDA as only one of several measures for evaluating business performance. In addition, capital expenditures, which impact depreciation and amortization, interest expense, and income tax expense, are reviewed separately by management. For a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA Margin to net income margin, and a further discussion of how the Company utilizes this non-GAAP financial measure, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
COVID-19 Developments
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease COVID-19 a pandemic, which continues to spread throughout the United States and globally. Beginning in mid-to-late March of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic led to severe disruptions in general economic activity as businesses and federal, state, and local governments took increasingly broad actions to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on public health, including through “shelter in place” or “stay at home” orders in the states in which we operate. As we modified our business practices to conform to government guidelines and best practices to ensure the health and safety of our customers, employees and the communities we serve, we saw significant early declines in new and pre-owned vehicle unit sales, sales of parts, accessories and related services, including finance and insurance revenues as well as campground and miscellaneous revenues.
We took a number of actions in April 2020 to adjust resources and costs to align with reduced demand caused by the pandemic. These actions included:
● Reduction of our workforce by 25%;
● Temporary reduction of senior management salaries (April 2020 through May 2020);
● Suspension of 2020 annual pay increases;
● Temporary suspension of 401k match (April 2020 through May 2020);
● Delay of non-critical capital projects; and
● Focus of resources on core sales and service operations.
To further protect our liquidity and cash position, we negotiated with our lenders for the temporary suspension of scheduled principal and interest payments on our term and mortgage loans from April 15, 2020 through June 15, 2020 and for the temporary suspension of scheduled floorplan curtailment payments from April 1, 2020 through June 15, 2020. We also received $8.7 million in loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP Loans”). While we applied for loan forgiveness under the PPP loans, there can be no assurances that the loans will be forgiven.
Starting in May 2020, we experienced significant improvement in sales of new and pre-owned vehicles. Senior management was able to resume normal salaries in late May 2020, and we adjusted our workforce where necessary to meet demand. We continue to aggressively manage and ration capital, and we are focusing our resources on core sales and service operations in response to the operational and financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The improvement in sales beginning in May 2020 likely relates, at least in part, to an increase in consumer demand as consumers seek outdoor travel and leisure activities that permit appropriate social distancing. However, we can provide no assurances that such growth in sales will continue at the same rate as between May and December 2020, or at all, over any time period, and sales may ultimately decline. Furthermore, our improved sales and cost savings measures to date may not be sufficient to offset any later adverse impacts of the pandemic, and our liquidity could be negatively impacted, if sales trends from May through December 2020 are reversed, which may occur, for example, if the cruise line, air travel and hotel industries begin to recover.
Our operations also depend on the continued health and productivity of our employees at our dealerships service locations and corporate headquarters throughout this pandemic. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic ultimately impacts our business, results of operations, and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, the efficacy and availability of vaccines, and further actions that may be taken by individuals, businesses and federal, state and local governments in response. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may experience significant adverse effects to our business as a result of its global economic impact, including any economic recession or downturn and the impact of such a recession or downturn on unemployment levels, consumer confidence, levels of personal discretionary spending and credit availability.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth information comparing the components of net income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Summary Financial Data
(in thousands)
Revenue
Revenue increased by approximately $172.2 million, or 26.7%, to $817.1 million from $644.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The COVID pandemic has impacted consumer lifestyles by leading to social distancing and limited travel options. These trends have been favorable to the RV industry and the Company. It is uncertain how long these trends will continue to affect the industry and the Company.
New Vehicles and Pre-Owned Vehicles Revenue
Revenue from new and pre-owned vehicle sales increased by approximately $162.8 million, or 28.7%, to $729.9 million from $567.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Revenue from new vehicle sales increased by approximately $126.4 million, or 35.8%, to $479.6 million from $353.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This was due to (a) an increase in the number of new vehicle units sold from 4,652 to 6,151, driven by increased demand across all locations as well as the acquisitions in 2020 of three dealerships located in Phoenix, Arizona (May), Elkhart, Indiana (October) and Burns Harbor, Indiana (December) (“New Locations”), and (b) an increase in average unit selling price from $75,500 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $76,400 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenue from pre-owned vehicle sales increased by approximately $36.5 million, or 17.1%, to $250.3 million from $213.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Excluding the effect of wholesale sales, there was an increase in units sold from 2,939 to 3,869 for the years December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which was partially offset by a mix-driven decrease in the average unit selling price from approximately $65,500 per unit for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $60,700 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company’s pending sale backlog, representing contracts for units that are sold, but have not been delivered to the dealership by the OEM, is at historical highs and growing, which is expected to have a positive impact on future revenue, although it is uncertain for how long.
Other Revenue
Other revenue consists of sales of parts, accessories, and related services. It also consists of finance and insurance revenues as well as campground and miscellaneous revenues. Other revenue increased by approximately $9.3 million, or 11.9%, to $87.2 million from $77.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
As a component of other revenue, sales of parts, accessories and related services increased by approximately $3.0 million, or 8.5%, to $38.6 million from $35.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, primarily due to increased level of business.
Finance and insurance revenue increased by approximately $8.4 million, or 23.0%, to $45.1 million from $36.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019, respectively, primarily due to higher RV unit sales.
Campground and other revenue, which included RV rental revenue, decreased by approximately $2.0 million, or 37.2%, to $3.5 million from $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019, respectively, primarily due to the discontinuance of RV rentals in 2019.
Gross Profit (excluding depreciation and amortization)
Gross profit consists of gross revenues less cost of sales and services and excludes depreciation and amortization. Gross profit increased by approximately $46.8 million, or 35.4%, to $179.0 million from $132.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This increase was attributable to growth in all lines of business with the exception of the discontinued rental business. Gross margin was 21.9% and 20.5% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Consumer demand was favorably impacted and supply restrained by the COVID pandemic, which in turn had a favorable impact on gross margins. It is uncertain how long these trends will continue to affect the industry and the Company.
New and Pre-Owned Vehicles Gross Profit
New and pre-owned vehicle gross profit increased $37.4 million, or 49.0%, to $113.8 from $76.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase is primarily attributable to the increase in units sold, as well as our ability to maintain higher margins in a period where inventory and supply has been tight.
Other Gross Profit
Other gross profit increased by $6.8 million, or 11.7% to $65.0 million from $58.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 due to increased finance and insurance revenues associated with increased RV sales as well as higher penetration rates on the Company’s finance and insurance products.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses, which, as explained above, do not include transaction costs, stock-based compensation expense, and depreciation and amortization expense, increased 13.7% to $117.7 million from $103.5 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in SG&A expenses was related to overhead associated with The Villages dealership acquired August 2019, the new service center near Houston, the Phoenix dealership acquired in May 2020, the Elkhart dealership acquired in October 2020, the Burns Harbor dealership acquired in December 2020 and increased performance wages as a result of the increased unit sales and revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was partially offset by cost reduction actions taken in April 2020.
Stock based compensation decreased $3.3 million as a result of the graded vesting of the awards with market conditions which were issued to members of management in 2018, with the majority of the expense being recorded in the early portion of the derived service period.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by approximately $2.3 million to $8.0 million from $10.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, due primarily to more favorable interest rates, lower floorplan balances associated with reduced inventory levels and the use of an interest reduction equity account, which earns interest to offset floorplan interest expense.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense increased to $10.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from income tax expense of $1.1 million during the same period of 2019, due to the increase in income.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The Company uses certain non-GAAP financial measures, such as EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, to enable it to analyze its performance and financial condition, for Adjusted EBITDA as described in “Key Performance Indicators”, above. The Company utilizes these financial measures to manage the business on a day-to-day basis and believes that they are relevant measures of performance. The Company believes that these supplemental measures are commonly used in the industry to measure performance. The Company believes these non-GAAP measures provide expanded insight to measure revenue and cost performance, in addition to the standard GAAP-based financial measures.
The presentation of non-GAAP financial information should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. You should read this discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations together with the consolidated financial statements of the Company and the related notes thereto also included herein.
EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) excluding depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, interest expense, net, amortization of intangible assets, and income tax expense.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) excluding depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, non-floor plan interest expense, amortization of intangible assets, income tax expense, stock-based compensation, transaction costs and other supplemental adjustments which for the periods presented includes LIFO adjustments, severance costs and other one-time charges, and gain (loss) on sale of property and equipment.
Adjusted EBITDA Margin is defined as Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of total revenues.
Reconciliations from Net Income per the Consolidated Statements of Operations to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are shown in the tables below.
* Interest expense includes $4,816 and $4,655 relating to finance lease payments for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Operating lease payments are included as rent expense and included in net income.
During 2019, the Company retired the RV rental units and moved the rental units to pre-owned inventory for sale. Upon transfer to pre-owned inventory, the carrying value of these units was adjusted to market value for similar units acquired by the Company for resale.
Note: Figures in the table may not recalculate exactly due to rounding.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow Summary
Net Cash from Operating Activities
The Company generated cash from operating activities of approximately $111.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $38.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Net income increased by approximately $28.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Adjustments for non-cash expenses, included in net income, increased $1.7 million to $15.7 million from $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, there was approximately $66.2 million of cash provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities as compared to $24.3 million of cash provided in 2019. The fluctuations in assets and liabilities were primarily due to the decrease in inventory of $63.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, excluding the impact of inventory added by the acquisitions in Phoenix, Arizona and Elkhart and Burns Harbor, Indiana.
Net Cash from Investing Activities
The Company used cash in investing activities of approximately $30.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $19.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During 2020, net cash used in investing activities was primarily related to cash paid for acquisitions of $16.7 million and purchases of property and equipment of $18.6 million, partially offset by cash provided by the consummation of a sale leaseback in Nashville, Tennessee of $4.9 million.
Net Cash from Financing Activities
The Company used cash in financing activities of approximately $48.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in financing activities for year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to net repayments on the M&T Floor Plan Line of Credit of $59.4 million and M&T Term Loan of $2.3 million, both as defined under “M&T Credit Facility” below. These payments were partially offset by cash provided by the new M&T mortgage for the Houston service center of $6.1 million, PPP loans of $8.7 million and proceeds from the Nashville sale leaseback of $12.8 million. In addition, the Company paid dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock of $11.0 million as well as $3.1 million of acquisition notes payable.
Funding Needs and Sources
The Company has historically satisfied its liquidity needs through cash from operations and various borrowing arrangements. Cash requirements consist principally of scheduled payments of principal and interest on outstanding indebtedness (including indebtedness under its existing floor plan credit facility), the acquisition of inventory, capital expenditures, salary and sales commissions and lease expenses, and in 2020 also consisted of acquisitions of three dealerships. The Company expects that it has adequate cash on hand, cash from operations and borrowing capacity to meet it liquidity needs for the next twelve months. Management continually evaluates capital requirements and options to facilitate our growth strategy, and currently believes capital is adequate to support the business and its growth strategy under various market conditions.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had liquidity of approximately $63.5 million in cash and had working capital of approximately $29.7 million.
Capital expenditures include expenditures to extend the useful life of current facilities, relating to purchases of new capital assets and construction, and to expand operations. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company invested approximately $18.6 million and $16.9 million in capital expenditures, respectively.
The Company maintains sizable inventory in order to meet the expectations of its customers and believes that it will continue to require working capital consistent with past experience. Historically, the Company has funded its operations with internally generated cash flow and borrowings. Changes in working capital are driven primarily by levels of business activity. The Company maintains a floor plan credit facility to finance its vehicle inventory. At times, the Company has made temporary repayments on its existing floor plan credit facility using excess cash flow from operations.
M&T Credit Facility
On March 15, 2018, the Company replaced its prior debt agreements with Bank of America with a $200 million Senior Secured Credit Facility (the “M&T Facility” and the related credit agreement, the “Credit Agreement”). The M&T Facility includes a $175 million M&T floor plan line of credit (“M&T Floor Plan Line of Credit”), a $20 million M&T term loan (“M&T Term Loan”), and a $5 million M&T revolver (“M&T Revolver”). The M&T Facility requires the Company to meet certain financial covenants and is secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company. In February 2021, the maturity under the M&T Facility was extended from March 15, 2021 to June 15, 2021.
The M&T Floor Plan Line of Credit may be used to finance new vehicle inventory, but only $45.0 million may be used to finance pre-owned vehicle inventory and $4.5 million may be used to finance rental units. Principal becomes due upon the sale of the respective vehicle. The M&T Floor Plan Line of Credit accrues interest at either (a) the fluctuating 30-day London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) rate plus an applicable margin, which ranges from 2.00% to 2.30% based upon the Company’s total leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement), or (b) the Base Rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.00% to 1.30% based upon the Company’s total leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement). The Base Rate is defined in the agreement as the highest of M&T’s prime rate, the Federal Funds rate plus 0.50% or one-month LIBOR plus 1.00%. In addition, the Company will be charged for unused commitments at a rate of 0.15%.
The M&T Term Loan is being repaid in equal monthly principal installments of $0.242 million plus accrued interest through the maturity date. At the maturity date, the Company must pay a principal balloon payment of $11.3 million plus any accrued interest. The M&T Term Loan bears interest at (a) LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 2.25% to 3.00% based on the total leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) or (b) the Base Rate plus a margin of 1.25% to 2.00% based on the total leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement).
The M&T Revolver allows the Company to draw up to $5.0 million. The M&T Revolver bears interest at (a) 30-day LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 2.25% to 3.00% based on the total leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) or (b) the Base Rate plus a margin of 1.25% to 2.00% based on the total leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement). The M&T Revolver is also subject to unused commitment fees at rates varying from 0.25% to 0.50% based on the total leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement).
On March 6, 2020, the Company entered into the Third Amendment and Joinder to Credit Agreement (“Third Amendment”). Pursuant to the Third Amendment, Star Land of Houston, LLC (the “Mortgage Loan Borrower”) and Lone Star Diversified, LLC (“Diversified”), wholly owned subsidiaries of LDRV Holdings Corp, became parties to the Credit Agreement and were identified as additional loan parties. The existing borrowers and guarantors also requested that the lenders provide a mortgage loan credit facility covering acquisition, construction, and permanent mortgage financing for a property acquired by the Mortgage Loan Borrower (the “M&T Mortgage”). The amount borrowed under the M&T Mortgage was $6.136 million. The M&T Mortgage bears interest at (a) LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 2.25% or (b) the Base Rate plus a margin of 1.25%. The M&T Mortgage requires monthly payments of principal of $0.03 million and matures on June 15, 2021 when all remaining principal and accrued interest payments become due.
In order to help mitigate the early effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company entered into the Fourth Amendment to the M&T Credit Agreement on April 15, 2020 (the “Fourth Amendment”). Pursuant to the Fourth Amendment, the parties agreed to a suspension of scheduled principal payments on the M&T Term Loan and M&T Mortgage (to the extent the permanent loan period had begun for the M&T Mortgage) for the period from April 15, 2020 through June 15, 2020. Interest on the outstanding principal balances of the M&T Term Loan and M&T Mortgage continued to accrue and be paid at the applicable interest rate during the deferment period. At the end of the deferment period, the borrowers resumed making all required payments of principal on the M&T Term Loan and M&T Mortgage. All principal payments of the M&T Term Loan and M&T Mortgage deferred during the deferment period are due and payable on the M&T Term Loan maturity date or the M&T Mortgage maturity date, as applicable. Additionally, all principal payments deferred during the deferment period are due and payable (a) as described above or (b) if earlier, the date all outstanding amounts are otherwise due and payable under the terms of the Credit Agreement (including, without limitation, upon maturity, acceleration or, to the extent applicable under the Credit Agreement, demand for payment). In addition, the Fourth Amendment included a temporary suspension of scheduled curtailment payments required by the Credit Agreement for the period from April 1, 2020 through June 15, 2020. Amounts related to floor plan unused commitment fees and interest on the outstanding principal balance of the M&T Floor Plan Line of Credit continued to accrue and be paid at the applicable rate and on the terms set forth in the Credit Agreement during the suspension period.
As of December 31, 2020, there was $105.5 million outstanding under the M&T Floor Plan Line of Credit, $12.8 million outstanding under the M&T Term Loan and $6.0 million outstanding under the M&T Mortgage.
The M&T Facility matures in June 2021. The Company is currently in the process of negotiating and securing a replacement facility. The Company can offer no assurances that it will be successful in refinancing amounts outstanding under the facility under terms that are as favorable to the Company as current terms, or at all. 	
Please refer to the discussion above under “COVID-19 Developments” for a discussion of measures we took in the spring of 2020 to protect our liquidity, including by applying for, receiving and using the PPP Loans, and the potential impact on liquidity going forward, which disclosure is incorporated into this “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section by reference.
Cyclicality
Unit sales of RV vehicles historically have been cyclical, fluctuating with general economic cycles. During economic downturns, the RV retailing industry tends to experience similar periods of decline and recession as the general economy. The Company believes that the industry is influenced by general economic conditions and particularly by consumer confidence, the level of personal discretionary spending, fuel prices, interest rates and credit availability.
Seasonality and Effects of Weather
The Company’s operations generally experience modestly higher volumes of vehicle sales in the first half of each year due in part to consumer buying trends and the hospitable warm climate during the winter months at our largest location in Tampa, Florida.
The Company’s largest RV dealership is located near Tampa, Florida, which is in close proximity to the Gulf of Mexico. A severe weather event, such as a hurricane, could cause severe damage to property and inventory and decrease the traffic to our dealerships. Although the Company believes that it has adequate insurance coverage, if the Company were to experience a catastrophic loss, the Company may exceed its policy limits, and/or may have difficulty obtaining similar insurance coverage in the future. In addition, a severe weather event such as a hurricane can lead to material disruptions in the Company’s operations at its Tampa, Florida headquarters or dealership.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company prepares its consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, and in doing so, it must make estimates, assumptions and judgments affecting the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The Company bases its estimates, assumptions and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Different assumptions and judgments would change estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements, which, in turn, could change the results from those reported. The Company evaluates its critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments on an ongoing basis.
We believe that, of our significant accounting policies (see Note 2 of the financial statements included in this Form 10-K), the following policies are the most critical:
Basis of Presentation
Use of Estimates in the Preparation of Financial Statements
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include the assumptions used in the valuation of the net assets acquired in business combinations, goodwill and other intangible assets, provision for charge-backs, inventory write-downs, the allowance for doubtful accounts and stock-based compensation.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued accounting standard updates which clarified principles for recognizing revenue arising from contracts with customers (Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 (“ASC 606”). The core principle of the revenue standard is that an entity recognizes revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to clients in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The new guidance applies a five-step model for revenue measurement and recognition and also requires increased disclosures including the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows related to contracts with clients.
The Company adopted the new revenue recognition standard at the beginning of the first quarter of fiscal 2019 using the modified retrospective method of adoption and applied the guidance to those contracts that were not completed as of December 31, 2018. Based on the evaluation, the Company did not identify customer contracts which will require different recognition under the new guidance.
Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to the customers at the expected amount the Company is entitled to for such goods and services. Taxes collected on revenue producing transactions are excluded from revenue in the consolidated statements of operations.
Revenue from the sale of vehicle contracts is recognized at a point in time on delivery, transfer of title and completion of financing arrangements.
Revenue from the sale of parts, accessories, and related service is recognized as services and parts are delivered or as a customer approves elements of the completion of service. Revenue from the sale of parts, accessories, and related service is recognized in other revenue in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Revenue from the rental of vehicles is recognized pro rata over the period of the rental agreement. The rental agreements are generally short-term in nature. Revenue from rentals is included in other revenue in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 during which the rental business was discontinued. Campground revenue is also recognized over the time period of use of the campground.
The Company receives commissions from the sale of insurance and vehicle service contracts to customers. In addition, the Company arranges financing for customers through various financial institutions and receives commissions. The Company may be charged back (“charge-backs”) for financing fees, insurance or vehicle service contract commissions in the event of early termination of the contracts by the customers. The revenues from financing fees and commissions are recorded at the time of the sale of the vehicles and an estimated allowance for future charge-backs is established based on historical operating results and the termination provision of the applicable contracts. The estimates for future chargebacks require judgment by management, and as a result, there may be an element of risk associated with these revenue streams.
Cumulative Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock
The Company’s Series A Preferred Stock (See Note 16 - Preferred Stock) is cumulative redeemable convertible preferred stock. Accordingly, it is classified as temporary equity and is shown net of issuance costs and the relative fair value of warrants issued in conjunction with the issuance of the Series A Preferred Stock. Unpaid preferred dividends are accumulated, compounded at each quarterly dividend date and presented within the carrying value of the Series A Preferred Stock until a dividend is declared by the Board of Directors.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation for employees and directors in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718, Compensation (“ASC 718”). ASC 718 requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the statement of operations based on their fair values. Under the provisions of ASC 718, stock-based compensation costs are measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and are recognized as expense over the employee’s requisite or derived service period. In accordance with ASC 718, excess tax benefits realized from the exercise of stock-based awards are classified as cash flows from operating activities. All excess tax benefits and tax deficiencies (including tax benefits of dividends on share-based payment awards) are recognized as income tax expense or benefit in the consolidated statements of operations.
Lease recognition
At inception of a contract, we determine whether an arrangement is or contains a lease. For all leases, we determine the classification as either operating or financing.
Operating lease assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term, and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments under the lease. Lease recognition occurs at the commencement date and lease liability amounts are based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Because most of our leases do not provide information to determine an implicit interest rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate in determining the present value of lease payments. Operating lease assets also include any lease payments made prior to the commencement date and exclude lease incentives received. Operating lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. We have lease agreements with both lease and non-lease components, which are generally accounted for together as a single lease component.