ITEM 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This section presents a review of Lakeland Bancorp, Inc.’s consolidated results of operations and financial condition. You should read this section in conjunction with the selected consolidated financial data that is presented on the preceding page as well as the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes to financial statements. As used in the following discussion, the term “Company” refers to Lakeland Bancorp, Inc. and “Lakeland” refers to the Company’s wholly owned banking subsidiary, Lakeland Bank. The Company has omitted comparative discussion of 2019 and 2018 results, which are presented in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K/A for the year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 6, 2020.
Statements Regarding Forward-Looking Information
The information disclosed in this document includes various forward-looking statements that are made in reliance upon the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 with respect to credit quality (including delinquency trends and the allowance for credit losses), corporate objectives and other financial and business matters. The words “anticipates,” “projects,” “intends,” “estimates,” “expects,” “believes,” “plans,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and other similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. The Company cautions that these forward-looking statements are necessarily speculative and speak only as of the date made, and are subject to numerous assumptions, risks and uncertainties, all of which may change over time. Actual results could differ materially from such forward-looking statements.
In addition to the risk factors disclosed in Item 1A in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the following factors, among others, could cause the Company’s actual results to differ materially and adversely from such forward-looking statements: changes in the financial services industry and the U.S. and global capital markets; changes in economic conditions nationally, regionally and in the Company’s markets; the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak and its effects on economic activity; the nature and timing of actions of the Federal Reserve Board and other regulators; the nature and timing of legislation affecting the financial services industry; government intervention in the U.S. financial system; changes in levels of market interest rates; pricing pressures on loan and deposit products; credit risks of Lakeland’s lending and leasing activities; successful implementation, deployment and upgrades of new and existing technology, systems, services and products; and customers’ acceptance of Lakeland’s products and services.
The above-listed risk factors are not necessarily exhaustive, particularly as to possible future events, and new risk factors may emerge from time to time. Certain events may occur that could cause the Company’s actual results to be materially different than those described in the Company’s periodic filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Any statements made by the Company that are not historical facts should be considered to be forward-looking statements. The Company is not obligated to update and does not undertake to update any of its forward-looking statements made herein.
Strategy
The Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary, Lakeland Bank, currently operates 48 banking offices located in Northern and Central New Jersey and Highland Mills, New York. Lakeland offers a broad range of lending, depository and related financial services to individuals and small to medium-sized businesses located in its market areas. Lakeland also offers a broad range of consumer banking services, including lending, depository, safe deposit services and wealth management services.
Lakeland’s growth has come from a combination of organic growth and acquisitions. In addition to organic growth, through December 31, 2020, the Company has acquired eight community banks with an aggregate asset total of approximately $2.28 billion at the date of the respective acquisitions. All acquired banks have been merged into Lakeland and their holding companies, if applicable, have been merged into the Company. The Company’s strategy is to continue growing both organically and through acquisition should opportunities allow. The Company continues to evaluate opportunities to increase market share by expanding within existing and contiguous markets.
The Company’s strategic aim is to provide an adequate return to its shareholders by focusing on profitable growth through services that meet the needs of its customers in its market areas. This will be accomplished by continuing to offer commercial and consumer loan, deposit and other financial product services in a changing economic and technological environment. In early 2021, Lakeland added two lenders to grow our commercial loan portfolio with life insurance-based financing.
The Company offers internet banking, mobile banking and cash management services to meet the needs of its business and consumer customers. In 2019, the Company embarked on a digital strategy initiative, impacting all operational areas of Lakeland, with a focus on providing a superior customer experience, evolving our product and service delivery and enhancing our operational functionality and cost-effectiveness. The Company devoted 2020 to building our infrastructure to implement the strategy. We hired a highly-skilled team, strengthened our project management and delivery capabilities and began organizing data housed in various areas of the Company. Investments were also made in customer relationship management tools, which
Table of Content
will provide an enhanced view of our customers. In the coming year, we will begin to apply these emerging capabilities to gain insights into our customers and align our products and services with their needs.
The Company’s results of operations are primarily dependent upon net interest income, the difference between interest earned on interest-earning assets and the interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities. For information on how interest rate change can influence the Company’s net interest income and how the Company manages its net interest income, see “Interest Rate Risk” in the discussion below.
The Company generates noninterest income such as income from retail and business account fees, loan servicing fees, loan origination fees, appreciation in the cash surrender value of bank owned life insurance, income from securities sales, fees from wealth management services and investment product sales, income from the origination and sale of residential mortgages and SBA loans and other fees. The Company’s operating expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefits expense, occupancy and equipment expense, data processing expense, ATM and debit card expense, marketing and advertising expense and other general and administrative expenses. The Company’s results of operations are also affected by general economic conditions, changes in market interest rates, changes in asset quality, changes in asset values, actions of regulatory agencies and government policies.
The Company continues to control its expenses by continually reviewing its ongoing noninterest expense, including evaluating its salary expense, ongoing service contract expense, marketing expenses and other expenses. The Company also controls its expenses by leveraging its technology investments that maximize the efficient delivery of products and services to its customers, which allows it further to evaluate its infrastructure. Lakeland will continue to consolidate and close branches when an evaluation determines a significant cost savings may be obtained through the consolidation or closure. In addition, opportunities to open new branches are also evaluated.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The accounting and reporting policies of the Company and Lakeland conform with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) and predominant practices within the banking industry. The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. These estimates and assumptions also affect reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
On December 31, 2020, effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted new accounting guidance, which requires entities to estimate and recognize an allowance for lifetime expected credit losses for loans and other financial assets measured at amortized cost. Previously, an allowance was recognized based on probable and reasonably estimable incurred losses inherent in the loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. See Note 1 to the Company's financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the Company's accounting policies and methodologies for establishing the allowance and the liability for off-balance-sheet commitments beginning in 2020.
The allowance for credit losses is a critical accounting estimate for the following reasons:
•estimates relating to the allowance for credit losses require management to project future loan performance, including cash flows, delinquencies, charge-offs and collateral values, based on a reasonable and supportable forecast period utilizing forward-looking economic scenarios in order to estimate potential credit losses;
•the allowance for credit losses is influenced by factors outside of management's control such as industry and business trends, geopolitical events and the effects of laws and regulations as well as economic conditions including, but not limited to, interest rates, housing prices, GDP, inflation and unemployment; and
•judgment is required to determine whether the models used to generate the allowance for credit losses produce results that appropriately reflect a current estimate of lifetime expected credit losses.
Because management's estimates of the allowance for credit losses involve a high degree of judgment, the subjectivity of the assumptions used and the potential for changes in the forecasted economic environment that could result in changes to the amount of the allowance recorded, there is uncertainty inherent in such estimates. Changes in these estimates could significantly impact the allowance and provision for credit losses.
The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a deterioration in U.S. economic conditions and an increase in economic uncertainty. As a result, the Company's future loss estimates may vary considerably as a result of the changes in the economy compared to management's December 31, 2020 assumptions; the magnitude of the pandemic; and the impact of the national monetary and fiscal response.
Table of Content
Use of Non-GAAP Disclosures
Reported amounts are presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The Company’s management believes that the supplemental non-GAAP information, which consists of measurements and ratios based on tangible equity, tangible assets and the efficiency ratio, which excludes certain items considered to be non-recurring from earnings, is utilized by regulators and market analysts to evaluate a company’s financial condition and therefore, such information is useful to investors. These disclosures should not be viewed as a substitute for financial results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, nor are they necessarily comparable to non-GAAP performance measures which may be presented by other companies.
Executive Summary
COVID-19 continues to have a significant, negative effect on families and businesses in New Jersey and throughout the United States. The prolonged COVID-19 outbreak, or any other epidemic that harms the global economy, the U.S. economy or the markets in which we operate could adversely affect our operations. If conditions worsen, we may again experience temporary closures of our offices and/or suspension of certain services until it is safe to open and return to work. The ultimate effect of COVID-19 on the Company's business will depend on numerous factors and future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. At this time, it is unknown how long the COVID-19 pandemic will last or when all restrictions on individuals and businesses will be lifted and businesses and their employees will be able to fully resume normal activities. Further, additional information may emerge regarding the severity of COVID-19, effectiveness of the vaccines developed and additional actions may be taken by federal, state and local governments to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact. Changes in the behavior of customers, businesses and their employees as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including social distancing practices, even after formal restrictions have been lifted, are also unknown. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the actions taken to contain it or reduce its impact, the Company may experience changes in the value of collateral securing outstanding loans, reductions in the credit quality of borrowers and the inability of borrowers to repay loans in accordance with their terms. Management is actively managing credit risk in the Company's commercial loan portfolio, including reviewing the industries that the Company believes are most likely to be impacted by emerging COVID-19 events. These and similar factors and events may have substantial negative effects on the business, financial condition, and results of operations of the Company and its customers.
The CARES Act was signed into law on March 27, 2020 and provided over $2.0 trillion in emergency economic relief to individuals and businesses impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act authorized the Small Business Administration ("SBA") to temporarily guarantee loans under a new 7(a) loan program called the Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP"). As a qualified SBA lender, we were automatically authorized to originate PPP loans. An eligible business could apply for a PPP loan up to the lesser of (1) 2.5 times its average monthly payroll costs or (2) $10.0 million. PPP loans have (a) an interest rate of 1.00%, (b) a two-year loan term to maturity; and (c) principal and interest payments deferred for six months from the date of the disbursement. The SBA guarantees 100% of the PPP loans made to eligible borrowers. The entire principal amount of the borrower's PPP loan is eligible to be reduced by the loan forgiveness amount under the PPP so long as employee and compensation levels of the business are maintained and 75% of the loan proceeds are used for payroll expenses, with the remaining 25% of the loan proceeds used for other qualifying expenses.
In June 2020, Congress passed the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act ("PPP Flexibility") to ease provisions of PPP related to the time period permitted to use the proceeds of loans, the deferral period of principal and interest payments on loans not forgiven and an extension of the maturity date of loan and loan forgiveness on loans. Key changes include (a) extending from two to five years the minimum maturity of any remaining loan balance after an application for loan forgiveness (for those loans closed after the enactment of PPP Flexibility); (b) extending the “covered period” (i.e., when costs that are eligible for forgiveness must be paid or incurred) from eight weeks to 24 weeks (or December 31, 2020, whichever is earlier); (c) reducing from 75 percent to 60 percent the amount of loan proceeds that must be used for payroll costs although the remainder must continue to be allocated to interest on mortgages, rent, and utilities; (d) permitting an exemption from reductions in loan forgiveness amounts based on reductions in full-time equivalent employees if the borrower, in good faith, documents an inability to return to the same level of business activity due to standards for sanitation, social distancing, or other worker or customer safety requirements established by the Department of Health and Human Services ("HHS"), the Center for Disease Control ("CDC") or Occupational, Safety and Health Administration ("OSHA"); and (e) allowing deferral of payments until the amount of forgiveness is remitted by the SBA to the lender or, if the borrower has not applied for forgiveness, ten months after the expiration of the covered period. The provisions of PPP Flexibility became effective upon enactment and will apply to all loans made under the PPP. The SBA released guidance on PPP loan forgiveness, which presently includes three different application methods depending primarily on the size of the PPP loan, reductions in staffing or salaries, or a business’ inability to operate at pre-COVID levels due to compliance with certain federally imposed requirements related to COVID-19. To qualify for full forgiveness, businesses must document that at least 60% of the PPP loan amount was used towards payroll costs and that the remaining 40% was used for other eligible costs such as mortgage interest, rent payments and/or utilities. Forgiveness was to be reduced by any Economic Injury Disaster Loan (“EIDL”) advance amount the business received.
Table of Content
Section 4013 of the CARES Act, as interpreted by the "Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working With Customers Affected by the Coronavirus (Revised)" (the “Revised Statement”), dated April 17, 2020, includes criteria that enable financial institutions to exclude from TDR status loans that are modified for customers affected by COVID-19. Under these provisions, TDR status is not required for the term of a loan modification if (i) the loan modification is made in connection with COVID-19, (ii) the loan was not past due more than 30 days as of December 31, 2019 and (iii) the loan modification is entered into during the period between March 1, 2020, and the earlier of (a) 60 days after COVID-19 is no longer characterized as a National Emergency or (b) December 31, 2020. Furthermore, pursuant to the Revised Statement, for loan modifications that do not meet these criteria but are made in connection with COVID-19, such loans may be presumed not to be TDR if they are current at a time the loan modification program was implemented and the modifications are short-term (e.g., six months). If the criteria are not met under either Section 4013 or the Revised Statement, banks are required to follow their existing accounting policies to determine whether COVID-related modifications should be accounted for as a TDR. The Company has elected to suspend the classification of loan modifications as TDR if they qualify under Section 4013 or the Revised Statement.
On December 27, 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (the "CAA") was signed into law. In addition to providing funding for normal government operations, this bill provides for additional COVID-19 relief. The CAA extends certain provisions of the CARES Act, provides additional funding for others and contains new relief provisions. The Company is currently accepting online applications for PPP First Draw Loans to first-time borrowers as well as PPP Second Draw Loans for previous PPP borrowers under the CAA.
The CARES Act also provided financial institutions with the option to defer adoption of the Financial Accounting Standards Board's Accounting Standard Update ("ASU") 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326) ("ASU 2016-13) until the earlier of the end of the pandemic or December 31, 2020. The CAA extended the option to delay implementation of ASU 2016-13 until January 1, 2022, however the Company has adopted this standard as of December 31, 2020, and has applied it retroactively to January 1, 2020.
Management has identified that the COVID-19 pandemic could adversely affect the liquidity of the Company. As such, management has taken specific steps to minimize the risk. In addition to processes already in place to closely monitor changes in liquidity needs, including those that may result from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company has increased collateral and expanded access to additional borrowings should it be necessary in order to meet liquidity needs. While the Company is unable to predict actual fluctuations in deposit or cash balances, management continues to monitor liquidity and believes that its current level of liquidity is sufficient to meet its current and future operational needs.
In addition, the carrying value of investment securities, right-of-use assets, goodwill and other intangibles could decrease, resulting in future impairment losses. Management will continue to evaluate current economic conditions to determine if a triggering event would impact the current valuations for these assets. As a result, it is not currently possible to ascertain the overall impact of COVID-19 on the Company's business.
As the COVID-19 pandemic has advanced, Lakeland has made it a priority to safeguard the health of our associates and customers, while assisting customers impacted by the economic burdens of COVID-19 and providing support to our communities. Lakeland initiated remote working plans and encouraged the use of our mobile and online banking alternatives as we adjusted our branch hours, decreased lobby usage and temporarily closed branches. To assist COVID-19 impacted borrowers, we offered temporary payment deferrals on commercial, mortgage and consumer loans and we have assisted customers with the origination of PPP loans to help strengthen local businesses and preserve jobs in our communities. Additionally to further support our customers, the Company decided to participate in the Main Street Lending Program established by the Federal Reserve to support lending to small and medium-sized businesses that were in sound financial condition before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite this challenging environment, our associates show tireless professionalism, compassion and dedication to serving our customers under these unprecedented conditions. We remain open for business, continuing to lend to qualified businesses for working capital and general business purposes.
Table of Content
Financial Overview
The year ended December 31, 2020 represented a year of continued loan and deposit growth for the Company. As discussed in this management’s discussion and analysis:
•Net income was $57.5 million, or $1.13 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net income of $70.7 million, or $1.38 per diluted share, for 2019.
•In 2020, return on average assets was 0.80%, return on average common equity was 7.74% and return on average tangible common equity was 9.86%. This compared to 2019 ratios of return on average assets of 1.12%, return on average common equity of 10.14% and return on average tangible common equity of 13.16%.
•The Company adopted ASU 2016-13 at December 31, 2020, and, as a result, recorded an increase in the allowance for credit losses on loans of $6.7 million effective January 1, 2020.
•2020 financial results were adversely impacted by an elevated provision for credit losses of $27.2 million, compared to a provision for loan losses of $2.1 million for 2019.
•Total loans increased by $883.4 million, or 17%, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, and included $284.6 million in PPP loans.
•Loans on payment deferral at December 31, 2020 totaled $9.7 million, or 0.2% of total loans.
•Total deposits increased $1.2 billion, or 22%, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, including an increase of $386.1 million, or 34% in noninterest bearing deposits.
•Balance sheet restructures during 2020 involving the payoff of $114.9 million in FHLB borrowings, resulted in prepayment fees of $4.1 million.
•The Company’s net interest margin was 3.09% for 2020 compared to 3.33% for 2019.
Net Income
Net income for 2020 was $57.5 million, or $1.13 per diluted share, compared to net income of $70.7 million, or $1.38 per diluted share, in 2019. The major contributing factor to the decrease in net income was provision for credit losses of $27.2 million, compared to a provision for loan losses of $2.1 million for 2019.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the difference between interest income on earning assets and the cost of funds supporting those assets. The Company’s net interest income is determined by: (i) the volume of interest-earning assets that it holds and the yields that it earns on those assets, and (ii) the volume of interest-bearing liabilities that it has assumed and the rates that it pays on those liabilities.
In March 2020, the FOMC lowered the target range for the federal funds rate twice by a total of 150 basis points, bringing the current target range to between 0.00% and 0.25%. In 2019, the target range was lowered by a total of 75 basis points and in 2018, the range was raised four times by a total of 100 basis points.
For 2020, the Company's net interest margin was 3.09% compared to 3.33% for 2019, reflecting a decrease in interest income as a effect of the low interest rate environment on higher cash balances held and loan yields. The low interest rate environment has had a positive effect on interest costs on deposits.
Table of Content
The following table reflects the components of the Company’s net interest income, setting forth for the years presented, (1) average assets, liabilities and stockholders’ equity, (2) interest income earned on interest-earning assets and interest expense paid on interest-bearing liabilities, (3) average yields earned on interest-earning assets and average rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities, (4) the Company’s net interest spread (i.e., the average yield on interest-earning assets less the average cost of interest-bearing liabilities) and (5) the Company’s net interest margin. Rates are computed on a tax equivalent basis assuming a 21% tax rate.
(1)Includes non-accrual loans, loans held for sale and deferred loan fees.
(2)Includes interest-bearing cash accounts.
(3)Net interest income on a tax equivalent basis divided by interest-earning assets.
Table of Content
Interest income and expense volume/rate analysis
The following table shows the impact that changes in average balances of the Company’s assets and liabilities and changes in average interest rates have had on the Company’s net interest income over the past three years. This information is presented on a tax equivalent basis assuming a 21% tax rate. If a change in interest income or expense is attributable to a change in volume and a change in rate, the amount of the change is allocated proportionately.
Net interest income on a tax equivalent basis for 2020 was $208.1 million, compared to $196.4 million in 2019, resulting primarily from growth in average earning assets of $840.2 million. The net interest margin decreased from 3.33% in 2019 to 3.09% in 2020 primarily as a result of the current low interest rate environment resulting in lower yields on interest-earning assets as well as higher cash levels. The effect on net interest income was due to the decrease in yield on interest-earning assets and was partially mitigated by an increase in interest income earned on free funds (interest-earning assets funded by noninterest-bearing liabilities) resulting from an increase in average noninterest-bearing deposits of $270.1 million.
Interest income on a tax equivalent basis decreased from $256.9 million in 2019 to $249.3 million in 2020, a decrease of $7.6 million, or 3%. The decrease in interest income resulted from a 66 basis point decline in the yield on interest-earning assets, partially offset by a $840.2 million increase in average interest-earning assets. The decrease in yield on interest-earning assets was due primarily to a reduction in the yield on loans due to decreases in the prime rate and LIBOR during 2019 and 2020, increased balance of lower-yielding federal funds sold, as well as the origination of lower-yielding PPP loans during 2020. The average balance of loans increased $688.0 million compared to 2019, while the yield on average loans of 4.07% in 2020 was 66 basis points lower than 2019. The yield on average taxable investment securities decreased 27 basis points, while the yield on tax-exempt investment securities decreased 13 basis points compared to 2019.
Total interest expense decreased from $60.5 million in 2019 to $41.2 million in 2020, a decrease of $19.3 million. Total average interest-bearing liabilities increased $510.2 million as a result of organic growth, while the cost of average interest-bearing liabilities decreased from 1.35% in 2019 to 0.83% in 2020 largely driven by lower market interest rates. The cost of interest-bearing transaction accounts, time deposits and borrowings decreased by 60 basis points, 57 basis points, and 21 basis points, respectively, compared to 2019.
Provision for Credit Losses
The Company adopted ASU 2016-13 on December 31, 2020, and has applied it retroactively to January 1, 2020. ASU 2016-13 requires the measurement of expected credit losses for financial assets, including loans and certain off-balance-sheet credit exposures, measured at amortized cost. See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Company's financial statements for a description of the adoption of ASU 2016-13 and the Company's allowance methodology.
Table of Content
In determining the provision for credit losses on loans and off-balance-sheet credit exposures, management measures expected credit losses based on relevant information about past events, current conditions, reasonable and supportable forecasts, prepayments and future economic conditions. The key assumptions of the methodology include the lookback periods, historic net charge-off factors, economic forecasts, reversion periods, prepayments and qualitative adjustments. The Company uses its best judgment to assess economic conditions and loss data in estimating the CECL allowance and these estimates are subject to periodic refinement based on changes in underlying external or internal data.
Provision for credit losses totaled $27.2 million in 2020, of which $26.0 million was related to loans, compared to a provision for loan losses of $2.1 million for 2019. The increased provision for 2020 was primarily due to the negative impact of COVID-19 on forecasted economic conditions and credit loss projections with the remainder of the provision attributable to loan growth. The provision attributable to off-balance-sheet exposures was $1.3 million and a negative provision of $28,000 was attributable to held to maturity securities.
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income of $27.1 million in 2020 increased by $314,000 compared to 2019. Gains on sales of loans and swap income increased $1.7 million and $1.5 million, respectively, compared to 2019, both due primarily to the low interest rate environment. Gain on sales of securities totaled $1.2 million in 2020 compared to no such gains in 2019. Service charges on deposit accounts decreased $2.1 million due primarily to changes in customer behavior resulting from the pandemic. Included in noninterest income in 2020, was a $552,000 loss on equity securities compared to gains of $496,000 in 2019. Other income of $735,000 in 2020 was $499,000 lower than 2019 due primarily to gains during 2019 resulting from payoffs of purchased credit impaired loans. Noninterest income represented 12% of total revenue in 2020. Total revenue is defined as net interest income plus noninterest income.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest expense in 2020 totaled $132.8 million, which was $6.0 million greater than the $126.8 million reported for 2019. The increase in noninterest expense was due primarily to $4.1 million in FHLB debt prepayment fees resulting from the Company's balance sheet restructurings during 2020. Salaries and employee benefits increased $3.1 million in 2020, from the same period last year, as a result of an increase in staffing levels as well as normal merit increases. Furniture and equipment expense in 2020 increased $2.6 million compared to 2019 due primarily to an increase in information technology service agreement expense, including expenses related to the Company's digital initiative. FDIC insurance expense increased $1.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to an increase in deposit balances as well as the application of FDIC assessment credits in 2019 resulting from the insurance fund reserve ratio exceeding the required level. Marketing expense decreased $692,000 in 2020 primarily due to the timing of marketing campaigns impacted by the pandemic as well as increased advertising during 2019 in new locations as a result of the merger with Highlands Bancorp. Noninterest expense in 2019 included merger-related expenses of $3.2 million resulting from the merger with Highlands Bancorp.
The efficiency ratio, a non-GAAP measure, expresses the relationship between noninterest expense (excluding long-term debt prepayment fees, merger related expenses and core deposit amortization) to total tax-equivalent revenue (excluding gains and/or losses on securities and gain and/or losses on debt extinguishment).
Table of Content
Income Taxes
The Company’s effective income tax rate was 23.1% and 24.8% in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The effective tax rate decrease from 2019 to 2020 primarily resulted from a decline in pretax income from 2019 to 2020 and the resulting increase in the percentage of tax-advantaged items over pretax income.
Financial Condition
Total assets at December 31, 2020 were $7.66 billion, an increase of $953.1 million, or 14%, from $6.71 billion at December 31, 2019. Loans, net of deferred fees, were $6.02 billion and $5.14 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $883.4 million, or 17% during 2020. Total deposits were $6.46 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.16 billion, or 22%, from December 31, 2019.
The Company recorded the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed in the acquisition of Highlands Bancorp, Inc. in January 2019, at their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. Total assets acquired were $496.5 million and total loans and total deposits acquired were $426.1 million and $409.6 million, respectively.
Loans
Lakeland primarily serves New Jersey, the Hudson Valley region in New York and the surrounding areas. Its equipment finance division serves a broader market with a primary focus on the Northeast. At the time of adoption of CECL, the loan portfolio segmentation was expanded to nine portfolio segments, taking into consideration common loan attributes and risk characteristics, as well as historical reporting metrics and data availability. See Note 1 to the Company's financial statements for a full description of the segments. The information below for December 31, 2020 is presented in accordance with ASU 2016-13. The Company did not reclassify comparative financial periods and has presented those disclosures under previously applicable U.S. GAAP.
At December 31, 2020, the amortized cost of loans totaled $6.02 billion, an increase of $883.4 million when compared to the balance at December 31, 2019 of $5.14 billion. Commercial loans secured by real estate increased $649.9 million to $4.24 billion at December 31, 2020. Commercial and industrial loans increased $286.3 million in 2020 and includes PPP loans totaling $284.6 million. Residential mortgage loans increased $42.2 million as customers took advantage of the low interest rate environment to refinance their mortgages. Additionally, the Company decided to retain a higher percentage of originated residential mortgage loans in 2020 compared to 2019. Equipment finance loans increased $5.6 million, while construction and consumer loans declined by $68.3 million and $35.4 million, respectively, during 2020.
The following tables present the classification of Lakeland’s gross loans by major category as of December 31 for each of the last five years:
(1) With the adoption of ASU 2016-13 in 2020, the Company expanded its portfolio segments. Prior years have not been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation.
Table of Content
(2) With the adoption of ASU 2016-13 in 2020, net deferred fees and costs are allocated to the appropriate segments.
At December 31, 2020, there were no concentrations of loans exceeding 10% of total loans outstanding other than loans that are secured by real estate and commercial, industrial and other loans. Commercial, industrial and other includes $284.6 million of PPP loans, which are expected to be fully guaranteed by the SBA. Loan concentrations are considered to exist when there are amounts loaned to a multiple number of borrowers engaged in similar activities which would cause them to be similarly impacted by economic or other related conditions.
The following table presents commercial loan maturities and sensitivity to changes in interest rates at December 31, 2020:
Risk Elements
Commercial loans are placed on a non-accrual status with all accrued interest and unpaid interest reversed if (a) because of the deterioration in the financial position of the borrower, they are maintained on a cash basis (which means payments are applied when and as received rather than on a regularly scheduled basis), (b) payment of all contractual principal and interest is not expected, or (c) principal and interest have been in default for a period of 90 days or more unless the obligation is both well-secured and in process of collection. Residential mortgage loans and closed-end consumer loans are placed on non-accrual status at the time principal and interest have been in default for a period of 90 days or more, except where there exists sufficient collateral to cover the defaulted principal and interest payments, and the loans are well-secured and in the process of collection. Open-end consumer loans secured by real estate are generally placed on non-accrual status and reviewed for charge-off when principal and interest payments are four months in arrears unless the obligations are well-secured and in the process of collection. Interest thereafter on such charged-off consumer loans is taken into income when received only after full recovery of principal. As a general rule, a non-accrual asset may be restored to accrual status when none of its principal or interest is due and unpaid and satisfactory payments have been received for a sustained period (usually six months), or when it otherwise becomes well-secured and in the process of collection.
Table of Content
The following tables present certain information regarding Lakeland’s non-accrual loans, including troubled debt restructurings that are on non-accrual, and past due loans and other real estate owned and other repossessed assets as of December 31, for each of the last five years:
(1) With the adoption of ASU 2016-13 in 2020, the Company expanded its portfolio segments. Prior years have not been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation.
(2) Non-accrual loans in 2020 includes $6.6 million in purchased credit deteriorated loans ("PCD").
(3) Non-accrual loans excludes purchased credit impaired loans ("PCI") for the years prior to 2020.
Non-accrual loans increased to $42.8 million on December 31, 2020 from $21.1 million at December 31, 2019 primarily due to an increase in the commercial loans secured by real estate of $21.3 million. Additionally, commercial, industrial and other non-accruals increased $1.1 million and construction non-accruals increased $473,000 when compared to December 31, 2019 as a result of the inclusion of PCD loans in 2020.
Non-accruals as of December 31, 2020 include fourteen loan relationships between $500,000 and $1.0 million totaling $9.6 million, and seven loan relationships exceeding $1.0 million totaling $20.6 million. All non-accrual loans are in various stages of litigation, foreclosure, or workout. Non-accrual loans included $1.1 million and $1.6 million in troubled debt restructurings as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Table of Content
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, Lakeland had $3.9 million and $5.7 million, respectively, in loans that are TDRs and still accruing. Restructured loans that are still accruing are those loans where Lakeland has granted concessions to the borrower in payment terms, in rate and/or in maturity as a result of the financial difficulties of the borrower where the borrower has demonstrated the ability to repay based on the modified terms of the loan. The CARES Act provided relief from TDR classification for certain loan modification related to the COVID-19 pandemic beginning March 1, 2020 through the earlier of 60 days after the end of the pandemic or December 31, 2020. Additionally, banking regulatory agencies issued interagency guidance that COVID-19 related short-term modifications (i.e., six months or less) granted to borrowers that were current as of the loan modification program implementation date do not need to be considered TDRs. In December 2020, the CAA extended this guidance to modifications made until the earlier of January 1, 2022 or 60 days after the end of the COVID-19 national emergency. The Company elected this provision of the CARES Act and excluded modified loans that met the required guidelines for relief from its TDR classification.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had $139.4 million and $47.7 million, respectively, of loans that were rated substandard that were not classified as non-performing. The increase in substandard loans that were not classified as non-performing relates principally to the COVID-19 pandemic. A large number of the additional substandard loans were modifications under the CARES Act and not classified as TDRs. There were no additional loans at December 31, 2020, other than those designated non-performing or substandard, where Lakeland was aware of any credit conditions of any borrowers that would indicate a possibility of the borrowers not complying with the present terms and conditions of repayment and which may result in such loans being included as non-accrual, past due or renegotiated at a future date.
The Company adopted ASU 2016-13 in 2020, with an adjustment to the allowance for credit losses on loans of $6.7 million, using a modified retrospective approach. For further information see Notes 1, 5 and 6 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following tables present for each of the five years ended December 31, 2020, the historical relationships among the amount of loans outstanding, the allowance for credit losses on loans, the provision for credit losses on loans, the amount of loans charged off and the amount of loan recoveries:
Table of Content
The total allowance for credit losses on loans increased $31.1 million during 2020 to $71.1 million at December 31, 2020. The adoption of ASU 2016-13 increased this allowance by $6.7 million. During the year, the provision for credit losses on loans increased by $23.8 million due to COVID-19's negative impact on forecasted economic conditions, credit loss projections and loan growth during 2020. The allowance for credit losses on loans was 1.18% of total loans on December 31, 2020 compared to 0.78% of total loans on December 31, 2019. Management believes, based on appraisals and estimated selling costs, that the majority of its non-performing loans are well secured and that the reserves on its non-performing loans are adequate. Based upon the process employed and giving recognition to all accompanying factors related to the loan portfolio, management considers the allowance for credit losses on loans to be adequate at December 31, 2020.
The following tables present the allowance for credit losses on loans allocated by loan category and the percent of loans in each category to total loans at the dates indicated. The allowance for credit losses on loans allocated to each category is not necessarily indicative of future losses in any particular category and does not restrict the use of the allowance to absorb losses in other categories.
(1) With the adoption of ASU 2016-13 in 2020, the Company expanded its portfolio segments. Prior years have not been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation.
Investment Securities
The Company has classified its investment securities into the available for sale and held to maturity categories based on its intent and ability to hold the securities to maturity.
Table of Content
The following table sets forth the carrying value of the Company’s investment securities, both available for sale and held to maturity, at December 31 for each of the last three years. Investment securities available for sale are stated at fair value while securities held for maturity are stated at cost, adjusted for amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts.
In addition, the Company has an equity securities portfolio, which consists of investments in community reinvestment funds and until 2020, investments in other financial institutions for market appreciation purposes, with a carrying value of $14.7 million, $16.5 million and $15.9 million, at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The Company also does not own any interests in any hedge funds or private equity funds that are designated “covered funds” under the Volcker Rule. All of the Company’s mortgage-backed securities are issued by U.S. Government or U.S. Government sponsored entities.
The following tables presents the maturity distribution and weighted average yields (calculated on the basis of the stated yields to maturity, considering applicable premium or discount), on a fully taxable equivalent basis, of investment securities as of December 31, 2020, at book value:
Table of Content
Other Assets
Assets included within "other assets" on the Company's balance sheet increased from $54.7 million at December 31, 2019 to $110.3 million at December 31, 2020 primarily due to a $53.6 million increase in swap assets.
Deposits
Total deposits increased from $5.29 billion at December 31, 2019 to $6.46 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.16 billion, or 22%. Noninterest-bearing deposits increased $386.1 million, or 34%, to $1.51 billion, while savings and interest-bearing transaction accounts and time deposits increased $568.4 million and $207.5 million, respectively. The increase in deposits during 2020 can be attributed to organic growth, PPP-related deposits and CD and money market promotions.
The average amount of deposits and the average rates paid on deposits for the years indicated are summarized in the following table:
Table of Content
As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate amount of outstanding time deposits issued in amounts of greater than $250,000, broken down by time remaining to maturity, was as follows:
Federal Home Loan Bank Advances and Other Borrowings
Lakeland may borrow from time to time from the Federal Home Loan Bank ("FHLB") and other correspondent banks as part of its overall funding and liquidity management program. The following tables provide a summary of the borrowings as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
FHLB advances totaled $25.0 million at December 31, 2020, with a weighted average interest rate of 0.77%, while at December 31, 2019, FHLB advances totaled $165.8 million, with a weighted average interest rate of 2.24%. These advances are collateralized by first mortgage loans and have prepayment penalties. In 2020, the Company repaid an aggregate of $114.9 million in advances and recorded $4.1 million in long-term prepayment fees.
Derivatives
Lakeland enters into interest rate swaps (“swaps”) with loan customers to provide a facility to mitigate the fluctuations in the variable rate on the respective loans. These swaps are matched in offsetting terms to swaps that Lakeland enters into with an outside third party. The swaps are reported at fair value in other assets or other liabilities. Lakeland’s swaps qualify as derivatives, but are not designated as hedging instruments; thus any net gain or loss resulting from changes in the fair value is recognized in other noninterest income.
In 2016, the Company entered into two cash flow hedges in order to hedge the variable cash outflows associated with its subordinated debentures. The notional value of these hedges was $30.0 million. The Company’s objectives in using the cash flow hedge is to add stability to interest expense and to manage its exposure to interest rate movements. The Company used interest rate swaps designated as cash flow hedges which involved the receipt of variable amounts from a counterparty in exchange for the Company making fixed-rate payments over the life of the agreements without exchange of the underlying notional amount. In these particular hedges the Company is paying a third party an average of 1.10% in exchange for a payment at 3 month LIBOR over a five year period. The effective portion of changes in the fair value of derivatives designated and that qualify as cash flow hedges are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income and are subsequently reclassified into earnings in the period that the hedged forecasted transaction affects earnings. During 2020, the Company did not record any hedge ineffectiveness.
Table of Content
Further discussion of Lakeland’s financial derivatives is set forth in Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Liquidity
“Liquidity” measures whether an entity has sufficient cash flow to meet its financial obligations and commitments on a timely basis. The Company is liquid when its subsidiary bank has the cash available to meet the borrowing and cash withdrawal requirements of customers and the Company can pay for current and planned expenditures and satisfy its debt obligations.
Lakeland funds loan demand and operation expenses from several sources:
•Net income. Cash provided by operating activities was $85.0 million in 2020 compared to $87.1 million in 2019.
•Deposits. Lakeland can offer new products or change its rate structure in order to increase deposits. In 2020, Lakeland generated $1.16 billion in deposit growth compared to $263.4 million in 2019, excluding the impact of the Highlands Bancorp, Inc. acquisition.
•Sales of securities and overnight funds. At year-end 2020, the Company had $855.7 million in securities designated “available for sale.” Of these securities, $499.1 million was pledged to secure public deposits and for other purposes required by applicable laws and regulations.
•Repayments on loans can also be a source of liquidity to fund further loan growth.
•Overnight credit lines. As a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of New York (“FHLB”), Lakeland has the ability to borrow overnight and short term based on the market value of collateral pledged. Lakeland had $100.0 million in overnight and short term borrowings from the FHLB on December 31, 2020. Lakeland also has overnight federal funds lines available for it to borrow up to $215.0 million from correspondent banks. Lakeland had no borrowings against these lines at December 31, 2020. Lakeland also has the ability to utilize a line of credit from the FHLB to secure a portion of its public deposits. Lakeland may also borrow from the discount window of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York based on the market value of collateral pledged. Lakeland had no borrowings with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as of December 31, 2020.
•Other borrowings. Lakeland can also generate funds by utilizing long-term debt or securities sold under agreements to repurchase that would be collateralized by security or mortgage collateral. At times the market values of securities collateralizing our securities sold under agreements to repurchase may decline due to changes in interest rates and may necessitate our lenders to issue a “margin call” which requires the Company to pledge additional collateral to meet that margin call. For more information regarding the Company’s borrowings, see Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Management and the Board of Directors monitor the Company’s liquidity through the Asset/Liability Committee, which monitors the Company’s compliance with certain regulatory ratios and other various liquidity guidelines.
The cash flow statements for the periods presented provide an indication of the Company’s sources and uses of cash, as well as an indication of the ability of the Company to maintain an adequate level of liquidity. Cash and cash equivalents totaling $270.1 million at December 31, 2020, increased $12.3 million from December 31, 2019. Operating activities provided $85.0 million in net cash. Investing activities used $928.0 million in net cash, primarily reflecting an increase in loans. Financing activities provided $830.8 million in net cash primarily reflecting a net increase in deposits of $1.16 billion, partially offset by decreases in federal funds purchased and securities sold under agreements to repurchase, net repayments of other borrowings and dividends paid of $159.1 million, $144.9 million and $25.5 million, respectively.
The Company’s management believes that its current level of liquidity is sufficient to meet its current and anticipated operational needs, including current loan commitments, deposit maturities and other obligations. Actual results could differ materially from anticipated results due to a variety of factors, including uncertainties relating to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, general economic conditions; unanticipated decreases in deposits; changes in or failure to comply with governmental regulations; and uncertainties relating to the analysis of the Company’s assessment of rate sensitive assets and rate sensitive liabilities and the extent to which market factors indicate that a financial institution such as Lakeland should match such assets and liabilities.
Table of Content
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth contractual obligations and other commitments representing required cash outflows as of December 31, 2020. Interest on subordinated debentures and other borrowings is calculated based on current contractual interest rates.
(1) Includes interest on other borrowings and subordinated debentures at a weighted rate of 4.07%.
Interest Rate Risk
Closely related to the concept of liquidity is the concept of interest rate sensitivity (i.e., the extent to which assets and liabilities are sensitive to changes in interest rates). As a financial institution, the Company’s potential interest rate volatility is a primary component of its market risk. Fluctuations in interest rates will ultimately impact the level of income and expense recorded on a large portion of the Company’s assets and liabilities, and the market value of all interest-earning assets, other than those which possess a short term to maturity. Based upon the Company’s nature of operations, the Company is not subject to foreign currency exchange or commodity price risk. The Company does not own any trading assets.
The Company’s net income is largely dependent on net interest income. Net interest income is susceptible to interest rate risk to the extent that interest-bearing liabilities mature or reprice on a different basis than interest-earning assets. For example, when interest-bearing liabilities mature or reprice more quickly than interest-earning assets, an increase in market interest rates could adversely affect net interest income. Conversely, when interest-earning assets reprice more quickly than interest-bearing liabilities, an increase in market interest rates could increase net interest income.
The Company’s Board of Directors has adopted an Asset/Liability Policy designed to stabilize net interest income and preserve capital over a broad range of interest rate movements. This policy outlines guidelines and ratios dealing with, among others, liquidity, volatile liability dependence, investment portfolio composition, loan portfolio composition, loan-to-deposit ratio and gap analysis ratio. Key quantitative measurements include the percentage change of net interest income in various interest rate scenarios (net interest income at risk) and changes in the market value of equity in various rate environments (net portfolio value at risk). The Company’s performance as compared to the Asset/Liability Policy is monitored by its Risk Committee. In addition, to effectively administer the Asset/Liability Policy and to monitor exposure to fluctuations in interest rates, the Company maintains an Asset/Liability Committee (the “ALCO”), consisting of the Chief Executive Officer, the Chief Financial Officer, Chief Operating Officer, Chief Lending Officer, Chief Banking Officer, Chief Credit Officer, Chief Risk Officer and certain other senior officers. This committee meets quarterly to review the Company’s financial results and to develop strategies to implement the Asset/Liability Policy and to respond to market conditions.
The Company monitors and controls interest rate risk through a variety of techniques, including use of an interest rate risk management model. With the interest rate risk management model, the Company projects future net interest income, and then estimates the effect of various changes in interest rates and balance sheet growth rates on that projected net interest income. The Company also uses the interest rate risk management model to calculate the change in net portfolio value over a range of interest rate change scenarios.
Interest rate sensitivity modeling is done at a specific point in time and involves a variety of significant estimates and assumptions. Interest rate sensitivity modeling requires, among other things, estimates of how much and when yields and costs on individual categories of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities will respond to general changes in market rates, future cash flows and discount rates.
Table of Content
Net interest income simulation considers the relative sensitivities of the balance sheet including the effects of interest rate caps on adjustable rate mortgages and the relatively stable aspects of core deposits. As such, net interest income simulation is designed to address the probability of interest rate changes and the behavioral response of the balance sheet to those changes. Market Value of Portfolio Equity represents the fair value of the net present value of assets, liabilities and off-balance-sheet items. Changes in estimates and assumptions made for interest rate sensitivity modeling could have a significant impact on projected results and conclusions. These assumptions could include prepayment rates, sensitivity of non-maturity deposits, decay rates and other similar assumptions. Therefore, if our assumptions should change, this technique may not accurately reflect the impact of general interest rate movements on the Company’s net interest income or net portfolio value.
Management reviews the accuracy of its model by back testing its results (comparing predicted results in past models with current data), and it periodically reviews its prepayment assumptions, decay rates and other assumptions.
The starting point (or “base case”) for the following table is an estimate of the following year’s net interest income assuming that both interest rates and the Company’s interest-sensitive assets and liabilities remain at year-end levels. The net interest income estimated for 2021 (the base case) is $218.0 million. The information provided for net interest income assumes that changes in interest rates change gradually in equal increments (“rate ramp”) over the twelve month period.
The ALCO’s policy review of interest rate risk includes policy limits for net interest income changes in various “rate shock” scenarios. Rate shocks assume that current interest rates change immediately. The information provided for net interest income assumes fluctuations or “rate shocks” for changes in interest rates as shown in the table below.
The base case for the following table is an estimate of the Company’s net portfolio value for the periods presented using current discount rates, and assuming the Company’s interest-sensitive assets and liabilities remain at year-end levels. The net portfolio value at December 31, 2020 (the base case) was $969.7 million. The information provided for the net portfolio value assumes fluctuations or rate shocks for changes in interest rates as shown in the table below.
The Company's net portfolio value change in the -100 basis point scenario was -10.1% for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to its policy limit of -10.0% resulting from the effects of the extremely low interest rate environment. Management has determined that no corrective action is necessary at this time and will continue to monitor this rate shock scenario and report the variance to the Board.
The information in the above tables represent the policy scenario that the ALCO reviews on a quarterly basis. There are also other scenarios run that the ALCO examines that vary depending on the economic environment. These scenarios include a yield curve flattening scenario and scenarios that show more dramatic changes in rates. The committee uses alternative scenarios, depending on the economic environment, in its interest rate management decisions.
Table of Content
Certain shortcomings are inherent in the methodologies used in the above interest rate risk measurements. Modeling changes in net interest income requires the making of certain assumptions regarding prepayment and deposit decay rates, which may or may not reflect the manner in which actual yields and costs respond to changes in market interest rates. While management believes such assumptions are reasonable, there can be no assurance that assumed prepayment rates and decay rates will approximate actual future loan prepayment and deposit withdrawal activity. Moreover, the net interest income table presented assumes that the composition of interest sensitive assets and liabilities existing at the beginning of a period remains constant over the period being measured and also assumes that a particular change in interest rates is reflected uniformly across the yield curve regardless of the duration to maturity or repricing of specific assets and liabilities. Accordingly, although the net interest income table provides an indication of the Company’s interest rate risk exposure at a particular point in time, such measurement is not intended to and does not provide a precise forecast of the effect of changes in market interest rates on net interest income and will differ from actual results.
Effects of Inflation
The impact of inflation, as it affects banks, differs substantially from the impact on non-financial institutions. Banks have assets which are primarily monetary in nature and which tend to move with inflation. This is especially true for banks with a high percentage of rate sensitive interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. A bank can further reduce the impact of inflation with proper management of its rate sensitivity gap. This gap represents the difference between interest rate sensitive assets and interest rate sensitive liabilities. Lakeland attempts to structure its assets and liabilities and manages its gap to protect against substantial changes in interest rate scenarios, in order to minimize the potential effects of inflation.
Capital Resources
Stockholders’ equity increased from $725.3 million on December 31, 2019 to $763.8 million on December 31, 2020, which was primarily due to $57.5 million of net income, partially offset by the payment of cash dividends on common stock of $25.5 million.
Book value per common share (total common stockholders’ equity divided by the number of shares outstanding) increased from $14.36 on December 31, 2019 to $15.13 on December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of net income. Tangible book value per share increased from $11.18 on December 31, 2019 to $11.97 on December 31, 2020. For more information see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
The Company and Lakeland are subject to various regulatory capital requirements that are monitored by federal and state banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can lead to certain supervisory actions by regulators; any supervisory action could have a direct material adverse effect on the Company or Lakeland’s financial statements. As of December 31, 2020, the Company and Lakeland met all capital adequacy requirements to which they are subject.
The following table reflects capital ratios of the Company and Lakeland as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Table of Content
The Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (the “Act”) was signed into law during the second quarter of 2018. The Act, among other matters, amends the Federal Deposit Insurance Act to require federal banking agencies to develop a specified Community Bank Leverage Ratio (the ratio of a bank's equity capital to its average total consolidated assets) for banks with assets of less than $10 billion. Qualifying participating banks that exceed this ratio shall be deemed to comply with all other capital and leverage requirements. In September 2019, the FDIC approved a final rule allowing community banks with a leverage capital ratio of at least 9% to be considered in compliance with Basel III capital requirements and exempt from the Basel Calculation. Under the final rule, banks with less than $10 billion in assets may elect the community bank leverage ratio framework if they meet the 9% ratio and if they hold 25% or less of assets in off-balance sheet exposures, and 5% or less of assets in trading assets and liabilities. For institutions that fall below the 9% capital requirement but remain above 8%, the final rule establishes a two-quarter grace period to either meet the qualifying criteria again or comply with the generally applicable capital rule. In 2020, the CARES Act required the federal banking agencies to temporarily lower the Community Bank Leverage Ratio from 9% of average total consolidated assets to 8% for the remainder of 2020. The ratio rose to 8.5% for calendar year 2021 and will revert to 9% thereafter. Management did not elect to use the Community Bank Leverage Ratio framework for Lakeland Bancorp or Lakeland Bank.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Calculation of Tangible Book Value Per Common Share
Calculation of Tangible Common Equity to Tangible Assets
Table of Content
Calculation of Return on Average Tangible Common Equity:
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In March 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued Update 2020-04, an update to Topic 848, Reference Rate Reform. The update provides guidance to ease the potential burden in accounting for, or recognizing the effects of, reference rate reform on financial reporting. The update provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying generally accepted accounting principles to contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions affected by reference rate reform if certain criteria are met and only applies to contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions that reference LIBOR or another reference rate expected to be discontinued because of reference rate reform. In addition, the update provides optional expedients for applying the requirements of certain Topics or Industry Subtopics in the Codification for contracts that are modified because of reference rate reform and contemporaneous modifications of other contract terms related to the replacement of the reference rate. The ASU allows companies to apply the standard as of the beginning of the interim period that includes March 12, 2020 or any date thereafter. The Company is currently assessing the impact to its financial statements; however, the impact is not expected to be material.
In January 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued Update 2020-01, an update to Topic 321, Investments, Topic 323, Joint Ventures and Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging. The update clarifies the accounting for certain equity securities upon the application or discontinuation of the equity method of accounting in accordance with Topic 321. In addition, the update clarifies scope considerations for forward contracts and purchased options on certain securities. This update will be effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company does not expect the update to have a material impact on the Company's financial statements.
In December 2019, FASB issued Update 2019-12, an update to Topic 740, Income Taxes, as part of an initiative to reduce complexity in accounting standards for income taxes. The amendments also improve consistent application of and simplify GAAP for other areas of Topic 740 by clarifying and amending existing guidance. This update will be effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2021 with early adoption permitted. The Company does not expect the update to have a material impact on the Company's financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued Update 2018-13, an update to Topic 820, Fair Value Measurement, to improve the effectiveness of fair value measurement disclosures. Among other provisions, the update removes requirements to disclose amounts of and reasons for transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy, and it modifies the disclosures regarding transfers in and out of Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. The update requires a discussion regarding the change in unrealized gains and losses included in other comprehensive income for recurring Level 3 fair value measurements held at the end of the reporting period, and the range and weighted average of significant unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements. This update is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2019. Because the Company does not typically have Level 3 fair value measurements, the update did not have a material impact on the Company's financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued Update 2018-15, an update to Subtopic 350-40, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Internal-Use Software, which aligns the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs in a cloud-computing arrangement service contract with the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred for an internal-use software license. Implementation costs incurred by customers in a cloud computing arrangement are to be deferred and recognized over the term of the arrangement, if those costs would be capitalized by the customer in a software licensing arrangement under the internal-
Table of Content
use software guidance. This update is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2019. The adoption of this update did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued Update 2018-14, an update to Subtopic 715-20, Compensation - Retirement Benefits - Defined Benefit Plans - General, which changes the disclosure of accounting and reporting requirements related to single-employer defined benefit pension or other postretirement benefit plans. The amendments in the update remove disclosures that are no longer considered cost-beneficial, clarify the specific requirements of disclosures and add disclosure requirements identified as relevant. For calendar-year public companies, the changes will be effective for annual periods, including interim periods within those annual periods, in 2020. Because the Company has minimal pension plans that require calculation of projected benefit obligations or accumulated benefit obligations, the update did not have a material impact on the Company's financial statements.
In August 2017, the FASB issued Update 2017-05, an update to Subtopic 610-20, Other Income - Gains and Losses from the Derecognition of Nonfinancial Assets, intended to improve and simplify accounting rules around hedge accounting. Amendments expand and refine hedge accounting for both nonfinancial and financial risk components and align the recognition and presentation of the effects of the hedging instrument and the hedged item in the financial statements. The amendments in this update also make certain targeted improvements to simplify the application of hedge accounting guidance and ease the administrative burden of hedge documentation requirements and assessing hedge effectiveness. This update is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2019. The adoption of this update did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
In January 2017, the FASB issued Update 2017-04, an update to Topic 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, to simplify the test for goodwill impairment. This amendment eliminates Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. The annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test is performed by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An impairment charge should be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value. This update is effective for the Company’s financial statements for annual years beginning after December 15, 2019. The update was adopted by the Company as of January 1, 2020 with prospective application and did not impact 2020 results. The future impact of the update will depend upon the performance of the Company and the market conditions impacting the fair value of the Company going forward.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments ("ASU 2016-13"), further amended by ASU 2019-04, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses, Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, and Topic 825, Financial Instruments. Topic 326 pertains to the measurement of credit losses on financial instruments. This update requires the measurement of all expected credit losses for financial instruments held at the reporting date based on historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Financial institutions and other organizations will now use forward-looking information to better inform their credit loss estimates. This update is intended to improve financial reporting by requiring timelier recording of credit losses on loans and other financial instruments held by financial institutions and other organizations. This update is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2019. Upon the Company's adoption of ASU 2016-13 at December 31, 2020, the change from the incurred loss methodology to the expected credit losses methodology was recognized through an adjustment to retained earnings of $3.4 million.
Table of Content
Quarterly Financial Data
The following represents summarized quarterly financial data of the Company, which in the opinion of management reflected all adjustments, consisting only of non-recurring adjustments, necessary for a fair presentation of the Company’s results of operations.
(1) The Company adopted ASU 2016-13 on December 31, 2020, with a transition adjustment retroactive to January 1, 2020. Quarterly provision amounts for the first, second and third quarters of 2020 do not reflect the adoption of ASU 2016-13.