Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Item 6. Selected Financial Data” and our audited consolidated and combined financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains “forward-looking statements” that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of risks and uncertainties, including those described in this Annual Report on Form 10-K under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements. This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. For discussion of year ended December 31, 2018, as well as the year ended 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7 - “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are an independent provider of hydraulic fracturing services and goods to onshore oil and natural gas E&P companies in North America.
We have grown from one active hydraulic fracturing fleet in December 2011 to approximately 30 active fleets in the first quarter of 2021, including the addition of fleets from the OneStim Acquisition in December 2020. We are an independent provider of hydraulic fracturing and wireline services and related goods to onshore oil and natural gas exploration and production (“E&P”) companies in North America. We provide our services primarily in the Permian Basin, the Eagle Ford Shale, the Denver-Julesburg Basin (the “DJ Basin”), the Williston Basin, the San Juan Basin and the Powder River Basin. Following the completion of the OneStim Acquisition (as defined below) we now also provide services in the Haynesville Shale, the SCOOP/STACK, the Marcellus Shale, Utica Shale, and the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin. Additionally, we operate two sand mines in the Permian Basin.
In response to market conditions described below, in April 2020, we reduced our headcount consistent with the temporary idling of approximately half of our frac fleets that were operating during the first quarter of 2020, while further temporary reductions in active fleets were managed through employee furloughs. As of December 31, 2020, no employees remained on furlough, and with the completion of the OneStim Acquisition we had a total of approximately 30 active frac fleets and 20 active wireline units.
On December 31, 2020, the Company acquired certain assets and liabilities of Schlumberger Limited’s (“Schlumberger”) OneStim® business, which provides hydraulic fracturing pressure pumping services in onshore United States and Canada, including its pressure pumping, pumpdown perforating and Permian frac sand business (such entire business of Schlumberger, “OneStim,” and the portion of OneStim acquired pursuant by the Company, the “Transferred Business”) in exchange for consideration resulting in a total of 66,326,134 shares of Class A common stock, par value $0.01 per share, of the Company (the “Class A Common Stock”) being issued in connection with the transaction (such transaction, the “OneStim Acquisition”; see Note 3-The OneStim Acquisition to the consolidated and combined financial statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”). Effective December 31, 2020, Schlumberger owned 37% of the issued and outstanding shares of our Common Stock. The combined company will deliver best-in-class completion services for the sustainable development of unconventional resource plays in the United States and Canada onshore markets.
We believe the following characteristics both distinguish us from our competitors and are the foundations of our business: forming ongoing partnerships of trust and innovation with our customers; developing and utilizing technology to maximize well performance; and promoting a people-centered culture focused on our employees, customers and suppliers. We have developed strong relationships with our customers by investing significant time in fracture design collaboration, which substantially enhances their production economics. Our technological innovations have become even more critical as E&P companies have increased the completion complexity and fracture intensity of horizontal wells. We are proactive in developing innovative solutions to industry challenges, including developing: (i) our proprietary databases of U.S. unconventional wells to which we apply our proprietary multi-variable statistical analysis technologies to provide differential insight into fracture design optimization; (ii) our Liberty Quiet Fleet® design which significantly reduces noise levels compared to conventional hydraulic fracturing fleets; (iii) hydraulic fracturing fluid systems tailored to the specific reservoir properties in the basins in which we operate; and (iv) our dual fuel dynamic gas blending fleets that allow our engines to run diesel or a combination of diesel and natural gas, to optimize fuel use, reduce emissions and lower costs. We foster a people-centered culture built around honoring our commitments to customers, partnering with our suppliers and hiring, training and retaining people that we believe to be the best talent in our field to drive innovation, enabling us to be one of the safest and most efficient hydraulic fracturing companies in the United States.
Recent Trends and Outlook
During the first quarter of 2020, the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic placed significant downward pressure on the global economy and oil demand and prices, leading North America operators to announce significant cuts to planned 2020 capital expenditures. Reduced activity levels led to a plunging rig count and an abrupt curtailment of frac activity. As a result, OPEC, coupled with production curtailment and a drop in frac activity amongst North America operators, removed significant oil supply from and eased pressure on the market. During the second half of 2020, OPEC+ suppliers worked to maintain oil production through an agreed upon quota, and North America operators largely remained disciplined in capital spending. Many operators have announced that they are targeting oil and gas production at the end of 2021 to be consistent with production at the end of 2020.
Early signs of a potential global economic recovery have emerged, driven by the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines, fiscal and monetary stimulus policies, and pent-up demand for goods and services. These factors support continued improvement in energy demand, while controlled OPEC+ production and discipline amongst E&P operators are supporting oil and gas prices. WTI prices that have largely stabilized in the second half of 2020, relative to the volatility observed during the second quarter of 2020. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the price of WTI averaged $42.52 compared with an average of $40.89 for the third quarter of 2020, which was much improved from an average of $27.96 for the second quarter of 2020. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the price of WTI has averaged $53.93 through February 16, 2021. The recovery of energy demand is also reflected in incremental improvement to rig count, as the most recent domestic onshore rig count for North America was 381 rigs reported on February 19, 2021, up from the average in the fourth quarter of 2020 of 297, according to a report by Baker Hughes, a GE company.
The number of total marketable frac fleets has declined significantly from 2019 as the pandemic accelerated the pace of rationalization and cannibalization of frac equipment. As customer demand is shifting towards next generation technologies that support their emissions and efficiency goals, attrition of older equipment is expected to continue. This supply shrinkage is a necessary part of moving the market towards balance. The current pricing dynamic remains challenging, but the Company is having many productive discussions with customers to phase in modest price improvements throughout the year. The Company was proactive in working with customers as oil prices collapsed, and that partnership works both ways.
With continued uncertainty surrounding the magnitude and timing of oil demand recovery, OPEC+ supply concerns, and ongoing investor pressure for better returns by E&P companies than those achieved over the last decade, we are unable to predict the degree and duration of many factors that may impact our future operating results. The volatile global economic conditions stemming from the pandemic, the liquidity situation for North American oil producers and the reaction of international oil producers could also exacerbate the risk factors identified in this Annual Report, see also the risk factor relating to COVID-19 disclosed in “Item 1A.-Risk Factors” of this Annual Report.
In response to these developments, the continued duration and ultimate severity of which is unknown, we have taken the following steps to protect our employees, customers and business. During February 2020, we formed a COVID-19 response team to implement safety procedures and contingency plans at both our customer locations and in our facilities to ensure our ability to continue providing safe and efficient services to our customers, while protecting the health of both employees and customers.
We have been proactive in protecting our business during these unprecedented events. During the second quarter, we moved quickly to preserve cash and protect our balance sheet and announced strategic actions to align our cost structure with demand for frac services. Regrettably, for the first time in the Company’s history we undertook a reduction of our personnel and staffed fleet count by approximately 50% and implemented a company-wide furlough plan. We also suspended variable compensation plans and our 401(k) match, implemented base salary reductions, executive and director compensation reductions, operating cost rationalization, reduction of planned 2020 capital expenditures, and suspended our quarterly dividend. Further, we implemented a company-wide employee furlough plan that flexes our cost structure to align with the uncertain level of frac demand we experienced during the second and third quarters of 2020. As of September 30, 2020 all employees were returned from furlough, additionally, effective January 1, 2021 the Company restored 401(k) match and base salaries.
E&P operators are navigating through significant challenges, including industry consolidation, a change in the political climate and capital constraints while maintaining general commitments to flat production with 2021 levels relative to 2020 exit rates. Dedicated fleet negotiations for 2021, which started in the fall of 2020, saw continued pricing pressure. However, WTI crude oil prices have improved since the fall bid season.
We believe the frac market will probably experience flat to slightly rising demand for frac services in 2021, based on current visibility into customer plans. Demand of publicly-traded operators is expected to be relatively level during the year, whereas private operator demand is more likely to be focused on the second half of the year. Against this backdrop, the Company expects to maintain approximately 30 active frac fleets in the first quarter of 2021, with the potential of adding more
fleets later in the year if the economics improve. Increased efficiencies that lower our cost of delivery coupled with a gradual, modest rise in frac pricing are the factors that can drive improved fleet profitability.
Increase in Drilling Efficiency and Service Intensity of Completions
Over the past decade, E&P companies have focused on exploiting the vast resource potential available across many of North America’s unconventional resource plays through the application of horizontal drilling and completion technologies, including the use of multi-stage hydraulic fracturing, in order to increase recovery of oil and natural gas. As E&P companies have improved drilling and completion techniques to maximize return and efficiency, we believe that their “break-even oil prices” continue to decline. These improvements in well economics have kept American Shale oil and gas production competitive even as oil and gas prices have declined. Liberty has been a significant partner with our customers in driving these continued improvements.
Improved drilling economics from horizontal drilling and greater rig efficiencies. Unconventional resources are increasingly being targeted through the use of horizontal drilling. According to Baker Hughes, as reported on February 19, 2021, horizontal rigs accounted for approximately 90% of all rigs drilling in the United States, up from 74% as of December 31, 2014. Over the past several years, North American E&P companies have benefited from improved drilling economics driven by technologies that reduce the number of days, and the cost, of drilling wells. North American drilling rigs have incorporated newer technologies, which allow them to drill rock more effectively and quickly, meaning each rig can drill more wells in a given period. These include improved drilling technologies and the incorporation of geosteering techniques which allow better placement of the wellbore. Drilling rigs have also incorporated new technology which allows fully-assembled rigs to automatically “walk” from one location to the next without disassembling and reassembling the rig, greatly reducing the time it takes to move from one drilling location to the next. Today the majority of E&P drilling is on multi-well pad development, allowing efficient drilling of multiple horizontal wellbores from the same pad or location. The aggregate effect of these improved techniques and technologies have reduced the average days required to drill a well, which according to Coras, has dropped from 28 days in 2014 to 20 days in 2020.
Increased complexity and service intensity of horizontal well completions. In addition to improved rig efficiencies discussed above, E&P companies are also improving the subsurface techniques and technologies used to exploit unconventional resources. These improvements have targeted increasing the exposure of each wellbore to the reservoir by drilling longer horizontal lateral sections of the wellbore. To complete the well, hydraulic fracturing is applied in stages along the wellbore to break-up the resource so that oil and gas can be produced. As wellbores have increased in length, the number of frac stages and/or the number of perf clusters (frac initiation points) has also increased. Further, E&P companies have improved production from each stage by applying increasing amounts of proppant in each stage, which better connects the well to the resource. The aggregate effect of increased number of stages and the increasing amount of proppant in each stage has greatly increased the total amount of proppant used in each well, according to Coras, from six million pounds per well in 2014 to over 16 million pounds per well in 2020. Further efficiency gains are being sought via the “simul-frac” technique. Utilizing a larger frac fleet (1.25x to 2x the normal horsepower), operators are fracturing stages in two separate wells on a pad simultaneously as a single operation. When compared to typical zipper-frac operations, this new method allows for more lateral feet to be completed in a day. This emerging trend will allow operators to complete a pad of wells quicker, thereby shortening the time from spud to first production.
These industry trends continue to keep our customers as important suppliers to the global oil and natural gas markets, which directly benefit hydraulic fracturing companies like us that have the expertise and technological innovations to effectively service today’s more efficient oilfield drilling activity and the increasing complexity and intensity of well completions. Given the expected returns that E&P companies have reported for new well development activities due to improved rig efficiencies and increasing well completion complexity and intensity, we expect these industry trends to continue.
How We Generate Revenue
We currently generate revenue through the provision of hydraulic fracturing and wireline services and goods, including sand from our Permian Basin sand mines. These services and goods are performed under a variety of contract structures, primarily master service agreements (“MSAs”) as supplemented by statements of work, pricing agreements and specific quotes. A portion of our statements of work, under MSAs, include provisions that establish pricing arrangements for a period of up to one year in length. However, the majority of those agreements provide for pricing adjustments based on market conditions. The majority of our services are priced based on prevailing market conditions and changing input costs at the time the services are provided, giving consideration to the specific requirements of the customer.
Our hydraulic fracturing and wireline services are performed in sections, which we refer to as fracturing stages. The estimated number of fracturing stages to be completed for a particular horizontal well is determined by the customer’s well completion design. We recognize revenue for each fracturing stage completed, although our revenue per completed fracturing
stage varies depending on the actual volumes and types of proppants, chemicals and fluid utilized for each fracturing stage. The number of fracturing stages that we are able to complete in a period is directly related to the number and utilization of our deployed fleets and size of stages.
Costs of Conducting Our Business
The principal expenses involved in conducting our business are direct cost of personnel, services and materials used in the provision of services, general and administrative expenses, and depreciation and amortization. A large portion of the costs we incur in our business are variable based on the number of hydraulic fracturing jobs and the requirements of services provided to our customers. We manage the level of our fixed costs, except depreciation and amortization, based on several factors, including industry conditions and expected demand for our services.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
We use a variety of qualitative, operational and financial metrics to assess our performance. First and foremost of these is a qualitative assessment of customer satisfaction because ensuring we are a valuable partner to our customers is the key to achieving our quantitative business metrics. Among other measures, management considers each of the following:
•Revenue;
•Operating Income;
•EBITDA;
•Adjusted EBITDA;
•Annualized Adjusted EBITDA per Average Active Fleet;
•Net Income Before Taxes; and
•Earnings per Share.
Revenue
We analyze our revenue by comparing actual monthly revenue to our internal projections for a given period and to prior periods to assess our performance. We also assess our revenue in relation to the number of fleets we have deployed (revenue per average active fleet) from period to period.
Operating Income
We analyze our operating income, which we define as revenues less direct operating expenses, depreciation and amortization and general and administrative expenses, to measure our financial performance. We believe operating income is a meaningful metric because it provides insight on profitability and true operating performance based on the historical cost basis of our assets. We also compare operating income to our internal projections for a given period and to prior periods.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
We view EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as important indicators of performance. We define EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA adjusted to eliminate the effects of items such as non-cash stock based compensation expense, new fleet or new basin start-up costs, fleet lay-down costs, costs of asset acquisition, gain or loss on the disposal of assets, asset impairment charges, bad debt reserves, and non-recurring expenses that management does not consider in assessing ongoing operating performance. Annualized Adjusted EBITDA per Average Active Fleet is calculated as Adjusted EBITDA annualized, divided by the Average Active Fleets for the same period. See “-Comparison of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Our revenue decreased $1.0 billion, or 51.5%, to $965.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $2.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. Average active fleets decreased 42.1% to 13.2 from 22.8 average active fleets deployed during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, as the Company reduced the staffed fleets in April 2020 in response to market conditions, as discussed in “Recent Trends and Outlook” above. Further, revenue per average active fleet decreased 16.2% to $73.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $87.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, attributable to lower demand for frac services in the market as previously discussed.
Cost of Services
Cost of services (excluding depreciation and amortization) decreased $763.2 million, or 47.1%, to $858.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The lower expense was primarily related to the reduced levels of activity from fewer average active fleets deployed during 2020, as described above, and to a lesser extent from cost-cutting measures related to personnel costs enacted during 2020 including reduction in headcount and furloughs, as well as a temporary suspension of bonus and 401(k) match programs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased by $13.5 million, or 13.8%, to $84.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $97.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily related to a decrease in personnel costs, excluding share based compensation, of $15.1 million due to the reduction in headcount, furlough and flexible cost structure, as well as the temporary suspension of bonus and 401(k) match programs. Partially offsetting this decrease, general and administrative expense included $12.9 million of share based compensation expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Transaction, Severance and Other Costs
Transaction costs were $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Such costs were incurred in connection with the OneStim Acquisition and included investment banking, legal, accounting and other professional services provided in connection with closing the transaction.
Severance and other costs were $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The costs were primarily related to the reduction in our workforce in April 2020 and the commencement of furlough schedules for remaining employees in May 2020 during which the Company continued to pay insurance and other benefits. The Company did not lay-off or furlough any employees during 2019.
Depreciation and Amortization of Intangible Assets
Depreciation and amortization of intangible assets expense increased $14.7 million, or 8.9%, to $180.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $165.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in 2020 was due to a full year of depreciation for one fleet deployed during 2019, as well as one additional fleet deployed during early 2020.
(Gain) Loss on Disposal of Assets
(Gain) loss on disposal of assets increased $3.0 million to a gain of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a loss of $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During 2020, we reduced the number of light duty pick-ups in our fleet based on our lower levels of activity and realized gains upon sale commensurate with lease terminations.
Operating (Loss) Income
We realized an operating loss of $177.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to operating income of $103.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to the $1.0 billion, or 51.5%, decrease in total revenue only partially offset by a $743.9 million decrease in total operating expenses, the significant components of which are discussed above. The decline in operating income was significantly impacted by reduced customer work as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and steep decline in oil prices in March and April 2020.
Interest Expense, net
The decrease in interest expense, net of $0.2 million, or 1.2%, to $14.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $14.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, was due to lower interest expense on credit facilities and from finance leases, largely offset by reduced interest income from excess cash on hand.
Net (Loss) Income Before Taxes
We realized a net loss before taxes of $191.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net income before taxes of $88.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in revenue, as discussed above, related to the decrease in pricing and activity.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
We recognized a tax benefit of $30.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an effective rate of 16.1%, compared to expense of $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an effective rate of 15.8%. The decrease in tax expense is primarily attributable to a decrease in revenue, as discussed above, related to the decrease in pricing and activity.
Comparison of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We view EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as important indicators of performance. We define EBITDA as net income before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA adjusted to eliminate the effects of items such as non-cash stock based compensation, new fleet or new basin start-up costs, fleet lay-down costs, costs of asset acquisitions, gain or loss on the disposal of assets, asset impairment charges, bad debt reserves and non-recurring expenses that management does not consider in assessing ongoing performance.
Our Board, management, investors and lenders use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to assess our financial performance because it allows them to compare our operating performance on a consistent basis across periods by removing the effects of our capital structure (such as varying levels of interest expense), asset base (such as depreciation and amortization) and other items that impact the comparability of financial results from period to period. We present EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA because we believe they provide useful information regarding the factors and trends affecting our business in addition to measures calculated under GAAP.
Note Regarding Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP. We believe that the presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures will provide useful information to investors in assessing our financial performance and results of operations. Net income (loss) is the GAAP measure most directly comparable to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. Our non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered as alternatives to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure. Each of these non-GAAP financial measures has important limitations as an analytical tool due to exclusion of some but not all items that affect the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures. You should not consider EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA in isolation or as substitutes for an analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may be defined differently by other companies in our industry, our definitions of these non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies, thereby diminishing their utility.
The following tables present a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to our net income, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure for the periods presented:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019: EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA was $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $269.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Adjusted EBITDA was $57.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $290.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreases in EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA resulted from the decreased revenue and other factors described above under the captions Revenue, Cost of Services, and General and Administrative Expenses for Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Historically, our primary sources of liquidity to date have been cash flows from operations, proceeds from our IPO, and borrowings under our Credit Facilities. We expect to fund operations and organic growth with cash flows from operations and available borrowings under our Credit Facilities. We may incur additional indebtedness or issue equity in order to fund growth opportunities that we pursue via acquisition, such as with the OneStim Acquisition. Our primary uses of capital have been capital expenditures to support organic growth and funding ongoing operations, including maintenance and fleet upgrades.
Cash and cash equivalents decreased by $43.7 million to $69.0 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $112.7 million as of December 31, 2019. We believe that cash on hand, our operating cash flows and available borrowings under our Credit Facilities will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Analysis of Cash Flow Changes Between the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities was $85.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $261.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $175.7 million decrease in cash from operating activities was primarily attributable to a $1.0 billion decrease in revenues, offset by a $743.9 million decrease in operating expenses and a $63.3 million increase in cash from changes in working capital for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a $21.6 million decrease in cash from changes in working capital for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $100.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $194.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $94.1 million decrease in net cash used in investing activities is attributable to a decrease in capital expenditures in an effort to reduce spending and as a result of the lower fleet count in 2020.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities was $28.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $57.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $28.5 million decrease in cash used in financing activities was primarily due to an $18.4 million decrease in share repurchases and a $16.6 million reduction in dividends and per unit distributions to non-controlling interest unitholders as a result of the suspension of the dividend in April 2020. Partially offsetting the decreases was a $6.8 million increase in cash used in financing activities as a result of payments made to non-controlling interest unitholders under the TRAs as a result of the 2020 refund of a portion of cash taxes paid in 2018.
Debt Agreements
On September 19, 2017, the Company entered into two new credit agreements for a revolving line of credit up to $250.0 million (the “ABL Facility”) and a $175.0 million term loan (the “Term Loan Facility”, and together with the ABL Facility the “Credit Facilities”). Following is a description of the ABL Facility and the Term Loan Facility.
ABL Facility
Under the terms of the ABL Facility, up to $250.0 million may be borrowed, subject to certain borrowing base limitations based on a percentage of eligible accounts receivable and inventory. On May 29, 2020 the Company amended the ABL Facility to allow accounts receivables that are more than 90 but less than 120 days past their original invoice date to be included in the determination of eligible accounts receivables, up to a limit of $37.5 million when combined with receivable that are more than 60 but less than 90 days past their due date to be included in the borrowing base. The expanded borrowing base terms were in effect from May 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, the borrowing base was calculated to be $115.1 million, and the Company had no borrowings outstanding, except for a letter of credit in the amount of $0.8 million, with $114.3 million of remaining availability. Borrowings under the ABL Facility bear interest at the London InterBank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) or a base rate, plus an applicable LIBOR margin of 1.5% to 2.0% or base rate margin of 0.5% to 1.0%, as defined in the ABL Facility credit agreement. The unused commitment is subject to an unused commitment fee of 0.375% to 0.5%. Interest and fees are payable in arrears at the end of each month, or, in the case of LIBOR loans, at the end of each interest period. The ABL Facility matures on the earlier of (i) September 19, 2022 and (ii) to the extent the debt under the Term Loan Facility remains outstanding, 90 days prior to the final maturity of the Term Loan Facility, which matures on September 19, 2022. Borrowings under the ABL Facility are collateralized by accounts receivable and inventory, and further secured by the Company, Liberty LLC and R/C IV Non-U.S. LOS Corp., a Delaware corporation (“R/C IV”) and a subsidiary of the Company, as parent guarantors.
Term Loan Facility
The Term Loan Facility provides for a $175.0 million term loan, of which $108.2 million remained outstanding as of December 31, 2020. Amounts outstanding bear interest at LIBOR or a base rate, plus an applicable margin of 7.625% or 6.625%, respectively, and the weighted average rate on borrowings was 8.6% as of December 31, 2020. The Company is required to make quarterly principal payments of 1% per annum of the initial principal balance, commencing on December 31, 2017, with final payment due at maturity on September 19, 2022. The Term Loan Facility is collateralized by the fixed assets of LOS and its subsidiaries, and is further secured by the Company, Liberty LLC and R/C IV, as parent guarantors.
The Credit Facilities include certain non-financial covenants, including but not limited to restrictions on incurring additional debt and certain distributions. Moreover, the ability of the Company to incur additional debt and to make distributions is dependent on maintaining a maximum leverage ratio. The Term Loan Facility requires mandatory prepayments upon certain dispositions of property or issuance of other indebtedness, as defined, and annually a percentage of excess cash flow (25% to 50%, depending on leverage ratio, of consolidated net income less capital expenditures and other permitted payments, commencing with the year ending December 31, 2018). Certain mandatory prepayments and optional prepayments are subject to a prepayment premium of 3% of the prepaid principal declining annually to 1% during the first three years of the term of the Term Loan Facility.
The Credit Facilities are not subject to financial covenants unless liquidity, as defined in the respective credit agreements, drops below a specified level. Under the ABL Facility, the Company is required to maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined in the credit agreement governing the ABL Facility, of 1.0 to 1.0 for each period if excess availability is less than 10% of the borrowing base or $12.5 million, whichever is greater. Under the Term Loan Facility, the Company is required to maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined, of 1.2 to 1.0 for each trailing twelve-month period if the Company’s liquidity, as defined, is less than $25.0 million for at least five consecutive business days. The Company was in compliance with these covenants as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
The table below provides estimates of the timing of future payments that we are contractually obligated to make based on agreements in place at December 31, 2020.
(1)Payments on our ABL Facility and Term Loan Facility exclude interest payments. Payments are based on debt balances as of December 31, 2020.
(2)Estimated interest payments are based on debt balances as of December 31, 2020. Interest rates applied are based on the weighted average rate as of December 31, 2020.
(3)Operating lease obligations include payments for leased facilities, equipment and vehicles.
(4)Finance lease obligations include payments for leased vehicles.
(5)Purchase commitments represent payments under supply agreements for the purchase and transportation of proppants. Some of the agreements include minimum monthly purchase commitments, including agreements under which a shortfall fee may be applied. The shortfall fee may be offset by purchases in excess of the minimum requirement during future periods, as allowed for by each agreement.
(6)The timing and amount(s) of the aggregate payments due under the TRAs may vary based on a number of factors, including the timing and amount of the taxable income we generate each year and the tax rate then applicable.
Tax Receivable Agreements
In connection with the IPO, on January 17, 2018, the Company entered into two TRAs with the TRA Holders. The TRAs generally provide for the payment by the Company of 85% of the net cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state, and local income tax and franchise tax (computed using simplifying assumptions to address the impact of state and local taxes) that the Company actually realizes (or is deemed to realize in certain circumstances) in periods after the IPO as a result, as applicable to each of the TRA Holders, of (i) certain increases in tax basis that occur as a result of the Company’s acquisition (or deemed acquisition for U.S. federal income tax purposes) of all or a portion of such TRA Holders’ Liberty LLC Units in connection with the IPO or pursuant to the exercise of the right of each Liberty Unit Holder (the “Redemption Right”), subject to certain limitations, to cause Liberty LLC to acquire all or a portion of its Liberty LLC Units for, at Liberty LLC’s election, (A) shares of our Class A Common Stock at the specific redemption ratio or (B) an equivalent amount of cash, or, upon the exercise of the Redemption Right, the right of the Company (instead of Liberty LLC) to, for administrative convenience, acquire each tendered Liberty LLC Unit directly from the redeeming Liberty Unit Holder (the “Call Right”) for, at its election, (1) one share of Class A Common Stock or (2) an equivalent amount of cash, (ii) any net operating losses available to the Company as a result of the Corporate Reorganization, and (iii) imputed interest deemed to be paid by the Company as a result of, and additional tax basis arising from, any payments the Company makes under the TRAs.
With respect to obligations the Company expects to incur under the TRAs (except in cases where the Company elects to terminate the TRAs early, the TRAs are terminated early due to certain mergers, asset sales, or other changes of control or the Company has available cash but fails to make payments when due), generally the Company may elect to defer payments due under the TRAs if the Company does not have available cash to satisfy its payment obligations under the TRAs or if its contractual obligations limit its ability to make such payments. Any such deferred payments under the TRAs generally will accrue interest. In certain cases, payments under the TRAs may be accelerated and/or significantly exceed the actual benefits, if any, the Company realizes in respect of the tax attributes subject to the TRAs. The Company accounts for amounts payable under the TRAs in accordance with Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 450, Contingencies (“ASC Topic 450”).
If the Company experiences a change of control (as defined under the TRAs) or the TRAs otherwise terminate early, the Company’s obligations under the TRAs could have a substantial negative impact on its liquidity and could have the effect of delaying, deferring or preventing certain mergers, asset sales, or other forms of business combinations or changes of control. There can be no assurance that we will be able to finance our obligations under the TRAs.
Income Taxes
Following the IPO, the Company is a corporation and is subject to U.S. federal, state and local income tax on its share of Liberty LLC’s taxable income. As a result of the IPO and Corporate Reorganization, the Company recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities for the difference between the book value of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and those amounts applicable for income tax purposes.
The effective combined U.S. federal and state income tax rate applicable to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 16.1% and 15.8%, respectively. The Company’s effective tax rate is significantly less than the federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily because no taxes are payable by the Company for the non-controlling interest’s share of Liberty LLC’s pass-through income for federal, state and local income tax reporting. The Company recognized income tax benefit of $30.9 million and income tax expense of $14.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements requires the use of judgments and estimates. Our critical accounting policies are described below to provide a better understanding of how we develop our assumptions and judgments about future events and related estimates and how they can impact our financial statements. A critical accounting estimate is one that requires our most difficult, subjective or complex estimates and assessments and is fundamental to our results of operations.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable according to the current facts and circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We believe the following are the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our combined financial statements, as well as the significant estimates and judgments affecting the application of these policies. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our combined financial statements and related notes included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Business Combinations: Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with the ASC Topic 805 - Business Combinations, as amended by Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2017-01, Business Combinations (Topic 805), Clarifying the Definition of a Business. The purchase price is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. Fair value of the acquired assets and liabilities is measured
in accordance with the guidance of ASC 850 - Fair Value Measurements, using discounted cash flows and other applicable valuation techniques. Any acquisitions related costs incurred by the Company are expensed as incurred. Any excess purchase price over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired is recorded as goodwill if the definition of a business is met. Operating results of an acquired business are included in our results of operations from the date of acquisition.
Revenue Recognition: Revenue from hydraulic fracturing services is recognized as specific services are provided in accordance with contractual arrangements. If our assessment of performance under a particular contract changes, our revenue and / or costs under that contract may change. In connection with ASC Topic 842 - Leases (“Topic 842”), the Company determined that certain of its service revenue contracts contain a lease component. The Company elected to adopt a practical expedient available to lessors, which allows the Company to combine the lease and service component for certain of the Company’s service contracts when the service component is the predominant component and continues to account for the combined component under ASC Topic 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
Accounts Receivable: On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”), which changes the impairment model for most financial assets and certain other instruments. Specifically, this new guidance requires using a forward looking, expected loss model for trade and other receivables, held-to-maturity debt securities, loans, and other instruments. Under ASU 2016-13, a company recognizes as an allowance, the estimate of lifetime expected credit losses, which is expected to result in more timely recognition of such losses.
The Company applies historic loss factors to its receivable portfolio segments that were not expected to be further impacted by current economic developments, and an additional economic conditions factor to portfolio segments anticipated to experience greater losses in the current economic environment. The Company continuously evaluates customers based on risk characteristics, such as historical losses and current economic conditions. Due to the cyclical nature of the oil and gas industry, the Company often evaluates its customers’ estimated losses on a case-by-case basis. It is reasonably possible that our estimates of the allowance for doubtful accounts will change and that losses ultimately incurred could differ materially from the amounts estimated in determining the allowance.
Inventory: Inventory consists of raw materials used in the hydraulic fracturing process, such as proppants, chemicals and field service equipment maintenance parts, and is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, determined using the weighted average cost method. Net realizable value is determined based on our estimates of selling prices in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable cost of completion, disposal, and transportation, each of which require us to apply judgment.
Property and Equipment: We calculate depreciation and amortization on our assets based on the estimated useful lives and estimated salvage values that we believe are reasonable. The estimated useful lives and salvage values are subject to key assumptions such as maintenance, utilization and job variation. These estimates may change due to a number of factors such as changes in operating conditions or advances in technology.
We incur maintenance costs on our major equipment. The determination of whether an expenditure should be capitalized or expensed requires management judgment in the application of how the costs benefit future periods, relative to our capitalization policy. Costs that either establish or increase the efficiency, productivity, functionality or life of a fixed asset are capitalized and depreciated over the remaining useful life of the asset.
Impairment of long-lived and other intangible assets: Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment, right-of-use lease assets and intangible assets, are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. Recoverability is assessed using undiscounted future net cash flows of assets grouped at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets. When alternative courses of action to recover the carrying amount of the asset group are under consideration, estimates of future undiscounted cash flows take into account possible outcomes and probabilities of their occurrence, which require us to apply judgment. If the carrying amount of the asset is not recoverable based on its estimated undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount by which its carrying amount exceeds its estimated fair value. The inputs used to determine such fair value are primarily based upon internally developed cash flow models. Our cash flow models are based on a number of estimates regarding future operations that may be subject to significant variability, are sensitive to changes in market conditions, and are reasonably likely to change in the future.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of negative market indicators including the COVID-19 pandemic, the increased supply of low-priced oil, and customer cancellations, the Company concluded these triggering events could indicate possible impairment of property and equipment. The Company performed a quantitative and qualitative impairment analysis and determined that no impairment had occurred as of March 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Company concluded that no additional triggering events occurred and the conclusion reached at March 31, 2020 is still appropriate. Such analysis required management to make estimates and assumptions based on historical data and consideration of future market conditions. Given the uncertainty inherent in any projection, heightened by the possibility of unforeseen additional effects of COVID-19, actual results may differ from the estimates and assumptions used, or conditions may change, which could result in impairment charges in the future.
No impairment was recognized during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Leases: The Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-02, Leases ASC Topic 842 effective January 1, 2019. We elected the modified retrospective transition method under ASC Topic 842 and as such information prior to January 1, 2019 has not been restated and continues to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for the period (ASC Topic 840-Leases). We carried forward the historical lease classifications and assessment of initial direct costs, account for lease and non-lease components as a single component, and exclude leases with an initial term of less than 12 months in the lease assets and liabilities. For leases entered into after January 1, 2019, the Company determines if an arrangement is a lease at inception and evaluates identified leases for operating or finance lease treatment. Operating or finance lease right-of-use assets and liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. We use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. Lease terms may include options to renew; however, we typically cannot determine our intent to renew a lease with reasonable certainty at inception.
Tax Receivable Agreements: In connection with the IPO, on January 17, 2018, the Company entered into two TRAs with the TRA Holders. The TRAs generally provide for the payment by the Company of 85% of the net cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state, and local income tax and franchise tax that the Company actually realizes in periods after the IPO as a result of certain tax attributes applicable to each TRA Holder. The Company accounts for amounts payable under the TRAs in accordance with ASC Topic 450, Contingencies.
Share Repurchases: The Company accounts for the purchase price of repurchased Class A Common Stock in excess of par value ($0.01 per share of Class A Common Stock) as a reduction of additional paid-in capital, and will continue to do so until additional paid-in capital is reduced to zero. Thereafter, any excess purchase price will be recorded as a reduction to retained earnings.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2-Significant Accounting Policies-Recently Issued Accounting Standards to the consolidated and combined financial statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no material off balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020, except for purchase commitments under supply agreements as disclosed above under “-Contractual Obligations.” As such, we are not materially exposed to any other financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in such financing arrangements.