Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On February 22, 2021, we entered into a Merger Agreement with Merger Sub and Atieva, relating to a proposed business combination transaction between us and Atieva.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub will merge with and into Atieva with Atieva being the surviving entity in the merger (the “Merger” and, together with the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, the “Transactions”).
The aggregate consideration to be paid to the shareholders of Atieva will be equal to (a) $11,750,000,000 plus (b) (i) all cash and cash equivalents of Atieva and its subsidiaries less (ii) all indebtedness for borrowed money of Atieva and its subsidiaries, in each case as of two business days prior to the closing date (the “Equity Value”) and will be paid entirely in shares of Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of the Company (the “Class A Common Stock”) in an amount equal to $10.00 per share (the “Merger Consideration”).
At the effective time of the Merger:
(i) each share of capital stock of Atieva (the “Atieva Shares”) will be cancelled and automatically deemed for all purposes to represent the right to receive, in the aggregate, the Merger Consideration. All share incentive plan or similar equity-based compensation plans maintained for employees of Atieva will be assumed by the Company and all outstanding options to purchase Atieva Shares (each, a “Atieva Option”) and each restricted stock unit award (“RSU”) with respect to Atieva Shares (each, a “Atieva RSU”) will be assumed by the Company as described below. For purposes of the following paragraph, the “Exchange Ratio” means the Equity Value per share divided by $10.00.
(ii) each Atieva Option will become an option to purchase shares of Class A Common Stock (each, an “Assumed Option”), on the same terms and conditions (including applicable vesting, exercise and expiration provisions) as applied to the Atieva Option immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger, except that (i) the number of shares of Class A Common Stock subject to such Assumed Option shall equal the product of (x) the number of Atieva Shares that were subject to the option immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger, multiplied by (y) the Exchange Ratio, rounded down to the nearest whole share, and (B) the per-share exercise price shall equal the quotient of (1) the exercise price per Atieva Share at which such option was exercisable immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger, divided by (2) the Exchange Ratio, rounded up to the nearest whole cent.
(iii) each Atieva RSU, will be assumed by the Company and become an RSU with respect to shares of Class A Common Stock (each, an “Assumed RSU”) on the same terms and conditions (including applicable vesting provisions) as applied to each Atieva RSU immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger, except that the number of shares of Class A Common Stock subject to such Assumed RSU Award will be equal the product of (x) the number of Atieva Shares that were subject to such RSU immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger, multiplied by (y) the Exchange Ratio, rounded down to the nearest whole share.
The Merger Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants by the parties thereto and the closing is subject to certain conditions as further described in the Merger Agreement.
On February 20, 2021, we entered into a transactional support agreement with a service provider, pursuant to which the service provider agreed to render certain financial advisory and capital markets advisory services for a potential Business Combination. We agreed to pay the service provider a fee of (i) $6,000,000 is payable upon the consummation of a Business Combination (ii) $500,000 is payable upon consummation of the financing (iii) out-of-pocket expenses not to exceed $125,000 without prior approval.
On February 22, 2021, we entered into a convertible promissory note with the Sponsor pursuant to which the Sponsor agreed to loan us up to an aggregate principal amount of $1,500,000 (the “Note”). The Note is non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of (i) the date of which we consummate a Business Combination or (ii) the date that the winding up of the Company. If we do not consummate a Business Combination, we may use a portion of any funds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Promissory Note; however, no proceeds from the Trust Account may be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of the Note may be converted into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the Sponsor. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. We borrowed an aggregate of $1,500,000 on February 22, 2021.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target for our Business Combination, and activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of Atieva. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from April 30, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $2,521,839, which consists of operating costs of $2,976,423 and a provision for income taxes of $81,422 offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $531,361 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $4,645.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of common stock by the Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On August 3, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 207,000,000 Units, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $2,070,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 42,850,000 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $42,850,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $2,070,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $109,714,885 in transaction costs, including $36,403,600 of underwriting fees, $72,450,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $861,285 of other costs.
For the period from April 30, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $2,467,258. Net loss of $2,521,839 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $531,361, unrealized gain of on marketable securities held in our Trust Account $4,645 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $590,587 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $2,070,086,006. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less permitted withdrawals, deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest for working capital requirement and to pay franchise and income taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2020, we withdrew $450,000 of interest earned on the Trust Account for working capital purpose. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $3,592,857 outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the initial stockholders or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We monitor the adequacy of our working capital in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial Business Combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $50,000 for office space, administrative and support services to the Company. We began incurring these fees on July 30, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $72,450,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. The underwriters waived the upfront underwriting discount on 19,982,000 Units, resulting in a reduction of the upfront underwriting discount of $3,996,400. In addition, the underwriters reimbursed us an aggregate of $1,000,000 for costs incurred in connection with the Initial Public Offering.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, if any, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding for the period. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net loss less income attributable to Class A common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.