ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the section entitled “Selected Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Information Statement. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Information Statement, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those described below. You should read the “Risk Factors” section of this Information Statement for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Life Clips, Inc. (the “Company”) was incorporated in Wyoming on March 20, 2013 as Blue Sky Media Corporation and its principal business was developing, financing, producing and distributing motion pictures and related entertainment products. Following the Company’s October 2, 2015 acquisition of Klear Kapture, Inc. (“Klear Kapture”), the Company continued Klear Kapture’s business of developing a body camera and an auditable software solution suitable for use by law enforcement. The Company changed its name to Life Clips, Inc. on November 3, 2015 in order to better reflect its business operations at the time.
On July 11, 2016, the Company completed its acquisition (the “Acquisition”) of all of the outstanding equity securities of Batterfly Energy Ltd. (“Batterfly”), an Israel-based corporation that develops and distributes a single-use, cordless battery under the brand name Mobeego for use with cellular phones and other mobile devices. Batterfly is now a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. The Acquisition was completed pursuant to a Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of June 10, 2016 (the “Purchase Agreement”), among the Company, Batterfly and all of the shareholders of Batterfly, as amended. The Company has decided to retire its core product, Mobeego batteries, and continue pursuing alternative business opportunities that will re-energize the business within the next 12 months.
On April 5, 2021, the Company closed its acquisition of Cognitive Apps Software Solutions Inc. (“Cognitive Apps”, “Subsidiary”), a developer of artificial intelligence (AI) applications for the healthcare industry and psychedelic research. Cognitive Apps was incorporated in British Columbia on November 25, 2020. Its principal business is developing, financing, producing and distributing AI based technological solutions to the mental health and healthcare sector.
Cognitive Apps sold all of its issued and outstanding capital stock to LCLP, such that, becoming a 100% wholly-owned subsidiary of LCLP.
Cognitive Apps provides an AI powered mental health analytics platform empowering businesses to measure, understand, and improve the mental well-being of their employees, patients or customers. The Cognitive Apps solution is driven to achieve the Three Pillars: improved diagnostic outcomes, better and more personalized care for individuals, and to decrease the overall costs and time for the care. An individual only needs to record their voice on a handset, iPad, or tablet. The Cognitive Apps assessment is designed to be administered as often as daily, in order to provide a more granular picture of changes in mental health over time. As a result, the Cognitive apps assessment can be routinely completed to monitor mental health and track variables that might be impacted by treatment.
Cognitive Apps delivers a comprehensive approach to well-being, supporting the whole person. Cognitive apps currently has partnerships with Ehave (OTC: EHVVF), Mycotopia (OTC: TWGL), Welmind EMR, Betterhelp, Belshare, and Movefit.
How We Generate Revenue
Our Subsidiary, Cognitive Apps Software Solutions, Inc., generates income through Licensing Agreements.
On January 6, 2021, Cognitive Apps (Licensor) entered into its first License Agreement with Ehave, Inc. (OTCBB: EHVVF), an Ontario corporation. The Licensor is contracted to provide access to its software and systems for a fee of $100,000. Payment for the License of $25,000 is payable upon signing. The remaining subsequent payments for the first year of the License in the aggregate of $75,000 will be made in accordance with an agreed upon schedule. All payment will be in shares of Ehave, Inc. common stock. The shares shall be priced based upon the average closing price of the EHVVF common stock as quoted on its principal trading market for the 20 trading days immediately prior to the date upon which the payment is due.
General and administrative expenses consisted of professional service fees, and other general and administrative overhead costs. Expenses are recognized when incurred.
Depending on the extent of our future growth, we may experience significant strain on our management, personnel, and information systems. We will need to implement and improve operational, financial, and management information systems. In addition, we are implementing new information systems that will provide better record-keeping, customer service and billing. However, there can be no assurance that our management resources or information systems will be sufficient to manage any future growth in our business, and the failure to do so could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Results of Operations
For the Years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020
The Company has revenue totaling $50,000 and $0 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, respectively. This new revenue is being generated by our subsidiary, Cognitive Apps.
Cost of goods sold for the years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020 was $0.
Operating expenses, which consisted of professional fees and general and administrative expenses, for the year ended June 30, 2021, were $599,590. This compares with operating expenses for the year ended June 30, 2020, of $326,614. The increase of $272,976 in operating expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 is related to increases in contractual executive salaries and subsidiary payroll expenses.
Other Income/(Expense) increased to ($2,929,447) for the year ended June 30, 2021 vs. ($10,413,713) for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was directly related to the swings in derivative fair values from $(10,018,665) in 2020 to $7,274,230 in 2021. Additionally, there was a $10,036,200 loss on impairment of intangibles and a $468,505 gain on Batterfly settlement for the year ended June 30, 2021. This was offset by an increase in interest expense of $173,120 when compared to the year ended June 30, 2020.
As a result of the foregoing, we had a net loss of $3,479,037 for the year ended June 30, 2021. This compares with a net loss for the year ended June 30, 2020 of $10,740,327. The difference is primarily due to a 2021 net gain in derivatives of $7,274,230, compared to a net loss in derivatives of $10,018,665 for the year ended June 30, 2020. Additionally, there was a $10,036,200 loss on impairment of intangibles for the year ended June 30, 2021.
In its audited consolidated financial statements as of June 30, 2021, the Company was issued an opinion by its auditors that raised substantial doubt about the ability to continue as a going concern based on the Company’s current financial position. Our ability to achieve and maintain profitability and positive cash flow is dependent upon our ability to successfully develop and market our products and our ability to generate revenues.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of June 30, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $230,685. As of June 30, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $12,160.
Net cash from operating activities was $(175,088) for the year ended June 30, 2021. This compares to net cash from operating activities of $(21,614) for the year ended June 30, 2020. The change of ($153,474) in our net cash from operating activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily due to a change in net income /(loss) of $7,261,290, plus a change in the fair value of the derivative of $7,274,230, offset by a loss on impairment of intangibles of $10,036,200.
Cash flows from investing activities was $0 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020.
Cash flows from financing activities was $400,000 for the year ended June 30, 2021, which compares to cash flows from financing activities of $0 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in our cash flows from financing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was due to an increase in proceeds from convertible notes payable.
We have no present agreements or commitments with respect to any material acquisitions of other businesses, products, product rights or technologies or any other material capital expenditures. However, we will continue to evaluate acquisitions of and/or investments in products, technologies, capital equipment or improvements or companies that complement our business and may make such acquisitions and/or investments in the future. Accordingly, we may need to obtain additional sources of capital in the future to finance any such acquisitions and/or investments. We may not be able to obtain such financing on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. Due to the ongoing global economic crisis, we believe it may be difficult to obtain additional financing if needed. Even if we are able to obtain additional financing, it may contain undue restrictions on our operations, in the case of debt financing, or cause substantial dilution for our stockholders, in the case of equity financing.
Stock Incentive Plan
On April 20, 2017, the Company approved the Life Clips, Inc. 2017 Stock and Incentive Plan (“the Plan”). The Plan provides for the granting of nonqualified stock options, incentive stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock grants and units, performance units and awards. The Plan allows for an issuance of a maximum of 20,000,000 shares of common stock, with awards made at the discretion of the board of directors. No awards have been made to date.
Contractual Commitments
For the year ending June 30, 2021, the Company held two executive employment agreements with key officers as described in detail in Item 11.
Material Agreements
None
Financings
The following summary table is a listing of all outstanding convertible debt as of June 30, 2021. For additional information, please refer to Note 7 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Capital Expenditures
Other Capital Expenditures
We expect to incur research and development costs, as well as marketing expenses in connection with the expansion of our business.
Fiscal year end
Our fiscal year end is June 30.
Going Concern
We believe that the actions presently being taken to further implement the Company’s business plan and generate revenues provide the opportunity for us to continue as a going concern. While we believe in the viability of our strategy to generate revenues and in its ability to raise additional funds, there can be no assurances to that effect. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to further implement our business plan and generate revenues.
The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern.
Future Financings
We will require additional financing to fund our planned operations. We currently do not have committed sources of additional financing and may not be able to obtain additional financing particularly, if the volatile conditions of the stock and financial markets, and more particularly the market for early development stage company stocks persist. There can be no assurance that additional financing will be available to us when needed or, if available, that it can be obtained on commercially reasonable terms. If we are not able to obtain the additional financing on a timely basis, if and when it is needed, we will be forced to further delay or further scale down some or all of our activities or perhaps even cease the operations of the business.
Since inception we have funded our operations primarily through equity and debt financings and we expect that we will continue to fund our operations through equity and debt financing, either alone or through strategic alliances. If we are able to raise additional financing by issuing equity securities, our existing stockholders’ ownership will be diluted. Obtaining commercial or other loans, assuming those loans would be available, will increase our liabilities and future cash commitments.
There is no assurance that we will be able to maintain operations at a level sufficient for an investor to obtain a return on his, her, or its investment in our common stock. Further, we may continue to be unprofitable.
Critical Accounting Policies
The SEC has defined a company’s critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and which require us to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. Based on this definition, we have identified the critical accounting policies and judgments addressed below. We also have other key accounting policies that are significant to understanding our results.
The following are deemed to be the most significant accounting policies affecting us.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of these consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of net sales and expenses during the reported periods. Actual results may differ from those estimates and such differences may be material to the consolidated financial statements. The more significant estimates and assumptions by management include among others: derivatives, estimated useful lives of property and equipment, foreign currency transactions and translations, and common stock valuation. The current economic environment has increased the degree of uncertainty inherent in these estimates and assumptions.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under an asset and liability approach. This process involves calculating the temporary and permanent differences between the carrying amounts of the assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. The temporary differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which would be recorded on our consolidated balance sheets in accordance with ASC 740, which established financial accounting and reporting standards for the effect of income taxes. We must assess the likelihood that its deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe that recovery is not likely, we must establish a valuation allowance. Changes in our valuation allowance in a period are recorded through the income tax provision on the consolidated statements of operations.
From the date of our inception we adopted ASC 740-10-30. ASC 740-10 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an entity’s consolidated financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attributes for consolidated financial statement disclosure of tax positions taken or expected to be taken on a tax return. Under ASC 740-10, the impact of an uncertain income tax position on the income tax return must be recognized at the largest amount that is more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon audit by the relevant taxing authority. An uncertain income tax position will not be recognized if it has less than a 50% likelihood of being sustained. Additionally, ASC 740-10 provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition. As a result of the implementation of ASC 740-10, we recognized no material adjustment in the liability for unrecognized income tax benefits.
Non-Cash Equity Transactions
Shares of equity instruments issued for non-cash consideration are recorded at the fair value of the consideration received based on the market value of services to be rendered, or at the value of the stock given, considered in reference to contemporaneous cash sale of stock.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
We apply the provisions of accounting guidance, FASB Topic ASC 825, that requires all entities to disclose the fair value of financial instruments, both assets and liabilities recognized and not recognized on the consolidated balance sheet, for which it is practicable to estimate fair value, and defines fair value of a financial instrument as the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, the fair value of accounts payable approximated the carrying value due to the short maturity of the instruments, quoted market prices or interest rates which fluctuate with market rates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
There were no Recently Adopted Standards.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. ASU 2016-13 amends the guidance on the impairment of financial instruments. This update adds an impairment model (known as the current expected credit losses model) that is based on expected losses rather than incurred losses. Under the new guidance, an entity recognizes, as an allowance, its estimate of expected credit losses. In November 2018, ASU 2016-13 was amended by ASU 2018-19, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses. ASU 2018-19 changes the effective date of the credit loss standards (ASU 2016-13) to fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Further, the ASU clarifies that operating lease receivables are not within the scope of ASC 326-20 and should instead be accounted for under the new leasing standard, ASC 842. The Company does not believe that the impact of this ASU will have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. The amendments in this ASU simplify the subsequent measurement of goodwill by eliminating Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test and eliminating the requirement for a reporting unit with a zero or negative carrying amount to perform a qualitative assessment. Instead, under this ASU, an entity would perform its annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount and would recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized is not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In addition, income tax effects will be considered, if applicable. This ASU is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. The Company adopted this ASU on July 1, 2020 and it had no material impact on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Under SEC regulations, we are required to disclose our off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, such as changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. As of June 30, 2021, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our results of operations.