Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Introduction
The following is management's discussion and analysis of the consolidated financial condition and consolidated results of operations of LCNB. It is intended to amplify certain financial information regarding LCNB and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes contained in the 2020 Annual Report to Shareholders.
Overview
Net income for 2020 was $20,075,000 (basic and diluted earnings per share of $1.55), compared to $18,912,000 (basic and diluted earnings per share of $1.44) in 2019 and $14,845,000 (basic and diluted earnings per share of $1.24) in 2018 .
The following items significantly affected earnings for the years indicated:
•The provision for loan losses for 2020 was $2,014,000, compared to $207,000 for 2019 and $923,000 for 2018, partially due to adjustments for potential impacts from the economic recession caused by the COVID-19 pandemic;
•CFB merged with and into LCNB Corp. on May 31, 2018;
•Expenses related to the merger with CFB totaled $2,123,000 during 2018; and
•Other non-interest expense for 2018 included $575,000 in net losses from sales of fixed assets, primarily due to losses incurred in the sale of two office buildings.
Coronavirus Update/Status
The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has created unprecedented challenges throughout the communities LCNB serves, the
state of Ohio, the United States and the entire world. LCNB has implemented a number of procedures in response to the
pandemic to support the safety and well-being of our employees, customers, and shareholders that continue through the date of
this report, including the following:
•We addressed the safety of our 33 branches, following the guidelines of the Center for Disease Control, by temporarily closing our lobbies from March through May 2020 in an effort to encourage use of mobile banking applications and our drive-thru facilities, while allowing access to the lobbies by appointment only and only when necessary;
•We re-opened most lobbies during June and July 2020 and introduced various safety measures including the installation of clear barriers at the teller windows, placing markers on the floor to properly space customers as they wait, enhancing our cleaning procedures, and requiring the wearing of masks;
•As the pandemic worsened in the fourth quarter, we once again made our office lobbies available by appointment only, beginning November 27, 2020 and lasting through January 31, 2021.
•We hold frequent executive management meetings to address issues that change rapidly;
•We have encouraged non-customer service employees to work remotely from home as much as possible and have adopted technological improvements to make this possible;
•We moved our Annual Shareholders’ Meeting, held on April 21, 2020, from a physical meeting to a virtual meeting and the 2021 Annual Shareholders' Meeting to be held on April 20, 2021 will also be virtual;
•We provided COVID-19 related payment deferrals, primarily agreements to accept interest only payments for a period of time or agreements to defer principal and interest payments for a period of time, on 607 loans with balances as follows (in thousands)
LCNB CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
•We chose to participate in the CARES Act Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP") that provided government guaranteed and potentially forgivable loans to applicants. The PPP was implemented by the Small Business Administration with support from the Department of the Treasury and provided small businesses with funds to pay up to eight or twenty-four weeks, depending on the date of the loan, of payroll costs including benefits. Funds could also be used to pay interest on mortgages, rent, and utilities. All PPP loans originated by LCNB during 2020 were closed during April and May 2020 and we were able to assist 316 small businesses with $45.5 million of such loans. Remaining outstanding at December 31, 2020 was $21.1 million and unrecognized fees at that date totaled $747,000. We believe these loans and our participation in the program is good for our customers, the employees who work for these companies, and the communities we serve.
The Economic Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act, which was signed into law on December 27, 2020, extends the authority to make PPP loans through March 31, 2021 and LCNB is participating in this new round.
LCNB continues to closely monitor this pandemic and expects to make future changes to respond to the pandemic as this
situation continues to evolve.
Net Interest Income
LCNB's primary source of earnings is net interest income, which is the difference between earnings from loans and other investments and interest paid on deposits and other liabilities. The following table presents, for the years indicated, average balances for interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the income or expense related to each item, and the resulting average yields earned or rates paid.
LCNB CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(1)Includes non-accrual loans if any.
(2)Income from tax-exempt securities is included in interest income on a taxable-equivalent basis. Interest income has been divided by a factor comprised of the complement of the incremental tax rate of 21%.
(3)The net interest spread is the difference between the average rate on total interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities.
(4)The net interest margin is the taxable-equivalent net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets.
LCNB CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
The following table presents the changes in interest income and expense for each major category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the amount of change attributable to volume and rate changes for the years indicated. Changes not solely attributable to rate or volume have been allocated to volume and rate changes in proportion to the relationship of absolute dollar amounts of the changes in each.
(1)Non-accrual loans, if any, are included in average loan balances.
(2)Change in interest income from non-taxable investment securities is computed based on interest income determined on a taxable-equivalent yield basis. Interest income has been divided by a factor comprised of the complement of the incremental tax rate of 21%.
2020 vs. 2019. Net interest income on a fully tax-equivalent basis for 2020 totaled $56,491,000, an increase of $1,639,000 from 2019. The increase resulted from a decrease in total interest expense of $3,226,000, partially offset by a decrease in total taxable-equivalent interest income of $1,587,000.
The decrease in total interest income was due primarily to a $685,000 decrease in interest income from taxable debt securities and an $823,000 decrease from taxable-equivalent interest income from non-taxable debt securities. Interest income from taxable debt securities decreased due to an $11.0 million decrease in average securities and to a 30 basis point decrease in the average rate earned on these securities. Interest income from non-taxable debt securities decreased due to a $35.2 million decrease in average securities, partially offset by a 50 basis point increase in the average rate earned on these securities. The decreases in debt securities were invested in the loan portfolio and used to pay down short-term borrowings and long-term debt.
Loan interest income increased by $258,000 due to an $84.9 million increase in average loans, largely offset by a 29 basis point decrease in the average rate earned on loans.
LCNB CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
The decrease in total interest expense was primarily due to a $1,013,000 decrease in interest paid on savings deposits and a $1,879,000 decrease in interest paid on IRA and time certificates. Interest paid on savings deposits decreased primarily due to a 16 basis point decrease in the average rate paid, slightly offset by a $27.9 million increase in average deposit balances. Interest paid on IRA and time certificates decreased due to a 37 basis point decrease in the average rate paid and to a $37.5 million decrease in average deposit balances. Decreases in average rates paid for savings deposits and IRA and time certificates were primarily due to decreases in market rates.
2019 vs. 2018. Net interest income on a fully tax-equivalent basis for 2019 totaled $54,852,000, an increase of $5,969,000 from 2018. The increase resulted from an increase in total taxable-equivalent interest income of $10,332,000, partially offset by an increase in total interest expense of $4,363,000.
The increase in total interest income was due primarily to a $11,520,000 increase in loan interest income caused by a $183.2 million increase in average loans and secondarily to a 26 basis point increase in the average rate earned on loans. Loans obtained through the merger with CFB were a significant component of the increase in average loans. Partially offsetting the increase in loan interest income was a $1,277,000 decrease in taxable-equivalent interest income from non-taxable debt securities. Interest income from non-taxable investment securities decreased due to a $49.5 million decrease in average non-taxable debt securities, slightly offset by a 12 basis point increase in the average rate earned on these securities. The decrease in non-taxable debt securities were invested in the loan portfolio and used to pay down short-term borrowings.
The increase in total interest expense was primarily due to a $1,114,000 increase in interest paid on savings deposits, a $2,659,000 increase in interest paid on IRA and time certificates, and a $674,000 increase in interest paid on long-term debt. Interest paid on savings deposits increased primarily due to a 17 basis point increase in the average rate paid. Interest paid on IRA and time certificates increased due to a $73.8 million increase in the average balance and to a 42 basis point increase in the average rate paid. Increases in average rates paid for savings deposits and IRA and time certificates were primarily due to increases in market rates. Deposits obtained through the merger with CFB were a significant component of the increases in savings deposits and IRA and time certificates. Interest paid on long-term debt increased primarily due to a $25.9 million increase in the average balance and secondarily to a 27 basis point increase in the average rate paid. The average balance on long-term debt increased due to $25.0 million in new borrowings obtained in December 2018 and to borrowings obtained through the merger with CFB, partially offset by borrowings that matured.
LCNB CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
Provisions and Allowance for Loan Losses
The following table presents the total loan loss provision and the other changes in the allowance for loan losses for the years 2016 through 2020:
Charge-offs and recoveries classified as “Other” include charge-offs and recoveries on checking and NOW account overdrafts. LCNB charges off such overdrafts when considered uncollectible, but no later than 60 days from the date first overdrawn.
LCNB continuously reviews the loan portfolio for credit risk through the use of its lending and loan review functions. Independent loan reviews analyze specific loans, providing validation that credit risks are appropriately identified, graded, and reported to the Loan Committee, Board of Directors, and the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. New credits meeting specific criteria are analyzed prior to origination and are reviewed by the Loan Committee, the Loan Committee of the Board of Directors, and the Board of Directors.
LCNB CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
The total provision for loan losses is determined based upon management's evaluation as to the amount needed to maintain the allowance for loan losses at a level considered appropriate in relation to the risk of losses inherent in the portfolio. For analysis purposes, the loan portfolio is separated into pools of similar loans. These pools include commercial and industrial loans, owner occupied commercial real estate loans, non-owner occupied commercial real estate loans, real estate loans secured by farms, real estate loans secured by multi-family dwellings, residential real estate loans secured by senior liens on 1-4 family dwellings, residential real estate loans secured by junior liens on 1-4 family dwellings, home equity line of credit loans, consumer loans, loans for agricultural purposes not secured by real estate, construction loans secured by 1-4 family dwellings, construction loans secured by other real estate, and several smaller classifications. Within each pool of loans, LCNB examines a variety of factors to determine the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses, including historic charge-off percentages, overall pool quality, a review of specific problem loans, current economic trends and conditions that may affect borrowers' ability to pay, and the nature, volume, and consistency of the loan pool.
The provision for loan losses for 2020 was $2,014,000, compared to $207,000 for 2019 and $923,000 for 2018. The 2020 period included qualitative adjustments for estimated impacts from the economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Calculating an appropriate level for the allowance and provision for loan losses involves a high degree of management judgment and is, by its nature, imprecise. Revisions may be necessary as more information becomes available.
Non-Interest Income
A comparison of non-interest income for 2020, 2019, and 2018 is as follows:
Reasons for changes include:
•Fiduciary income increased during 2020 and 2019 due to increases in the fair value of trust and brokerage assets managed.
•Service charges and fees on deposit accounts decreased during 2020 primarily due to decreases in fee income recognized on the ICS deposit program, overdraft fees, and smaller decreases in other fee accounts, partially offset by an increase in fees received from debit card usage. Service charges and fees increased during 2019 due to fee income recognized on the ICS deposit program, fees received from debit card usage, and incentive income received on co-branded Mastercards. These increases were partially offset by decreases in service charges on deposit accounts, ATM surcharge fees, and overdraft fees.
•Net gains (losses) on sales of securities were greater during 2020 as compared to 2019 and 2018 primarily due to market pricing at the times of the sales. The book value of sales for 2020, 2019, and 2018 were, respectively, $8.6 million, $84.6 million, and $8.6 million.
•Bank owned life insurance income was greater in 2020 partially due to $12.0 million of new policies purchased at the beginning of the third quarter 2019 and partially due to a mortality benefit received during the first quarter 2020. Income increased during 2019 primarily due to the new policies previously mentioned.
•Net gains from sales of loans was greater during 2020 as compared to 2019 and 2018 primarily due to the volume of loans sold.
•Other operating income increased in 2020 primarily due to gains recognized on the sale of equity securities, partially offset by decreases in the fair value of equity security investments. Other operating income increased in 2019 primarily due to increases in the fair value of equity security investments.
LCNB CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
Non-Interest Expense
A comparison of non-interest expense for 2020, 2019, and 2018 is as follows:
Reasons for changes include:
•Salaries and employee benefits were 7.3% greater in 2020 than in 2019 and 19.0% greater in 2019 than in 2018. The increases for both years were primarily due to salary and wage increases, incentive payment increases, and newly hired employees, including additional business development positions. Increases in health insurance costs also contributed to the increases for both years.
•Equipment expenses increased during 2020 primarily due to increased depreciation charges for furniture and equipment and increased equipment rental costs. During 2020, LCNB replaced ATMs that it had previously owned with new ATMs obtained through an outsourcing arrangement.
•Occupancy expense decreased during 2020 primarily due to decreased costs for facility maintenance and repairs and smaller decreases in utility costs and depreciation charges for bank premises, partially offset by higher janitorial costs. Occupancy expense for 2019 increased primarily due to increased branch rental expense and increased charges for maintenance and repairs. The increase in branch rental expense primarily reflects rent paid for the new Worthington Office, previously the CFB Office.
•State financial institutions tax expense increased in 2019 due to a larger capital base (Ohio financial institutions tax is based on capital, not income), largely due to stock issued to CFB stockholders during 2018 as merger consideration.
•Marketing expense increased in 2019 primarily due to promotion costs for new checking products introduced in 2018, increased marketing activities in the Columbus area, and expanded use of television, radio, and digital media.
•FDIC premiums were lower in 2020 and 2019 as compared to 2018 due to small bank assessment credits received from the FDIC during 2020 and 2019 because the DIF was above the mandated level of 1.35%. LCNB has received the full amount of the credit and quarterly premium payments have returned to their normal amounts.
•ATM expense increased during 2020 partially due to a strategic decision to outsource LCNB's ATM operations to a third-party vendor, relieving LCNB branch personnel from various ATM maintenance responsibilities.
•Computer maintenance and supplies increased in 2019 due to increased technology and software related expenditures designed to offer technological convenience to customers, to protect the integrity of LCNB's data systems and software, and to protect the confidentiality of customer information.
•Contracted services increased in 2019 due to additional fees paid for loan and deposit system upgrades and improvements and to general price increases on other contracted services.
•Merger-related expenses for 2019 and 2018 were due to the acquisition of CFB and were primarily comprised of various professional fees, costs to prepare and distribute the proxy statement/prospectus, and costs to merge CFB's data system into LCNB's system.
LCNB CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
•Other non-interest expense for 2018 included $575,000 in net losses from sales of fixed assets, primarily due to the sale of two office buildings.
Income Taxes
LCNB's effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 were 16.9%, 17.9%, and 16.6%, respectively. The difference between the statutory rate of 21% and the effective tax rate is primarily due to tax-exempt interest income from municipal securities, tax-exempt earnings from bank owned life insurance, tax-exempt earnings from LCNB Risk Management, Inc., and tax credits and losses related to investments in affordable housing tax credit limited partnerships. A one-time tax benefit recognized as a result of certain provisions in the CARES Act also contributed to the difference during 2020.
Financial Condition
A comparison of balance sheet line items at December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows (in thousands):
LCNB CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
Reasons for changes include:
•Debt securities, available-for-sale, increased due to purchase of new securities totaling $102.9 million and by a net increase in fair values totaling $4.4 million. These increases were partially offset by sales of securities with a total book value of $8.6 million and maturities and calls of securities totaling $66.2 million.
•Net loans increased due to organic growth in the loan portfolio, including PPP loans with a carrying value of $21.1 million at December 31, 2020. Most of the growth occurred in the commercial and industrial and commercial real estate portfolios.
•Premises and equipment, net increased primarily due to Main Office remodeling costs and construction costs for a new Union Village Office, partially offset by depreciation expense.
•Operating lease right-of-use assets and operating lease liabilities increased due to the replacement of previously owned ATMs with outsourced ATMs.
•Core deposit and other intangibles decreased due to amortization of core deposit intangibles.
•Interest receivable increased primarily due to interest accrued on COVID-19 related loan payment deferrals.
•Other assets increased primarily due to additional investments in affordable housing tax credit funds totaling $5.0 million.
•Non-interest-bearing deposits and interest-bearing deposits have grown substantially since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. Management believes the growth reflects customer preferences for liquidity during uncertain economic periods. Balances in demand deposits and NOW and savings accounts have grown, while balances in IRA and time deposits have decreased. These increases were partially offset by a decline in ICS reciprocal accounts deposited with LCNB. The reciprocal deposits were allowed to decrease because management utilized other sources of liquidity.
•Long-term debt decreased due to payoffs of matured debt. There were no new borrowings during 2020.
•Accrued interest and other liabilities increased primarily due to payables connected with the $5.0 million in new affordable housing tax credit investments mentioned above.
•Total shareholders' equity increased primarily due to earnings retained during 2020 and to a $3.5 million increase in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of taxes caused by market-driven increases in the fair value of LCNB's debt security investments. These increases were partially offset by common stock repurchased and dividends paid to shareholders.
Liquidity
LCNB Corp. depends on dividends from the Bank for the majority of its liquid assets, including the cash needed to pay dividends to its shareholders. Federal banking law limits the amount of dividends the Bank may pay to the sum of retained net income for the current year plus retained net income for the previous two years. Prior approval from the OCC, the Bank's primary regulator, is necessary for the Bank to pay dividends in excess of this amount. In addition, dividend payments may not reduce capital levels below minimum regulatory guidelines. Management believes the Bank will be able to pay anticipated dividends to LCNB without needing to request approval. The Bank is not aware of any reasons why it would not receive such approval, if required.
Effective liquidity management ensures that cash is available to meet the cash flow needs of borrowers and depositors, pay dividends to shareholders, and meet LCNB's operating cash needs. Primary funding sources include customer deposits with the Bank, short-term and long-term borrowings from the Federal Home Loan Bank, short-term line of credit arrangements totaling $55.0 million with two correspondent banks, and interest and repayments received from LCNB's loan and investment portfolios.
Total remaining borrowing capacity with the Federal Home Loan Bank at December 31, 2020 was approximately $178.3 million. Additional borrowings of approximately $55.0 million were available through the line of credit arrangements at year-end.
On April 9, 2020, the Federal Reserve established the PPPLF to bolster the effectiveness of the PPP. The PPPLF will extend credit to eligible financial institutions that originate PPP loans, taking the loans as collateral at face value. LCNB management has decided not to currently use the PPPLF as a source of liquidity, as other sources of liquidity are believed to be adequate at this time.
Management closely monitors the level of liquid assets available to meet ongoing funding needs. It is management's intent to maintain adequate liquidity so that sufficient funds are readily available at a reasonable cost. LCNB experienced no liquidity or operational problems as a result of current liquidity levels.
LCNB CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
Commitments to extend credit at December 31, 2020 totaled $217.6 million, including standby letters of credit totaling $243,000, and are more fully described in Note 13 - Commitments and Contingent Liabilities to LCNB's consolidated financial statements. Since many commitments to extend credit may expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements.
The following table provides information concerning LCNB's contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
The following table provides information concerning LCNB's commitments at December 31, 2020:
Capital Resources
LCNB and the Bank are required by banking regulators to meet certain minimum levels of capital adequacy. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a material effect on LCNB's and the Bank's financial statements. These minimum levels are expressed in the form of certain ratios. Capital is separated into Tier 1 capital (essentially shareholders' equity less goodwill and other intangibles) and Tier 2 capital (essentially the allowance for loan losses limited to 1.25% of risk-weighted assets). Common Equity Tier 1 Capital is the sum of common stock, related surplus, and retained earnings, net of treasury stock, accumulated other comprehensive income, and other adjustments. The first three ratios, which are based on the degree of credit risk in the Bank's assets, provide for weighting assets based on assigned risk factors and include off-balance sheet items such as loan commitments and stand-by letters of credit. Information summarizing the regulatory capital of the Bank at December 31, 2020 and 2019 and corresponding regulatory minimum requirements is included in Note 14 - Regulatory Matters of the consolidated financial statements.
LCNB CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
The FDIC, the insurer of deposits in financial institutions, has adopted a risk-based insurance premium system based in part on an institution's capital adequacy. Under this system, a depository institution is required to pay successively higher premiums depending on its capital levels and its supervisory rating by its primary regulator. It is management's intention to maintain sufficient capital to permit the Bank to maintain a "well capitalized" designation, which is the FDIC's highest rating.
On August 24, 2020, LCNB's Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program (the “Program”). Under the terms of
the Program, LCNB is authorized to repurchase up to 645,000 of its outstanding common shares. The Program is authorized to
last no longer than five years. The Program replaced and superseded LCNB’s prior share repurchase program, which was
adopted in April 2019.
Under the Program, LCNB may purchase common shares through various means such as open market transactions, including
block purchases, and privately negotiated transactions. The number of shares repurchased and the timing, manner, price and
amount of any repurchases will be determined at LCNB's discretion. Factors include, but are not limited to, share price, trading
volume, and general market conditions, along with LCNB’s general business conditions. The Program may be suspended or
discontinued at any time and does not obligate LCNB to acquire any specific number of its common shares.
As part of the Program, LCNB entered into a trading plan adopted in accordance with Rule 10b5-1 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. The 10b5-1 trading plan permits common shares to be repurchased at times that LCNB might otherwise be precluded from doing so under insider trading laws or self-imposed trading restrictions. The 10b5-1 trading plan is administered by an independent broker and is subject to price, market volume and timing restrictions.
LCNB established an Ownership Incentive Plan during 2002 that allowed for stock-based awards to eligible employees. Under the plan, awards could be in the form of stock options, share awards, and/or appreciation rights. The plan provided for the issuance of up to 200,000 shares, as restated for a stock dividend. The plan expired on April 16, 2012. Any outstanding unexercised options, however, continue to be exercisable in accordance with their terms.
The 2015 Ownership Incentive Plan (the "2015 Plan") was approved by LCNB's shareholders at the annual meeting on April 28, 2015 and allows for stock-based awards to eligible employees, as determined by the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors. Awards may be made in the form of stock options, appreciation rights, restricted shares, and/or restricted share units. The 2015 Plan provides for the issuance of up to 450,000 shares. The 2015 Plan will terminate on April 28, 2025 and is subject to earlier termination by the Compensation Committee.
Critical Accounting Policies
The accounting policies of LCNB conform to U.S. generally accepted accounting principles and require management to make estimates and develop assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and related footnotes. These estimates and assumptions are based on information available to management as of the date of the financial statements. Actual results could differ significantly from management’s estimates. As this information changes, management’s estimates and assumptions used to prepare LCNB’s financial statements and related disclosures may also change. The most significant accounting policies followed by LCNB are presented in Note One of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein. Based on the valuation techniques used and the sensitivity of financial statement amounts to the methods, assumptions, and estimates underlying those amounts, management has identified the items described below to be the accounting areas that require the most subjective or complex judgments and, as such, could be most subject to revision as new information becomes available.
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is established through a provision for loan losses charged to expense. Loans are charged against the allowance for loan losses when management believes that the collectability of the principal is unlikely. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. The allowance is an amount that management believes will be adequate to absorb inherent losses in the loan portfolio, based on evaluations of the collectability of loans and prior loan loss experience. The evaluations take into consideration such factors as changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, overall portfolio quality, review of specific problem loans, and current economic conditions that may affect the borrowers' ability to pay. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available.
LCNB CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
The allowance consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are classified as doubtful, substandard, or special mention. For such loans an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows or collateral value is lower than the carrying value of that loan. The general component covers non-classified loans and is based on historical loss experience adjusted for qualitative factors, which include trends in underperforming loans, trends in the volume and terms of loans, economic trends and conditions, concentrations of credit, trends in the quality of loans, and borrower financial statement exceptions.
Based on its evaluations, management believes that the allowance for loan losses will be adequate to absorb estimated losses inherent in the current loan portfolio.
Acquired Credit Impaired Loans. LCNB accounts for acquisitions using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that assets acquired and liabilities assumed be measured at their fair values at the acquisition date. Acquired loans are reviewed to determine if there is evidence of deterioration in credit quality since inception and if it is probable that LCNB will be unable to collect all amounts due under the contractual loan agreements. The analysis includes expected prepayments and estimated cash flows including principal and interest payments at the date of acquisition. The amount in excess of the estimated future cash flows is not accreted into earnings. The amount in excess of the estimated future cash flows over the book value of the loan is accreted into interest income over the remaining life of the loan (accretable yield). LCNB records these loans on the acquisition date at their fair values. Thus, an allowance for estimated future losses is not established on the acquisition date. Subsequent to the date of acquisition, expected future cash flows on loans acquired are updated and any losses or reductions in estimated cash flows which arise subsequent to the date of acquisition are reflected as a charge through the provision for loan losses. An increase in the expected cash flows adjusts the level of the accretable yield recognized on a prospective basis over the remaining life of the loan. Due to the number, size, and complexity of loans within the acquired loan portfolio, there is always a possibility of inherent undetected losses.
Accounting for Intangibles. LCNB’s intangible assets at December 31, 2020 are composed primarily of goodwill and core deposit intangibles related to acquisitions of other financial institutions. It also includes mortgage servicing rights recorded from sales of mortgage loans to the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation and mortgage servicing rights acquired through the acquisition of Eaton National and CFB.
Goodwill is not subject to amortization, but is reviewed annually for impairment. A review for impairment may be conducted more frequently than annually if circumstances indicate a possible impairment. Impairment indicators that may be considered include the condition of the economy and banking industry; estimated future cash flows; government intervention and regulatory updates; the impact of recent events to financial performance and cost factors of the reporting unit; performance of LCNB’s stock; and other relevant events. These and other factors could lead to a conclusion that goodwill is impaired, which would require LCNB to write off the difference between the estimated fair value of the Company and the carrying value.
Core deposit intangibles are being amortized on a straight line basis over their respective estimated weighted average lives.
Mortgage servicing rights are capitalized by allocating the total cost of loans between mortgage servicing rights and the loans based on their estimated fair values. Capitalized mortgage servicing rights are amortized to loan servicing income in proportion to and over the period of estimated servicing income, subject to periodic review for impairment.
Fair Value Accounting for Debt Securities. Debt securities classified as available-for-sale are carried at estimated fair value. Unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes, are reported as accumulated other comprehensive income or loss in shareholders’ equity. Fair value is estimated using market quotations for U.S. Treasury investments. Fair value for the majority of the remaining available-for-sale securities is estimated using the discounted cash flow method for each security with discount rates based on rates observed in the market.
LCNB CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES