ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide information necessary to understand our audited consolidated financial statements for the two-year period ended December 31, 2020, and highlight certain other information which, in the opinion of management, will enhance a reader’s understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. In particular, the discussion is intended to provide an analysis of significant trends and material changes in our financial position and the operating results of our business during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Report. These historical financial statements may not be indicative of our future performance. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risks described throughout this Report, particularly in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company developing novel cell therapies for unmet medical needs. Our focus is to develop therapies for degenerative retinal diseases, neurological conditions associated with demyelination, and aiding the body in detecting and combating cancer. Specifically, we are testing therapies to treat dry age-related macular degeneration (“AMD”), spinal cord injuries, and non-small cell lung cancer. Our programs are based on our proprietary cell-based therapy platform and associated development and manufacturing capabilities. From this platform, we develop and manufacture specialized, terminally or functionally differentiated human cells from established and well-characterized pluripotent cell lines. These differentiated cells are developed either to replace or support cells that are dysfunctional or absent due to degenerative disease or traumatic injury, or are administered as a means of helping the body mount an effective immune response to cancer.
We have three allogeneic, or “off-the-shelf,” cell therapy programs in clinical development:
● OpRegen®, a retinal pigment epithelium cell replacement therapy currently in a Phase 1/2a multicenter clinical trial for the treatment of advanced dry AMD with geographic atrophy. There currently are no therapies approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) for dry AMD, which accounts for approximately 85-90% of all AMD cases and is the leading cause of blindness in people over the age of 60.
● OPC1, an oligodendrocyte progenitor cell therapy currently in a Phase 1/2a multicenter clinical trial for acute spinal cord injuries. This clinical trial has been partially funded by the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine.
● VAC2, an allogeneic cancer immunotherapy of antigen-presenting dendritic cells currently in a Phase 1 clinical trial in non-small cell lung cancer. This clinical trial is being funded and conducted by Cancer Research UK, the world’s largest independent cancer research charity.
Lineage completed its merger (the “Asterias Merger”) with Asterias Biotherapeutics, Inc. (“Asterias”) on March 8, 2019, which incorporated OPC1 and VAC2 into its cell therapy product portfolio.
In addition to seeking to create value for shareholders by developing product candidates and other technologies through our clinical development programs, we also seek to create value from our technologies through partnering and strategic transactions. We founded two companies that later became publicly traded companies: OncoCyte Corporation (“OncoCyte”) and AgeX Therapeutics, Inc. (“AgeX”).
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received approximately $12.6 million in gross proceeds in connection with our sale of shares of OncoCyte and AgeX. In August 2020, we also received $24.6 million from Juvenescence Limited (“Juvenescence”), representing principal and accrued interest under a promissory note we received in connection with our sale of AgeX shares to Juvenescence in August 2018.
We no longer hold any common stock in AgeX. The value of our OncoCyte holdings as of March 5, 2021, was approximately $4.2 million, based on the closing price of its common stock on that date. In this Report, see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business Operations and Capital Requirements-The value of our investments in public companies fluctuates based on their respective stock prices and could be negatively affected by poor business performance.”
Though our principal focus is on advancing our three cell therapy programs in clinical development, we may seek to create additional value through corporate transactions, as we have in the past.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements and related notes. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. We have identified below our critical accounting policies and estimates that we believe require the greatest amount of judgment. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimates which are subject to significant judgment, including those related to going concern assessment of our consolidated financial statements, useful lives associated with long-lived assets, including evaluation of asset impairment, allowances for uncollectible accounts and financing receivables, valuing shares owned in nonconsolidated companies using the equity method of accounting, loss contingencies, deferred income taxes and tax reserves, including valuation allowances related to deferred income taxes, and assumptions used to value stock-based awards, debt or other equity instruments. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates compared to historical experience and trends which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. To the extent that there are material differences between our estimates and our actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe the assumptions and estimates associated with the following have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Business Combinations - We account for business combinations, such as the Asterias Merger, in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 805, Business Combinations, which requires the purchase price to be measured at fair value. When the purchase consideration consists entirely of our common shares, we calculate the purchase price by determining the fair value, as of the acquisition date, of shares issued in connection with the closing of the acquisition. We recognize estimated fair values of the tangible assets and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development (“IPR&D”), and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date, and we record as goodwill any amount of the fair value of the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in excess of the purchase price.
Goodwill and IPR&D - Goodwill is calculated as the difference between the acquisition date fair value of the consideration transferred and the values assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if circumstances indicate potential impairment. IPR&D assets are indefinite-lived intangible assets until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development (“R&D”) efforts. Once the R&D efforts are completed or abandoned, the IPR&D will either be amortized over the asset life as a finite-lived intangible asset or be impaired, respectively, in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other. In accordance with ASC 350, goodwill and acquired IPR&D are determined to have indefinite lives and, therefore, are not amortized. Instead, they are tested for impairment at least annually and between annual tests if we become aware of an event or a change in circumstances that would indicate the asset may be impaired.
Leases - We account for leases in accordance with ASC 842, Leases. We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Leases are classified as either financing or operating, with classification affecting the pattern of expense recognition in the consolidated statements of operations. Under the available practical expedients for the adoption of ASC 842, we account for the lease and non-lease components as a single lease component. We recognize right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities for leases with terms greater than twelve months in the consolidated balance sheet. ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset during the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As most of our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. We use the implicit rate when readily determinable. The operating lease ROU asset also includes any lease payments made and excludes lease incentives. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Operating leases are included as right-of-use assets in property and equipment, and ROU lease liabilities, current and long-term, in the consolidated balance sheets. Financing leases are included in property and equipment, and in financing lease liabilities, current and long-term, in the consolidated balance sheets. We disclose the amortization of our ROU assets and operating lease payments as a net amount, “Amortization of ROU assets”, on the consolidated statement of cash flows.
Going concern assessment - In accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern, we assess going concern uncertainty in our consolidated financial statements to determine if we have sufficient cash and cash equivalents on hand and working capital to operate for a period of at least one year from the date our consolidated financial statements are issued or are available to be issued, which is referred to as the “look-forward period” as defined by ASU No. 2014-15. As part of this assessment, based on conditions that are known and reasonably knowable to us, we will consider various scenarios, forecasts, projections, and estimates, and we will make certain key assumptions, including the timing and nature of projected cash expenditures or programs, and our ability to delay or curtail those expenditures or programs, if necessary, among other factors. Based on this assessment, as necessary or applicable, we make certain assumptions concerning our ability to curtail or delay research and development programs and expenditures to the extent we deem probable those implementations can be achieved and we have the proper authority to execute them within the look-forward period in accordance with ASU 2014-15.
Marketable Equity Securities - We account for our shares in OncoCyte and HBL (and previously AgeX) as marketable equity securities in accordance with ASC 320-10-25, Investments - Debt and Equity Securities, as amended by Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-01, Financial Instruments-Overall: Recognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities, further discussed below.
OncoCyte and AgeX shares have readily determinable fair values quoted on the NYSE American under trading symbols “OCX” and “AGE”. The HBL shares have a readily determinable fair value quoted on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange (“TASE”) under trading symbol “HDST” where share prices are denominated in New Israeli Shekels (NIS).
Prior to September 11, 2019, we accounted for our OncoCyte shares held at fair value, using the equity method of accounting. On September 11, 2019, Lineage’s ownership percentage decreased from 24% to 16% when it sold 4.0 million shares of OncoCyte common stock. Accordingly, as the ownership percentage was reduced to less than 20%, we are no longer considered to exercise significant influence over OncoCyte and are now accounting for our OncoCyte holdings as marketable equity securities. Prior to the Asterias Merger completed on March 8, 2019, we accounted for our Asterias shares held at fair value, using the equity method of accounting.
Royalties from product sales and license fees - Lineage’s performance obligations in agreements with certain customers is to provide a license to allow customers to make, import and sell company licensed products or methods for preclinical studies and commercial use. Customers pay a combination of a license issue fee paid up front and a sales-based royalty, if any, in some cases with yearly minimums. The transaction price is deemed to be the license issue fee stated in the contract. The license offered by Lineage is a functional license with significant standalone functionality and provides customers with the right to use Lineage’s intellectual property. This allows Lineage to recognize revenue on the license issue fee at a point in time at the beginning of the contract, which is when the customer begins to have use of the license. Variable consideration related to sales-based royalties is recognized only when (or as) the later of one or more of the following events occur: (i) a sale or usage occurs; or (ii) the performance obligation to which some, or all, of the sales-based or usage-based royalty that has been allocated and has been satisfied or partially satisfied. Due to the contract termination clauses, Lineage does not expect to receive all of the minimum royalty payments throughout the term of the agreements. Therefore, Lineage fully constrains recognition of the minimum royalty payments as revenues until its customers are obligated to pay, which is generally within 60 days prior to the beginning of each year the minimum royalty payments are due.
Grant revenues - In applying the provisions of Topic 606, Lineage has determined that government grants are out of the scope of Topic 606 because the government entities do not meet the definition of a “customer”, as defined by Topic 606, as there is not considered to be a transfer of control of good or services to the government entities funding the grant. Lineage has, and will continue to, account for grants received to perform research and development services in accordance with ASC 730-20, Research and Development Arrangements, which requires an assessment, at the inception of the grant, of whether the grant is a liability or a contract to perform research and development services for others. If Lineage or a subsidiary receiving the grant is obligated to repay the grant funds to the grantor regardless of the outcome of the research and development activities, then Lineage is required to estimate and recognize that liability. Alternatively, if Lineage or a subsidiary receiving the grant is not required to repay, or if it is required to repay the grant funds only if the research and development activities are successful, then the grant agreement is accounted for as a contract to perform research and development services for others, in which case, grant revenue is recognized when the related research and development expenses are incurred.
Deferred grant revenues represent grant funds received from the governmental funding agencies for which the allowable expenses have not yet been incurred as of the balance sheet date reported.
Long-lived intangible assets - Long-lived intangible assets, consisting primarily of acquired patents, patent applications, and licenses to use certain patents are stated at acquired cost, less accumulated amortization. Amortization expense is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, generally over five to ten years.
Impairment of long-lived assets - Our long-lived assets, including long-lived intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be fully recoverable. If an impairment indicator is present, we evaluate recoverability by a comparison of the carrying amount of the assets to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the assets. If the assets are impaired, the impairment recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the estimated fair value of the assets.
Research and development - Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred for company-sponsored, collaborative and contracted research and development activities. These costs include direct and research-related overhead expenses including compensation and related benefits, stock-based compensation, consulting fees, research and laboratory fees, rent of research facilities, amortization of intangible assets, and license fees paid to third parties to acquire patents or licenses to use patents and other technology. We expense research and development costs as incurred. Research and development expenses incurred and reimbursed by grants from third parties approximate the grant income recognized in the consolidated statements of operations.
Stock-based compensation - We follow accounting standards governing share-based payments, which require the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based compensation awards made to directors and employees, including employee stock options, based on estimated fair values. We utilize the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Our determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. These variables include, but are not limited to, expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, and the expected term of options granted, which is derived using the simplified method, which is an average of the contractual term of the option and its vesting period, as we do not have sufficient historical exercise data. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant for zero coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities similar to the expected term of the awards. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur.
Although the fair value of employee stock options is determined in accordance with FASB guidance, changes in the assumptions can materially affect the estimated value and therefore the amount of compensation expense recognized in the consolidated financial statements.
In management’s opinion, the existing valuation models may not provide an accurate measure of the fair value of employee stock options because the option-pricing model value may not be indicative of the fair value that would be established in a willing buyer/willing seller market transaction.
Income taxes - We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes, which prescribe the use of the asset and liability method, whereby deferred tax asset or liability account balances are calculated at the balance sheet date using current tax laws and rates in effect. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. ASC 740 guidance also prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not sustainable upon examination by taxing authorities. We file a U.S. federal income tax return as well as various state and foreign income tax returns. Our judgments regarding future taxable income may change over time due to changes in market conditions, changes in tax laws, tax planning strategies or other factors. If our assumptions, and consequently the estimates, change in the future with respect to our own deferred tax assets and liabilities, the valuation allowance may be increased or decreased, which may have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits, if any, as income tax expense, however, no amounts were accrued for the payment of interest and penalties as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Principles of consolidation - Our consolidated financial statements include the accounts of our wholly owned and majority-owned subsidiaries. All material intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. The consolidated financial statements are presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. and with the accounting and reporting requirements of SEC Regulation S-X.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
The following table shows our revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (amounts in thousands except percentages).
Total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1.8 million compared to $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $1.7 million is primarily due to a $1.0 million decrease in grant revenue, a $0.4 million decrease in royalties from product sales and license fees and a $0.3 million decrease in the sale of research products and services due to the cessation of such sales.
Grant revenues are generated primarily by our subsidiary Cell Cure Neurosciences Ltd (“Cell Cure”) from the Israel Innovation Authority (“IIA”) for the development of OpRegen® and our bio retina program, and from a Small Business Innovation Research grant from the National Institutes of Health for our vision restoration program (the “NIH grant”). The decreases in our grant revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, were primarily due to less grant-related activities. Grant revenues generated by Cell Cure from the IIA for the development of OpRegen and our bio retina program (commencing in 2020) amounted to $0.7 million and $1.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and grant revenues generated by the NIH grant amounted to $0.4 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Royalties from product sales and license fees are generated from non-exclusive license agreements with multiple third parties. A majority of our royalties from product sales and license fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 are related to technologies that were acquired in the Asterias Merger. The decrease of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to the impact from a $0.6 million upfront, non-refundable payment for a new license agreement with a third party for the use of certain patents related to the culture of undifferentiated pluripotent stem cells in suspension that was recorded in 2019.
Operating Expenses
The following table shows our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (amounts in thousands, except percentages).
(1) Includes $0.7 million of acquisition related costs for the Asterias Merger.
(2) Includes $5.1 million of acquisition related costs for the Asterias Merger.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred for company-sponsored, collaborative and contracted research and development activities. These costs include direct and research-related overhead expenses including compensation and related benefits, stock-based compensation, consulting fees, research and laboratory fees, rent of research facilities, amortization of intangible assets, and license fees paid to third parties to acquire patents or licenses to use patents and other technology. We expense research and development costs as incurred. Research and development expenses incurred and reimbursed by grants from third parties approximate the grant income recognized in the consolidated statements of operations.
The following table shows the amount of our total research and development expenses allocated to our primary research and development projects for the periods presented (amounts in thousands, except percentages).
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $12.3 million as compared to $17.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $5.6 million is mainly attributable to the following:
● a decrease of $6.5 million in OpRegen and other ophthalmic application expenses, attributable primarily to a decrease in manufacturing activities in 2020 as compared to 2019,
● a decrease of $0.5 million in OPC1 related expenses, primarily related to return of unspent project funds of approximately $0.8 million from a former Asterias service provider,
● a decrease of $0.8 million in Renevia and other related expenses as Renevia received a CE Mark in September 2019 and we are spending less on research activities as we are actively looking for a commercialization partner in Europe, offset by
● an increase of $2.2 million in VAC program expenses, primarily related to the accrual of the signature fee of £1.25 million ($1.6 million) to Cancer Research UK.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses include employee and director compensation allocated to general and administrative expenses, consulting fees other than those paid for science-related consulting, facilities and equipment rent and maintenance related expenses, insurance costs allocated to general and administrative expenses, costs of patent applications, prosecution and maintenance, stock exchange-related costs, depreciation expense, marketing costs, board fees, legal and accounting costs, and other miscellaneous expenses which are allocated to general and administrative expense.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $15.6 million as compared to $24.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The total net decrease of $8.4 million was primarily attributable to a $5.5 million reduction in Asterias Merger related expenses, a $2.1 million reduction in compensation costs as a result of headcount reductions in 2019, a $0.9 million reduction in accounting expenses, a $0.5 million reduction in rent and utilities, a $0.3 million reduction in travel expenses, a $0.3 million reduction in office and information technology related expenses and a $0.2 million reduction in consulting expenses, offset by a $0.9 million increase related to the cessation of shared services reimbursements and a $0.5 million increase in legal and patent expenses.
Other income and expenses, net
The following table shows the amount of other income, net, during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Interest income and expense, net - During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we earned $1.0 million and $1.5 million of interest income, respectively, from our promissory note with Juvenescence Limited (“Juvenescence”).
Gain on equity method investment in Asterias - Prior to the closing of the Asterias Merger on March 8, 2019, we owned 21.7 million shares of common stock of Asterias, which we accounted for at fair value using the equity method of accounting. The fair value of our Asterias shares was approximately $20.2 million as of March 8, 2019, the closing date of the Asterias Merger, based on $0.93 per share, which was calculated by multiplying: (i) $1.31, the closing price of our common shares on such date; by (ii) the merger exchange ratio of 0.71. The fair value of our Asterias shares was approximately $13.5 million as of December 31, 2018, based on the closing price of Asterias common stock of $0.62 per share on such date. Accordingly, we recorded an unrealized gain of $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing the change in fair value of Asterias common stock from December 31, 2018 to March 8, 2019.
Gain (loss) on investment in OncoCyte - Prior to September 11, 2019, we elected to account for our shares of OncoCyte common stock at fair value using the equity method of accounting. We sold 2.25 million shares of OncoCyte common stock for net proceeds of $4.2 million in July 2019. Accordingly, our ownership in OncoCyte was reduced from 28% to 24%. We sold an additional 4.0 million shares of OncoCyte common stock for net proceeds of $6.5 million on September 11, 2019. Our ownership in OncoCyte was further reduced to 16% at this time. Effective September 11, 2019, we began accounting for our shares of OncoCyte common stock as marketable equity securities.
As of December 31, 2019, we had 8.4 million shares of OncoCyte common stock. These shares had a fair value of $19.0 million, based on the closing price of OncoCyte common stock of $2.25 per share on December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, we owned 3.6 million shares of OncoCyte common stock. These shares had a fair value of $8.7 million, based on the closing price of OncoCyte common stock of $2.39 per share on December 31, 2020,
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a realized gain of $3.1 million due to sales of OncoCyte shares in the period. In the same period, we also recorded an unrealized loss of $2.5 million related to our OncoCyte shares. The unrealized loss is comprised of $3.7 million related to the difference between the book cost basis of OncoCyte shares sold in the period versus the applicable prior month’s ending OncoCyte stock price, which is offset by $1.2 million related to the shares remaining at December 31, 2020 and the increase in OncoCyte’s stock price from $2.25 at December 31, 2019 to $2.39 at December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a realized gain of $0.5 million due to sales of OncoCyte shares in the period. We also recorded an unrealized gain of $8.8 million due to the increase in OncoCyte’s stock price from $1.38 per share at December 31, 2018 to $2.25 per share at December 31, 2019. $8.0 million of the unrealized gain was recorded as an unrealized gain on an equity method investment as it was prior to September 11, 2019; the remaining $0.8 million was recorded as an unrealized gain on marketable equity securities.
All share prices are determined based on the closing price of OncoCyte common stock on the NYSE American on the applicable dates, or the last day of trading of the applicable quarter, if the last day of a quarter fell on a weekend.
We expect our other income and expenses, net, to continue to fluctuate each reporting period based on the changes in the market price of our OncoCyte shares, which could significantly impact our net income or loss reported in our condensed consolidated statements of operations for each period.
Marketable equity securities - We account for the shares we held in Hadasit Bio-Holdings (“HBL”) and AgeX as marketable equity securities, carried at fair market value on our consolidated balance sheets.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded realized gains of $0.8 million and $0.6 million due to sales of AgeX shares and HBL shares, respectively, in the period.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded unrealized losses of $1.3 million related to our AgeX shares. $0.5 million of the unrealized loss was related to the difference between the book cost basis of AgeX shares sold in the period versus the applicable prior month’s ending AgeX share price and an additional $0.8 million was related to mark to mark adjustments throughout the year on the remaining shares of AgeX at each applicable period.
Other income and expenses, net - Other income and expenses, net, in 2020 and 2019 consist primarily of net foreign currency transaction gains and losses recognized by Cell Cure and ESI, and changes in the fair value of the Cell Cure liability classified warrants. Foreign currency transaction gains and losses for the periods presented are principally related to the remeasurement of the U.S. dollar denominated notes payable by Cell Cure to Lineage.
Income Taxes
The market value of the shares of OncoCyte common stock we hold creates a deferred tax liability (the “OncoCyte DTL”) based on the closing prices of the shares, less our tax basis in the shares. The OncoCyte DTL is a source of future taxable income to us, as prescribed by ASC 740-10-30-17, that will more likely than not result in the realization of our deferred tax assets to the extent of the OncoCyte DTL. The OncoCyte DTL is determined based on the closing prices of the OncoCyte shares as of December 31, 2020. Due to the inherent unpredictability of future prices of those shares, we cannot reliably estimate or project the OncoCyte DTL on an annual basis. Therefore, the OncoCyte DTL is determined based on the actual closing prices on the last stock market trading day of the applicable accounting period, and the related impacts to the valuation allowance and deferred tax asset changes, and are recorded in the accounting period in which they occur.
In connection with the Asterias Merger, a deferred tax liability of $10.8 million (the “Asterias DTL”) was recorded as part of the acquisition accounting (see Note 3). The Asterias DTL is related to fair value adjustments for the assets and liabilities acquired in the Asterias Merger, principally consisting of IPR&D. This estimate of deferred taxes was determined based on the excess of the estimated fair values of the acquired assets and liabilities over the tax basis of the assets and liabilities acquired. The statutory tax rate was applied, as appropriate, to the adjustment based on the jurisdiction in which the adjustment is expected to occur. Because the IPR&D (prior to completion or abandonment of the R&D) is considered an indefinite-lived asset for accounting purposes, the fair value of the IPR&D on the acquisition date creates a deferred income tax liability in accordance with ASC 740. The Asterias DTL is computed using the fair value of the IPR&D assets on the acquisition date multiplied by Lineage’s respective federal and state income tax rates. While the Asterias DTL would reverse on impairment or sale or commencement of amortization of the related intangible assets, those events are not anticipated under ASC 740 for purposes of predicting reversal of a temporary difference to support the realization of deferred tax assets, except for certain deferred tax assets and credit carryforwards that are also indefinite in nature as of the Asterias Merger date, which may be considered for reversal under ASC 740 as further discussed below.
A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Lineage established a full valuation allowance as of December 31, 2018 due to the uncertainty of realizing future tax benefits from its net operating loss carryforwards and other deferred tax assets, including foreign net operating losses generated by its subsidiaries. During the year ended December 31, 2019, a portion of the valuation allowance was released as it relates to Lineage’s indefinite lived assets that can be used against the indefinite lived liabilities. The amount of the valuation allowance released was $7.4 million; as new indefinite lived deferred tax assets are generated, we will continue to book provision benefits until the deferred tax liability position is exhausted, barring any new developments.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, Lineage recorded a $1.2 million deferred tax benefit for income taxes.
We expect that deferred income tax expense or benefit we record each reporting period, if any, will vary depending on the change in the closing stock prices of OncoCyte shares from period to period and the related changes in those deferred tax liabilities and our deferred tax assets and other credits, including changes in the valuation allowance, for each period.
See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for a description of the Asterias Merger that was completed on March 8, 2019. We have concluded that an ownership change did occur after the Asterias Merger, and the acquired operating loss carryforwards are subject to limitation under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Service Code; Lineage will only be able to utilize $52.8 million of these operating loss carryforwards.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we had $41.6 million of cash, cash equivalents and marketable equity securities on hand, which includes our investments in OncoCyte and HBL. We may use our marketable equity securities for liquidity, as necessary, and as market conditions allow. The market value may not represent the amount that could be realized in a sale of investment shares due to various market and regulatory factors, including trading volume or market depth factors and volume and manner of sale restrictions under Federal securities laws, prevailing market conditions and prices at the time of any sale, and subsequent sales of securities by the entities. In addition, the value of our marketable equity securities may be significantly and adversely impacted by deteriorating global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to and volatility in the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses and have funded our operations primarily through the issuance of equity securities, the sale of common stock of our former subsidiaries, AgeX and OncoCyte, payments from research grants, royalties from product sales and sales of research products and services. At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $294.1 million, working capital of $36.2 million and shareholders’ equity of $95.1 million. We evaluated the projected cash flows for Lineage and our subsidiaries, and we believe that our $41.6 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable equity securities at December 31, 2020, provide sufficient cash, cash equivalents, and liquidity to carry out our current planned operations through at least twelve months from the issuance date of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. If we need near term working capital or liquidity to supplement our cash and cash equivalents for our operations, we may sell some, or all, of our investments, as necessary.
On March 8, 2019, the Asterias Merger closed and Asterias became our wholly owned subsidiary. We began consolidating Asterias’ operations and results with our operations and results beginning on March 8, 2019. As we integrated Asterias’ operations into our own, we made extensive reductions in headcount and reduced non-clinical related spend, in each case, as compared to Asterias’ operations before the merger. We implemented significant cost savings initiatives and achieved reduced operational spend in 2020 compared to prior periods.
Our projected cash flows are subject to various risks and uncertainties, and the unavailability or inadequacy of financing to meet future capital needs could force us to modify, curtail, delay, or suspend some or all aspects of our current planned operations. Our determination as to when we will seek new financing and the amount of financing that we will need will be based on our evaluation of the progress we make in our research and development programs, any changes to the scope and focus of those programs, any changes in grant funding for certain of those programs, and projection of future costs, revenues, and rates of expenditure. Our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by deteriorating global economic conditions and the disruptions to and volatility in the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We may be required to delay, postpone, or cancel our clinical trials or limit the number of clinical trial sites, unless we are able to obtain adequate financing. We cannot assure that adequate financing will be available on favorable terms, if at all. Sales of additional equity securities by us or our subsidiaries and affiliates could result in the dilution of the interests of our current shareholders.
Cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $19.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflects the loss from operations of $26.4 million adjusted for the changes in assets and liabilities of $1.3 million. These items were offset primarily by non-cash expenses of $2.2 million for stock-based compensation and $2.1 million of depreciation and amortization. The unrealized gains on equity method investments and marketable securities, foreign currency remeasurement and deferred tax benefit are non-cash items that had no effect on cash flows.
Net cash used in operating activities of $31.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily reflects the loss from operations of $38.9 million adjusted for the changes in assets and liabilities of $2.1 million. These items were offset primarily by non-cash expenses of $3.6 million for stock-based compensation and $3.1 million of depreciation and amortization. The unrealized gains on equity method investments and marketable securities, foreign currency remeasurement and deferred tax benefit are non-cash items that had no effect on cash flows.
Cash used in investing activities
Cash provided by investing activities of $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was associated primarily with receipts of $10.9 million from sales of a portion of our OncoCyte holdings, $1.3 million in sales of our AgeX holdings and $0.8 million in sales of a portion of our HBL holdings.
Cash provided by investing activities of $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was associated primarily with receipts of $10.7 million from sales of a portion of our OncoCyte holdings, $1.7 million in sales of a portion of our AgeX holdings and $1.7 million in sales of a portion of our HBL holdings as well as the receipt of $3.1 million of cash that Asterias had on the closing date of the Asterias Merger, offset by $0.4 million in purchases of equipment and other assets.
Cash provided by financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $29.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was associated primarily with proceeds of $24.6 million from payment of the Juvenescence promissory note, gross proceeds of $5.1 million from sales of our common shares in at-the-market transactions under our Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co (which excludes $0.3 million of cash in transit related to 2020 sales that settled in 2021), and proceeds of $0.5 million from a Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, all offset by $0.4 million in financing costs.
Cash provided by financing activities of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was associated primarily with $0.8 million in landlord reimbursements for tenant improvements, offset by $0.1 million in common shares received and retired for employee taxes paid.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission.