ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
INTRODUCTION
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. This discussion contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to those described in Item 1A. Risk Factors and below under the caption “Outlook.” Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
Business Overview
We are a provider of practical, high-quality, and value-based educational training on the topics of personal finance, entrepreneurship, real estate investing strategies and techniques. Our programs are offered through a variety of formats and channels, including free workshops, basic trainings, forums, telephone mentoring, one-on-one mentoring, coaching and e-learning. In October 2019, we launched our new proprietary line of training, mentoring and coaching products to support our students through every phase of their journey with us, from beginner to experienced investor. In December 2019, we held our first virtual (online) symposium and our first Legacy Investor Forum. In November 2020, we held our first live post-COVID events.
Since December 31, 2019, we have operated under two brands:
● Building Wealth with Legacy TM: provides practical, high-quality and value-based educational training on the topics of personal finance, entrepreneurship, real estate, financial markets and investing strategies and techniques. This training program encompasses hands-on experience and the true spirit of investing from beginner to educated investor. In response to the limitations on travel and the social distancing protocols arising out of the Coronavirus pandemic, the Company began marketing its Legacy EducationTM products transitioning to brand name Building Wealth with LegacyTM.
● Homemade Investor by Tarek El MoussaTM introduces people to the investor mindset, real estate investing strategies, and ways to generate cash flow that are designed to help build a foundation of knowledge for their financial goals. Homemade Investor events offered nationwide free workshops, 3-day trainings and large stage events with Tarek presenting as the keynote speaker, all selling into our advanced training products.
Our students pay for their courses in full up-front or through payment agreements with independent third parties. Under United States of America generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”), we recognize revenue upon the earlier of (i) when our students take their courses or (ii) the term for taking their course expires, both of which could be several quarters after the student purchases a program and pays the fee. We recognize revenue immediately when we sell our (i) proprietary products delivered at time of sale and (ii) third party products sales. Our symposiums and forums combine multiple advanced training courses in one location, allowing us to achieve certain economies of scale that reduce costs and improve margins while also accelerating U.S. GAAP revenue recognition, while at the same time, enhancing our students’ experience, particularly, for example, through the opportunity to network with other students.
We also provide a richer experience for our students through one-on-one mentoring (two to four days in length, on site or remotely, although we have suspended providing on-site mentorships as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic) and telephone mentoring (10 to 16 weekly one-on-one or one-on-many telephone sessions). Mentoring involves a subject matter expert interacting with the student remotely or in person and guiding the student, for example, through his or her first real estate transaction, providing a real hands-on experience.
We were founded in 1996, and through a reverse merger, became a publicly-held company in November 2014. Today we are a global company that has cumulatively served more than two million students from more than 150 countries and territories over the course of our operating history.
Our operations are managed through three operating segments: (i) North America, (ii) United Kingdom, and (iii) Other Foreign Markets.
Recent Developments
Impact from COVID-19 Coronavirus.
Historically, our operations have relied heavily on our and our students’ ability to travel and attend live events where large groups of people gather in local markets within each of the segments in which we operate. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic. As a result of worldwide restrictions on travel and social distancing, in March 2020 we temporarily ceased conducting live sales and fulfillment and furloughed substantially all of our employees. We resumed sales operations in June 2020 with online sales events selling into our suite of online, on-demand, and over-the-phone products. We also resumed online, on-demand, and over-the-phone fulfillment activities in June 2020. We resumed live operations in November 2020, with events in Florida. The Company expects to conduct additional live events in other areas as lockdown restrictions continue to ease and hopes to return to a normal schedule over the coming months. The Company will continue following strict safety protocols at the live events. We have simplified our product offerings and restructured our compensation program with respect to both employees and independent contractors to reduce costs and improve margins, but there can be no assurances that the Company will be effective in selling its products and services, or what the impact such activities will have on our financial performance.
The ultimate impact from COVID-19 on the Company’s operations and financial results will depend on, among other things, the ultimate severity and scope of the pandemic, the pace at which governmental and private travel restrictions and public concerns about public gatherings will ease, the rate at which historically large increases in unemployment rates will decrease, if at all, and the speed with which the economy recovers. We are not able to fully quantify the impact that these factors will have on our financial results, but expect developments related to COVID-19 to continue to affect the Company’s financial performance in 2021 and beyond.
Changes in Management and Board of Directors
On March 8, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors (the “Board”) elected Michel Botbol, 61, as a Director, Chairman of the Board, and Chief Executive Officer of the Company. On the same date, the Board appointed James E. May, 66, as General Counsel of the Company, a position he held prior to his appointment as Interim CEO of the Company in January 2019. Upon the assumption of his position as General Counsel, Mr. May resigned as Director and Chief Executive Officer.
Senior Secured Convertible Debt Agreement
On February 11, 2021 the Company entered into a non-binding term sheet with Legacy Tech Partners, LLC (LTP). The term sheet includes a Debenture Agreement of $375 thousand, with 10% per annum interest rate. The Debenture may be converted at any time after the issue date into shares of the Company’s Common Stock (the “Conversion Shares”) at a price equal to $0.05 per share. Together with each Conversion Share, a warrant will be issued with a strike price of $0.05 per share and an expiration date of five years after issuance. The term sheet anticipates entering into a share purchase agreement whereby LTP will acquire for nominal consideration the existing business, assets and liabilities of the Company (the “Spin-Off”), while the Company will enter into a license agreement with LTP to retain rights with respect to certain of its intellectual property for the benefit of building an Education Technology (“EdTech”) business. This transaction will be subject to stockholder and regulatory approval and other conditions.
On March 8, 2021, the Company issued a $375 thousand Senior Secured Convertible Debenture (“Debenture”) to Legacy Tech Partners, LLC (“LTP”) a Delaware limited liability company. The Debenture accrues interest at a rate of 10% and is due on the earlier of the occurrence of certain liquidity events with respect to the Company and March 8, 2022. The Debenture may be converted at any time after the issue date into shares of the Company’s Common Stock (the “Conversion Shares”) at a price equal to $0.05 per share. Together with each Conversion Share a warrant will be issued with a strike price of $0.05 per share and an expiration date of March 8, 2026 (the “Warrants”). LTP has an obligation to lend the Company an additional $625 thousand under the same terms prior to March 31, 2022, and an option to fund an additional $4 million under the same terms prior to March 8, 2024. LTP also has the option to extend the maturity date of each loan it makes to the Company, including the initial loan of $375 thousand for a term not to exceed four years from the original maturity date of that loan. Net proceeds were $314 thousand after legal fees related to the transaction. The Debenture is secured by a lien on all the Company’s assets. The Company’s U.S. subsidiaries entered into Guaranties on March 9, 2021 in favor of LTP under which such subsidiaries guaranteed the Company’s obligations under the Debenture and granted LTP a lien on all assets of such subsidiaries. The use of proceeds from the Debenture will be to extinguish liabilities of the Company and to fund the development of the EdTech (as defined above) business. The Warrants will not be listed for trading on any national securities exchange. The Warrants and the shares issuable upon conversion of the Debenture are not being registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). The aggregate number of shares issuable upon conversion of the Debenture and upon the exercise of the Warrants may not exceed 19.9% of the number of shares of the Common Stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to the issuance of shares upon conversion of the Debenture and the exercise of the Warrants.
Bankruptcy or Receivership
At a meeting held on January 11, 2021 (“Creditors’ Meeting”), the creditors of Elite Legacy Education UK Ltd (“ELE UK”), a wholly owned subsidiary of Legacy Education Alliance, Inc. (“LEAI”), approved a Proposal for a Company Voluntary Arrangement (the “Arrangement”) under the UK Insolvency Act 1986 (the “IA”) and the UK Insolvency Rules 2016 (the “IR”). Under the terms of the Arrangement, CVR Global LLP has been appointed as Supervisor of ELE UK for the purposes of administering the Arrangement. At the Creditors Meeting, the creditors also approved a modification to the Arrangement whereby any tax refunds due to ELE UK would be paid to the Supervisor and made available for distribution to creditors. The Supervisor will wind down the business of ELE UK and make distributions to ELE UK’s non-student creditors in accordance with the applicable provisions of the IA and the IR, on and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the Arrangement in satisfaction of the non-student creditors’ respective claims against ELE UK. Student creditors of ELE UK will be provided the opportunity to receive trainings from an independent training provider on and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the Arrangement in satisfaction of their respective claims against ELE UK. Pursuant to the Arrangement, and at its conclusion, the remaining assets of ELE UK, if any, would be distributed to LEAI. As a result of the CVR, the Winding-Up Petition, CR-2020-001958, filed in the High Court of Justice, Business and Property Courts of England and Wales has been dismissed. At this time, LEAI management is unable to anticipate any distributions that would be received from ELE UK.
On January 27, 2021, Legacy Education Alliance Australia PTY Ltd (“LEA Australia”), a wholly owned subsidiary of Legacy Education Alliance, Inc. (“LEAI”), appointed Brent Leigh Morgan and Christopher Stephen Bergin, both of the firm of Rodgers Reidy, 326 William Street, Melbourne VIC 3000 Australia, as Joint and Several Liquidators of LEA Australia, to supervise a Creditors Voluntary Liquidation of LEA Australia. Subject to the approval of the creditors of LEA Australia at a meeting to be held on February 23, 2021 AEDT (February 22, 2021 EST), the Joint Liquidators will wind down the business of LEA Australia and make distributions, if any, to its creditors in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Australian Corporations Act of 2001.
On March 2, 2021, Legacy Education Alliance Holdings, Inc. the sole shareholder of Legacy Education Alliance Hong Kong Ltd (“LEA Hong Kong”), a subsidiary of the Company, adopted a resolution to wind up voluntarily the affairs of LEA Hong Kong and to appoint Cosimo Borrelli and Li Chung Ngai (also known as Anson Li), both of Borrelli Walsh Limited, Level 17, Tower 1, Admiralty Centre, 18 Harcourt Road, Hong Kong as Joint and Several Liquidators of LEA Hong Kong. At a meeting of the creditors of LEA Hong Kong held on March 2, 2021, the creditors similarly approved the voluntary winding up of LEA Hong Kong and the appointment of Cosimo Borrelli and Li Chung Ngai (also known as Anson Li), as Joint and Several Liquidators. The Joint and Several Liquidators will wind up the business of LEA Hong Kong and make distributions, if any, to its creditors in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Companies (Winding Up and Miscellaneous Provisions) Ordinance of Hong Kong.
On March 7, 2021, Tigrent Learning Canada Inc. (“Tigrent Canada”), a wholly owned subsidiary of Legacy Education Alliance, Inc., filed an assignment in bankruptcy under section 49 of the Canada Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act (the “Act”) in the Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy Canada, District of Ontario, Division of Toronto, Court No. 31-2718213. Also on March 7, 2021, A. Farber & Partners was appointed trustee of the estate of Tigrent Canada. The trustee will wind down the business of Tigrent Canada and make distributions, if any, to its creditors in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Act.
Results of Operations
Our financial results in 2020 were negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic impact, slower than we anticipated establishment of our new Homemade Investor brand, as well as the effect of winding down our Rich Dad brand and other matters as disclosed in the litigation section of Note 15 “Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Our Results of Operations in 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Our operating results expressed as a percentage of revenue are set forth in the table below:
Outlook
Cash sales were $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $79.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $75.8 million or 95.3%. The decrease was driven primarily by a $52.3 million decrease in our North American segment, an $18.2 million decrease in our Other Foreign Markets segment and a $5.3 million decrease in our U.K. segment.
We believe that cash sales remain an important metric when evaluating our operating performance. Pursuant to U.S. GAAP, we recognize revenue upon the earlier of (i) when our students take their courses or (ii) the term for taking their course expires, both of which could be several quarters after the student purchases a program. Our students pay for their courses in full up-front or through payment agreements with independent third parties.
Historically, our operations have relied heavily on our and our students’ ability to travel and attend live events where large groups of people gather in local markets within each of the segments in which we operate. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the COVID-19 coronavirus outbreak as a pandemic. As a result of worldwide restrictions on travel and social distancing, in March 2020 we have ceased conducting live sales and fulfillment events for an undetermined period of time, which we expect will have a materially adverse impact on results of our operations.
Operating Segments
Our operations are managed through three operating segments: (i) North America, (ii) United Kingdom, and (iii) Other Foreign Markets.
Operating results for the segments are as follows:
North America
Revenue derived from the Rich Dad brands in our North America segment was $16.6 million and $43.5 million or as a percentage of total segment revenue, 69.1% and 79.9%, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The majority pertained to real estate-related education, with the balance pertaining to financial markets training. We are continuing to develop non-Rich Dad brands Homemade InvestorTM and Legacy EducationTM to diversify our business, although our business to date in these brands has not been material to our Company as a whole. Revenue derived from our Homemade Investor brand was $1.0 million or as a percentage of total segment revenue was 4.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The North America segment revenue was $24.0 million and $54.4 million or as a percentage of total revenue was 70.3% and 72.1% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The decrease in revenue of $30.4 million or 55.9% during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, was due to the decrease in fulfillment of $29.8 million and decrease in recognition of revenue from expired contracts of $0.6 million.
U.K.
Revenue derived from the Rich Dad brands in our U.K. segment was $1.0 million and $3.5 million or as a percentage of total segment revenue was 97.7% and 84.6% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The majority pertained to real estate-related education, with the balance pertaining to financial markets training. With the discontinued operations of UK Legacy, our U.K. segment is no longer as diverse.
The U.K. segment revenue was $1.1 million and $4.1 million or as a percentage of total revenue was 3.1% and 5.5% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The discontinued operations of Legacy UK reduced this segment’s revenue by $14.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. There were no discontinued operations of Legacy UK for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The decrease in revenue of $3.0 million or 74.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, was due to decreased fulfillment of $2.8 million and a decrease in recognition of revenue from expired contracts of $0.2 million.
Other Foreign Markets
Our other foreign markets segment includes other European, Asian and African countries. Revenue derived from the Rich Dad brands was $8.8 million and $16.9 million or as a percentage of total segment revenue was 96.7% and 100.0% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Other Foreign Markets segment revenue was $9.1 million and $17.0 million or as a percentage of total revenue was 26.6% and 22.4% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The decrease in revenue of $7.9 million or 46.3% during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, was due to decreased fulfillment of $1.3 million and a decrease in recognition of revenue from expired contracts of $6.6 million.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue was $34.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $75.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $41.3 million or 54.8%. The decrease was due to decreased fulfillment of $33.9 million or 76.8% and a decrease in recognition of revenue from expired contracts of $7.4 million or 23.8%.
Cash sales were $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $79.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $75.8 million or 95.3%. The decrease was driven primarily by a $52.3 million decrease in our North American segment, an $18.2 million decrease in our Other Foreign Markets segment and a $5.3 million decrease in our U.K. segment.
Operating Expenses
Total operating costs and expenses were $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $73.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $58.3 million or 78.9%. The decrease was due to a $32.0 million decrease in direct course expenses, a $14.6 million decrease in advertising and sales expenses, an $8.3 million decrease in general and administrative expenses, and a $3.4 million decrease in royalty expenses.
Direct course expenses
Direct course expenses relate to our free preview workshops, basic and elite training, and individualized mentoring programs, consisting of instructor fees, facility costs, salaries, commissions and fees associated with our field representatives and related travel expenses. Direct course expenses were $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $39.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $32.0 million or 79.7%, which was related to decreases in sales and training compensation, due to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on consumers.
Advertising and sales expenses
We generally obtain most of our potential customers through internet-based advertising. Advertising and sales expenses consist of purchased media to generate registrations to our free preview workshops and costs associated with supporting customer recruitment. We obtain the majority of our customers through free preview workshops. These preview workshops are offered in various metropolitan areas in North America, United Kingdom, and other international markets. Prior to the actual workshop, we spend a significant amount of money in the form of advertising through various media channels.
Advertising and sales expenses were $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $14.6 million or 86.9%. As a percentage of revenue, advertising and sales expenses were 6.5% and 22.2% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease is primarily related to the COVID-19 restrictions on our ability to operate.
Royalty expenses
We are required to pay royalties under the licensing and related agreements pursuant to which we develop, market, and sell Rich Dad and Homemade Investor branded live seminars, training courses, and related products worldwide. Royalty expenses were $0.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of compensation, benefits, insurance, professional fees, facilities expenses and travel expenses for the corporate staff, as well as depreciation and amortization expenses. General and administrative expenses were $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $8.3 million, or 60.1%. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was partially a result of a decrease in our personnel expenses due to the fact that we furloughed substantially all of our employees during Q2 2020.
Other income, net
Other income was $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to other income of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase in other income of $1.1 million, mainly representing gain on sale of our property and equipment, and investment property during the year ended December 31, 2020, and a cash payment from Process America, Inc. in the amount of $0.4 million, received as a distribution on the legal case during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income tax expense
We recorded income tax expense of $4.0 million and income tax benefit of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a $5.3 million increase in income tax expense.
Our effective tax rate was 19.8% and (60.3)%for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our effective tax rates differed from the U.S. statutory corporate tax rate of 21.0%, primarily because of the mix of pre-tax income or loss earned in certain jurisdictions.
We record a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We have retained a full valuation allowances of $3.6 million against the deferred tax assets of our Australian, Canadian, U.K., Hong Kong, and South Africa subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020. We have retained full valuation allowances of $4.7 million against the deferred tax assets of our United States, Australian, Canadian, U.K. (excluding Elite Legacy Education UK), Hong Kong, and South Africa subsidiaries as of December 31, 2019. The most significant negative factor that was considered in determining whether a valuation allowance was required is a cumulative recent history of losses in all jurisdictions for the entities mentioned above.
Net income from continuing operations
Net income from continuing operations was $16.0 million or $0.69 per basic and $0.68 per diluted common share for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $3.3 million or $0.14 per basic and diluted common share for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase in net income from continuing operations of $12.7 million or $0.55 per basic and $0.54 per diluted common share.
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was positively impacted by the decrease in operating cost of $58.3 million.
Net income from discontinued operations
Net income from discontinued operations was $6.6 million or $0.29 per basic common share and $0.28 per diluted common share for the year ended December 31, 2019. There was no net income (loss) from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2019 mainly represents the gain on disposal of discontinued operations net assets.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts and related disclosures. In addition to the estimates presented below, there are other items within our consolidated financial statements that require estimation but are not deemed critical as defined below. We believe these estimates are reasonable and appropriate. However, if actual experience differs from the assumptions and other considerations used, the resulting changes could have a material effect on the financial statements taken as a whole.
Management believes that the following policies and estimates are critical because they involve significant judgments, assumptions and estimates. Management has discussed the development and selection of the critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors and the Audit Committee has reviewed the disclosures presented below relating to those policies and estimates.
Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate the carrying amount of our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. We record an impairment loss when indications of impairment are present and undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than assets’ carrying value. We evaluate the remaining life and recoverability of long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets may not be recoverable. At such time, we estimate the future cash flows expected from the use of the assets and their eventual dispositions and, if lower than the carrying amounts, adjust the carrying amount of the assets to their estimated fair value. Because of our changing business conditions including current and projected level of income, business trends, prospects and market conditions, our estimates of cash flows to be generated from our operations could change materially, resulting in the need to record additional impairment charges.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when our customers obtain control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services, in accordance with Topic 606.
We adopted Topic 606 using the modified retrospective method applied to those contracts which were not completed as of January 1, 2018. Revenue amounts presented in our consolidated financial statements are recognized net of sales tax, value-added taxes, and other taxes.
In the normal course of business, we recognize revenue based on the customers’ attendance of the course, mentoring training, coaching session or delivery of the software, data or course materials on-line. After a customer contract expires, we record breakage revenue less a reserve for cases where we allow a customer to attend after expiration. We had deferred revenue of $15.8 million and $46.5 million related to contractual commitments with customers where the performance obligation will be satisfied over time, which ranges from one to two years as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The revenue associated with these performance obligations is recognized as the obligation is satisfied.
The following table disaggregate our segment revenue by revenue source:
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in conformity with the requirements of ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). Per ASC 740, the provision for income taxes is calculated using the asset and liability approach of accounting for income taxes. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities, at enacted income tax rates, based on the temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and the tax basis of our assets and liabilities. We include any effects of changes in income tax rates or tax laws in the provision for income taxes in the period of enactment. When it is more likely than not that a portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized in the future, we provide a corresponding valuation allowance against the deferred tax asset.
ASC 740 also clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in a company’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold of more likely than not and a measurement process for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. In making this assessment, a company must determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination, based solely on the technical merits of the position and must assume that the tax position will be examined by taxing authorities. ASC 740 also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosures and transition.
Accounting for Litigation and Settlements
We are involved in various legal proceedings. Due to their nature, such legal proceedings involve inherent uncertainties including, but not limited to, court rulings, negotiations between affected parties, and the possibility of governmental intervention. Management assesses the probability of loss for such contingencies and accrues a liability and/or discloses the relevant circumstances as appropriate. While certain of these matters involve substantial amounts, management believes, based on available information, that the ultimate resolution of such legal proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
The critical accounting policies discussed above are not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Known Trends and Uncertainties
In general, we believe we will experience a decrease in demand for our products and services compared to prior periods as we develop the Homemade Investor with Tarek El Moussa brand. We believe that our products and services appeal to those who seek increased financial freedom. If we experience a prolonged decline in demand for our products and services, it could have a material adverse effect on our future operating results.
Historically, we have funded our working capital and capital expenditures using cash and cash equivalents on hand. However, given our decreased operating cash flows during the past two years combined, it has been necessary for us to manage our cash position to ensure the future viability of our business. Our cash flows are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, earnings, favorable terms from our merchant processors, seasonality, and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
We continue to take steps to ensure our expenses are in line with our projected cash sales and liquidity requirements for 2021 and based upon current and anticipated levels of operations, we believe cash and cash equivalents on hand will not be sufficient to fund our expected financial obligations and anticipated liquidity requirements for the fiscal year 2021. However, we are exploring alternative sources of capital, but there can be no assurances any such capital will be obtained. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit, a working capital deficit and a negative cash flow from operating activities. These circumstances raise substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to generate profits by expanding current operations as well as reducing our costs and increasing our operating margins, and to sustain adequate working capital to finance our operations. The failure to achieve the necessary levels of profitability and cash flows would be detrimental to us.
The following is a summary of our cash flow activities for the periods stated (in thousands):
Operating Cash Flows and Liquidity
Net cash used in operating activities was $7.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $18.0 thousand in the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a period-over-period decrease of $7.0 million. This decrease was primarily the result of a decrease in current liabilities for deferred revenue.
Investing Cash Flows
Net cash provided by investing activities totaled $2.9 million compared to net cash used in investing activities of $35.0 thousand in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing proceeds on sale of property and equipment, and investment property in the year ended December 31, 2020, and purchases of property and equipment in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Financing Cash Flows
Our consolidated capital structure as of December 31, 2020 was 14% debt and 86% equity. As of December 31, 2019, our consolidated capital structure was 4% debt and 96% equity.
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $1.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, including our net proceeds from borrowings of the Paycheck Protection Program loan. Net cash used in financing activities totaled $7.0 thousand in the year ended December 31, 2019.
We expect that our working capital deficit, which is primarily a result of our significant deferred revenue balance, will continue for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, our consolidated current deferred revenue was $15.8 million and $46.5 million, respectively.
Our cash and cash equivalents were, and continue to be, invested in short-term, liquid, money market funds. Restricted cash balances consisted primarily of funds on deposit with credit card processors and cash collateral with our credit card vendors. Restricted cash balances held by credit card processors are unavailable to us unless we discontinue sale of our products or discontinue the usage of a vendor’s credit card. As sales of the products and services related to our domestic business have decreased, our credit card vendors have not returned funds held as collateral, resulting in higher restricted cash balances.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not a party to any material off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.