Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes, which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We operate on a fiscal calendar that results in a fiscal year consisting of a 52- or 53-week period ending on the Saturday closest to September 30th. In a 52-week fiscal year, each quarter contains 13 weeks of operations; in a 53-week fiscal year, each of the first, second and third quarters includes 13 weeks of operations and the fourth quarter includes 14 weeks of operations. References to fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019 refer to the fiscal years ended October 2, 2021, October 3, 2020 and September 28, 2019, respectively. Fiscal 2021 and 2019 included 52 weeks of operations. Fiscal 2020 included 53 weeks of operations.
Our Company
We are the largest and most trusted direct-to-consumer brand in the $11 billion United States pool and spa care industry, serving residential and professional consumers. Founded in 1963, we are the only direct-to-consumer pool and spa care brand with national scale, operating an integrated marketing and distribution ecosystem powered by a physical network of 952 branded locations and a robust digital platform. We offer an extensive assortment of professional-grade products, the majority of which are exclusive to Leslie’s, as well as certified installation and repair services, all of which are essential to the ongoing maintenance of pools and spas. Our dedicated team of associates, pool and spa care experts, and experienced service technicians are passionate about empowering our consumers with the knowledge, products, and solutions necessary to confidently maintain and enjoy their pools and spas. The considerable scale of our integrated marketing and distribution ecosystem, which is powered by our direct-to-consumer network, uniquely enables us to efficiently reach and service every pool and spa in the continental United States.
We operate primarily in the pool and spa aftermarket industry which is one of the most fundamentally attractive consumer categories given its scale, predictability, and growth outlook. We have a highly predictable, recurring revenue model, as evidenced by our 58 consecutive years of sales growth. Approximately 80% of our assortment is comprised of non-discretionary products essential to the care of residential and commercial pools and spas. Our assortment includes chemicals, equipment and parts, cleaning and maintenance equipment, and safety, recreational, and fitness-related products. We also offer important essential services, such as equipment installation and repair for residential consumers and professional pool operators. Consumers receive the benefit of extended vendor warranties on purchased products from our locations and on installations or repairs from our certified in-field technicians. We offer complimentary, commercial-grade in-store water testing and analysis via our proprietary AccuBlue® system, which increases consumer engagement, conversion, basket size, and loyalty, resulting in higher lifetime value. Our water treatment expertise is powered by data and intelligence accumulated from the millions of water tests we have performed over the years, positioning us as the most trusted water treatment service provider in the industry. Due to the non-discretionary nature of our products and services, our business has historically delivered strong, uninterrupted growth and profitability in all market environments, including through the Great Recession and the COVID-19 pandemic.
We have a legacy of leadership and disruptive innovation. Since our founding in 1963, we have been the leading innovator in our category and have provided our consumers with the most advanced pool and spa care available. As we have scaled, we have leveraged our competitive advantages to strategically reinvest in our business and intellectual property to develop new value-added capabilities. Over the course of our history, we have pioneered complimentary in-store water testing, offered complimentary in-store equipment repair services, introduced the industry’s first loyalty program, and developed an expansive platform of owned and exclusive brands. These differentiated capabilities allow us to meet the needs of any pool and spa owner, whether they care for their pool or spa themselves or rely on a professional, whenever, wherever, and however they choose to engage with us.
Key Factors and Measures We Use to Evaluate Our Business
We consider a variety of financial and operating measures in assessing the performance of our business. The key measures we use under United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) are sales, gross profit and gross margin, selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”), and operating income. The key non-GAAP measures and other operating measures we use are comparable sales, comparable sales growth, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted net income, and Adjusted earnings per share.
Sales
We offer a broad range of products that consists of regularly purchased, non-discretionary pool and spa maintenance items such as chemicals, equipment, cleaning accessories and parts, as well as installation and repair services for pool and spa equipment. Our offering of proprietary, owned and third-party brands across diverse product categories drives sales growth by attracting new consumers and encouraging repeat visits from our existing consumers. Revenue from merchandise sales at retail locations is recognized at the point of sale, revenue from services are recognized when the services are rendered and revenue from e-commerce merchandise sales is
generally recognized upon shipment of the merchandise. Revenue is recorded net of related discounts and sales tax. Payment from retail customers is generally at the point of sale and payment terms for professional pool operator customers are based on our credit requirements and generally have terms of less than 60 days. When we receive payment from a consumer before the consumer has taken possession of the merchandise or the service has been performed, the amount received is recorded as deferred revenue or as a customer deposit until the sale or service is complete. Sales are impacted by product mix and availability, as well as promotional and competitive activities and the spending habits of our consumers. Growth of our sales is primarily driven by comparable sales growth and expansion of our locations in existing and new markets.
Comparable Sales and Comparable Sales Growth
We measure comparable sales growth as the increase or decrease in sales recorded by the comparable base in any reporting period, compared to sales recorded by the comparable base in the prior reporting period. The comparable base includes sales through our locations and through our e-commerce websites and third-party marketplaces. Comparable sales is a key measure used by management and our board of directors to assess our financial performance.
We consider a new or acquired location comparable in the first full month after it has completed 52 weeks of sales. Closed locations become non-comparable during their last partial month of operation. Locations that are relocated are considered comparable at the time the relocation is complete. Comparable sales are not calculated in the same manner by all companies, and accordingly, are not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies and may not be an appropriate measure for performance relative to other companies.
The number of new locations reflects the number of locations opened during a particular reporting period. New locations require an initial capital investment in location build-outs, fixtures, and equipment, which we amortize over time as well as cash required for inventory.
As of October 2, 2021, we operated 952 retail locations in 38 states across the United States. We owned 27 locations and leased the remainder of our locations. Our initial lease terms are typically five years with options to renew for multiple successive five-year periods. We evaluate new opportunities in new and existing markets based on the number of pools and spas in the market, competition, our existing locations, availability and cost of real estate, and distribution and operating costs of our locations. We review performance of our locations on a regular basis and evaluate opportunities to strategically close locations to improve our profitability. Our limited investment costs in individual locations and our ability to transfer sales to our extensive network of remaining locations and e-commerce websites allows us to improve profitability as a result of any strategic closures.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is equal to our sales less our cost of merchandise and services sold. Cost of merchandise and services sold reflects the direct cost of purchased merchandise, costs to package certain chemical products, including direct materials and labor, costs to provide services, including labor and materials, as well as distribution and occupancy costs. The direct cost of purchased merchandise includes vendor rebates, which are generally treated as a reduction of merchandise costs. We recognize such vendor rebates at the time the obligations to purchase products or perform services have been completed, and the related inventory has been sold. Distribution costs include warehousing and transportation expenses, including costs associated with third-party fulfillment centers used to ship merchandise to our e-commerce consumers. Occupancy costs include the rent, common area maintenance, real estate taxes, and depreciation and amortization costs of all retail locations. These costs are significant and are expected to continue increase proportionate to our growth.
Gross margin is gross profit as a percentage of our sales. Gross margin is impacted by merchandise costs, pricing and promotions, product mix and availability, inflation, and service costs, which can vary. Our proprietary brands, custom-formulated products, and vertical integration provide us with cost savings, as well as greater control over product availability and quality as compared to other companies in the industry. Gross margin is also impacted by the costs of distribution and occupancy costs, which can vary.
Our gross profit is variable in nature and generally follows changes in sales. The components of our cost of merchandise and services sold may not be comparable to the components of cost of sales or similar measures of other companies. As a result, our gross profit and gross margin may not be comparable to similar data made available by other companies.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Our SG&A includes selling and operating expenses at our retail locations and corporate-level general and administrative expenses. Selling and operating expenses at retail locations include payroll, bonus and benefit costs for personnel, supplies, and credit and debit card processing costs. Corporate expenses include payroll, bonus, and benefit costs for our corporate and field support functions, equity-based compensation, marketing and advertising, insurance, utilities, occupancy costs related to our corporate office facilities,
professional services, and depreciation and amortization for all assets, except those related to our retail locations and distribution operations, which are included in cost of merchandise and services sold. Selling and operating expenses generally vary proportionately with sales and the change in the number of locations. In contrast, general and administrative expenses are generally not directly proportional to sales and the change in the number of locations, but are expected to increase over time to support our growth and public company obligations. The components of our SG&A may not be comparable to the components of similar measures of other companies.
Operating Income
Operating income is gross profit less SG&A. Operating income excludes interest expense, loss on debt extinguishment, income tax expense, and other expenses, net. We use operating income as an indicator of the productivity of our business and our ability to manage expenses.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest (including amortization of debt issuance costs), taxes, depreciation and amortization, management fees, equity-based compensation expense, loss on debt extinguishment, costs related to equity offerings, executive transition costs, loss (gain) on disposition of assets, mark-to-market on interest rate cap and other non-recurring, non-cash or discrete items. Adjusted EBITDA is a key measure used by management and our board of directors to assess our financial performance. Adjusted EBITDA is also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry, when considered alongside other GAAP measures. We use Adjusted EBITDA to supplement GAAP measures of performance to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, to make budgeting decisions and to compare our performance against that of other companies using similar measures.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a recognized measure of financial performance under GAAP but is used by some investors to determine a company’s ability to service or incur indebtedness. Adjusted EBITDA is not calculated in the same manner by all companies, and accordingly, is not necessarily comparable to similarly entitled measures of other companies and may not be an appropriate measure for performance relative to other companies. Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an indicator of a company’s operating performance in isolation from, or as a substitute for, net income (loss), cash flows from operations or cash flow data, all of which are prepared in accordance with GAAP. We have presented Adjusted EBITDA solely as supplemental disclosure because we believe it allows for a more complete analysis of results of operations. Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to represent, and should not be considered more meaningful than, or as an alternative to, measures of operating performance as determined in accordance with GAAP. In the future, we may incur expenses or charges such as those added back to calculate Adjusted EBITDA. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by these items.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings per Share
Adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share are additional key measures used by management and our board of directors to assess our financial performance. Adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share are also frequently used by analysts, investors, and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry, when considered alongside other GAAP measures.
Adjusted net income is defined as net income adjusted to exclude management fees, equity-based compensation expense, loss on debt extinguishment, costs related to equity offerings, executive transition costs, loss (gain) on disposition of assets, mark-to-market on interest rate cap, and other non-recurring, non-cash or discrete items. Adjusted diluted earnings per share is defined as adjusted net income divided by the diluted weighted average number of common shares outstanding.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of our Results of Operations
Our reported results have been affected by, among other events, the following events, which must be understood in order to assess the comparability of our period-to-period financial performance and condition.
Impact of COVID-19
We continue to closely monitor the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business and in all of our locations. As of October 2, 2021, we operated 952 locations in 38 states and all locations are currently open. During the 13- and 52- weeks ended October 2, 2021, we maintained operations as an ‘essential’ business, as substantially defined by various federal, state, and local authorities, we provide essential products and services that maintain the safety and sanitization of homes and businesses. From time to time, certain of our locations may be temporarily closed or restricted to curbside service only. Closures and restrictions did not have a material impact on our performance during the 13- and 52- weeks ended October 2, 2021. We remain committed to supporting federal, state, and local mandates to prevent the spread of COVID-19 while we operate our business and to do our part in protecting public health.
We help keep our communities safe from serious public health risks by providing essential products and services. Water that is not properly maintained can serve as a breeding ground for potentially fatal bacteria and viruses.
As a business, the health and safety of our consumers, communities, and associates remain our highest priority, and we continue to take all precautions recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to ensure their safety and well-being. We have proactively implemented extensive measures in response to COVID-19 throughout our business operations, including:
Required employees who are experiencing symptoms or have been in close contact with someone who has symptoms or has been exposed to the coronavirus to stay home;
Provided additional employee benefits related to COVID-19, including paid sick leave while employees recover from receiving the COVID-19 vaccine;
Provided vaccination clinics for our employees at our corporate office and distribution centers;
Distributed personal protective equipment and implemented new monitoring protocols, including the installation of contactless temperature scanners in our corporate offices and distribution centers;
Enhanced facility cleaning including routine sanitization of high touch surfaces;
Implemented social distancing guidelines in our locations;
Implemented mask guidelines for all locations and distribution centers;
Encouraged contactless payments and introduced curbside pickup and contact-free service calls;
Executed remote workforce plan for associates in our corporate offices. Effective October 2021, all corporate office employees returned to work at the corporate office on a hybrid schedule; and
Effective October 2021, enacted a vaccination policy requiring certain employees to provide proof of vaccination or receive a religious or medical exemption. The vaccination policy applies to all corporate office, field leadership, distribution center leadership, and outside sales employees.
We have also closely coordinated with our vendor partners to minimize the impact of supply disruptions and maintain the flow of essential products to meet the elevated demand from consumers in the current environment. The full impact of COVID-19 on our financial and operating performance depends significantly on the duration and severity of the pandemic, the actions taken to contain or mitigate its impact, and any changes in consumer behaviors. It is not possible to predict the likelihood, timing, or severity of the aforementioned direct and indirect impacts of COVID-19 on our business. Restrictions on the operation of our locations and distribution facilities could have a material impact on our sales and earnings. COVID-19 could also lead to significant disruption to our supply chain for products we sell and could have a material impact on our sales and earnings.
Business Acquisitions
Our business acquisitions did not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations. See Note 3 - Business Combinations to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding our business acquisitions.
Incremental Public Company Expenses
As a newly public company we will incur significant expenses on an ongoing basis that we did not incur as a private company. Those costs include additional director and officer liability insurance expenses, as well as third-party and internal resources related to accounting, auditing, Sarbanes-Oxley Act compliance, legal, and investor and public relations expenses. These costs will generally be included in SG&A in our consolidated statements of operations.
Results of Operations
We derived our consolidated statements of operations for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019 from our consolidated financial statements. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future. The following table summarizes key components of our results of operations for the periods indicated, both in dollars and as a percentage of our sales (in thousands, except per share amounts).
(1)Components may not add to totals due to rounding.
(2)See the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Key Factors and Measures We Use to Evaluate Our Business.”
(3)The tables below provide a reconciliation from our net income to Adjusted EBITDA and net income to Adjusted net income for fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands).
(1)Includes depreciation related to our distribution centers and locations, which is reported in cost of merchandise and services sold in our consolidated statements of operations.
(2)Represents amounts paid or accrued in connection with our management services agreement, which was terminated upon the completion of our IPO in November 2020 and are reported in SG&A in our consolidated statements of operations.
(3)Represents charges related to equity-based compensation and the related Company payroll tax expense which are reported in SG&A in our consolidated statements of operations.
(4)Represents non-cash expense due to the write-off of deferred financing costs related to our Term Loan modification and the repayment of our senior unsecured notes in fiscal 2021 and are reported in loss on debt extinguishment in our consolidated statements of operations.
(5)Includes one-time payments of contractual amounts incurred in connection with our IPO that was completed in November 2020 which are reported in SG&A, and our follow on equity offerings in February, June and September 2021 which are reported in other expenses, net in our consolidated statements of operations.
(6)Includes executive transition costs, losses (gains) on disposition of fixed assets, mark-to-market on interest rate cap and other non-recurring, non-cash or discrete items as determined by management. Amounts are reported in SG&A and other expenses, net in our consolidated statements of operations.
(7)Represents the tax effect of the total adjustments based on our actual statutory tax rate. Amounts are reported in income tax expense in our consolidated statements of operations.
Comparison of Fiscal 2021 and 2020
Impact of 53rd week
Fiscal 2020 included a 53rd week, which added approximately $18.0 million in sales, $1.5 million in net income, and $3.0 million in Adjusted EBITDA.
Sales
Sales increased to $1,342.9 million in fiscal 2021 from $1,112.2 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of $230.7 million or 20.7%. The increase was primarily the result of an increase in comparable sales on a reported basis of 21.5% or $235.2 million, driven by an increase in consumer demand and elevated retail price inflation in the core sanitizer and equipment product categories.
We believe that COVID-19 has accelerated secular trends in consumer behavior and has favorably impacted our sales. While the duration and effects of the COVID-19 pandemic are uncertain, we anticipate that the changes in consumer behavior will continue for the foreseeable future.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit increased to $595.2 million in fiscal 2021 from $460.7 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of $134.5 million or 29.2%. Gross profit increased to 44.3% compared to 41.4% in fiscal 2020, an increase of 290 basis points. The increase in gross profit was primarily due to product margin improvements and occupancy leverage, partially offset by business mix.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A increased to $386.1 million in fiscal 2021 from $314.3 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of $71.8 million or 22.8%. As a percentage of sales, SG&A increased to 28.7% in fiscal 2021 compared to 28.3% in fiscal 2020, an increase of 40 basis points. The increase in SG&A in fiscal 2021, was primarily due to $55.2 million attributable to the increase in overall sales and our continued investments to support Company growth, $23.8 million related to non-cash equity-based compensation charges for the conversion of performance-based equity units and other equity awards granted at the time of IPO, and $8.2 million of one-time contractual amounts incurred in connection with the IPO, partially offset by lower costs of $6.4 million associated with COVID-19, a reduction in sponsor management fees of $4.5 million due to the termination of our sponsor management agreement at the time of our IPO, lower physical location closure costs of $3.6 million related to the strategic consolidation of certain locations during the first quarter of fiscal 2020 and lower executive transition and other costs of $0.9 million.
Total Other Expense
Total other expenses decreased to $46.0 million in fiscal 2021 from $85.2 million in fiscal 2020, a decrease of $39.2 million. This decrease was primarily due to lower interest expense of $49.7 million, due to a reduction in interest rates and the repayment of our senior unsecured notes with the proceeds of our IPO in November 2020, partially offset by a $9.2 million non-cash loss on debt extinguishment related to the repayment of our senior unsecured notes and amendment to the Term Loan during fiscal 2021.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense increased to $36.5 million in fiscal 2021 from $2.6 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of $33.9 million. This increase was primarily attributable to higher income before taxes.
Our effective tax rate was 22.4% in fiscal 2021 and reflects the reversal of a valuation allowance for our interest limitation carryforward as a result of our IPO and subsequent paydown of debt, as well as income tax benefits attributable to equity-based compensation awards. Our effective tax rate was 4.3% in fiscal 2020, reflecting a decrease in the valuation allowance for our interest limitation carryforward due to favorable provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), which increased the interest limitation from 30% to 50% of adjusted taxable income and allowed for the utilization of interest deduction carryforwards during fiscal 2020.
Net Income and Earnings per Share
Net income increased to $126.6 million in fiscal 2021 from $58.6 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of $68.0 million. Diluted earnings per share increased to $0.67 in fiscal 2021 from $0.37 in fiscal 2020.
Adjusted net income increased to $161.5 million in fiscal 2021 from $65.0 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of $96.5 million. Adjusted diluted earnings per share increased to $0.85 in fiscal 2021 compared to $0.42 in fiscal 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA increased to $270.6 million fiscal 2021 from $182.8 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of $87.8 million or 48.0%. This increase was due primarily to our increase in comparable sales, an improvement in gross margin, and cost leverage.
Comparison of Fiscal 2020 and 2019
Impact of 53rd week
Fiscal 2020 included a 53rd week, which added approximately $18.0 million in sales, $1.5 million in net income, and $3.0 million in Adjusted EBITDA.
Sales
Sales increased to $1,112.2 million in fiscal 2020 from $928.2 million in fiscal 2019, an increase of $184.0 million or 19.8%. The increase was the result of an increase in comparable sales of 18.0% and non-comparable sales growth primarily attributable to acquisitions and the 53rd week. The comparable sales increase of $163.3 million in fiscal 2020 was driven by an increase in consumer demand across all product categories due to higher use of residential pools and spas.
We believe that COVID-19 has accelerated secular trends in consumer behavior and has favorably impacted our sales. While the duration and effects of the COVID-19 pandemic are uncertain, we anticipate that the changes in consumer behavior will continue for the foreseeable future.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit increased to $460.7 million in fiscal 2020 from $379.7 million in fiscal 2019, an increase of $81.0 million or 21.3%. Gross profit increased by $72.4 million due to higher comparable sales and by $8.8 million due to higher non-comparable sales, and was partially offset by $0.2 million due to higher occupancy expenses. Gross margin increased to 41.4% in fiscal 2020 compared to 40.9% in fiscal 2019, an increase of 51 basis points.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A increased to $314.3 million in fiscal 2020 from $258.2 million in fiscal 2019, an increase of $56.1 million or 21.7%. As a percentage of sales, SG&A increased to 28.3% in fiscal 2020 compared to 27.8% in fiscal 2019, an increase of 45 basis points. The increase in SG&A was primarily driven by increased costs related to higher sales volume of $20.6 million, higher compensation expense of $10.9 million, expenses associated with COVID-19 of $8.6 million for temporary wage increases and personal protective equipment, expenses related to strategic consolidations of certain locations of $3.5 million, one-time bonus incentive accruals of $2.9 million, and higher general and administrative expenses of $9.7 million partially driven by higher spend related to information systems.
Total Other Expense
Total other expense decreased to $85.2 million in fiscal 2020 from $106.0 million in fiscal 2019, a decrease of $20.8 million. The decrease in fiscal 2020 was primarily driven by lower interest expense on our floating rate debt of $14.5 million, a reduction in fair market valuation adjustments related to our interest rate cap agreements of $4.3 million, and a reduction of other expenses of $2.0 million.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense decreased to $2.6 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $14.9 million in fiscal 2019, a decrease of $12.3 million. The decrease in income tax expense was the result of higher income before taxes during fiscal 2020, which was more than offset by the impact of limitations on interest expense deductibility in accordance with section 163(j) of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017.
Net Income and Earnings per Share
Net income increased to $58.6 million in fiscal 2020 from $0.7 million in fiscal 2019, an increase of $57.9 million. Diluted earnings per share increased to $0.37 in fiscal 2020 from $0.00 in fiscal 2019.
Adjusted net income increased to $65.0 million in fiscal 2020 from an Adjusted net income of $12.8 million in fiscal 2019, an increase of $52.2 million. Adjusted diluted earnings per share increased to $0.42 in fiscal 2020 compared to $0.08 in fiscal 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA increased to $182.8 million in fiscal 2020 from $160.0 million in fiscal 2019, an increase of $22.8 million or 14.3%. The increase was due primarily to our increase in comparable sales and an improvement in gross margin. Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of sales decreased to 16.4% in fiscal 2020 compared to 17.2% in fiscal 2019, a decrease of 80 basis points.
Seasonality and Quarterly Fluctuations
Our business is highly seasonal. In general, sales and earnings are highest during the third and fourth fiscal quarters, which include April through September and represent the peak months of swimming pool use. In fiscal 2021, we generated 75% of our sales and 97% of our Adjusted EBITDA in the third and fourth quarters of our fiscal year. Sales are substantially lower during our first and second fiscal quarters. We have a long track record of investing in our business throughout the year, including in operating expenses, working capital, and capital expenditures related to new locations and other growth initiatives. While these investments drive performance during the primary selling season in our third and fourth fiscal quarters, they have a negative impact during our first and second fiscal quarters.
We experience a build-up of inventory and accounts payable during the first and second fiscal quarters in anticipation of the peak swimming pool supply selling season. We negotiate extended payment terms with certain of our primary suppliers as we receive merchandise in December through March and we pay for merchandise in April through July.
The principal external factor affecting our business is weather. Hot weather can increase purchases of chemicals and other non-discretionary products and purchases of discretionary products, and can drive increased purchases of installation and repair services. Unseasonably cool weather or significant amounts of rainfall during the peak sales season can reduce chemical consumption in pools and spas and decrease consumer purchases of our products and services. In addition, unseasonably early or late warming trends can increase or decrease the length of the pool season and impact timing around pool openings and closings and, therefore, our total sales and timing of our sales.
We generally open new locations before our peak selling season begins and we close locations after our peak selling season ends. We expect that our quarterly results of operations will fluctuate depending on the timing and amount of sales contributed by new locations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity are net cash provided by operating activities and borrowing availability under our ABL Credit Facility. Historically, we have funded working capital requirements, capital expenditures, payments related to acquisitions and debt service requirements with internally generated cash on hand and through our ABL Credit Facility.
Cash and cash equivalents consist primarily of cash on deposit with banks. Cash and cash equivalents totaled $345.1 million, $157.1 million and $90.9 million as of October 2, 2021, October 3, 2020 and September 28, 2019, respectively. As of October 2, 2021, October 3, 2020, and September 28, 2019, we did not have any outstanding borrowings under our ABL Credit Facility. On April 12, 2021, we entered into an agreement to the $200.0 million ABL Credit Facility. See Note 10 - Long-Term Debt to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more detail.
Our primary working capital requirements are for the purchase of inventory, payroll, rent, other facility costs, distribution costs, and general and administrative costs. Our working capital requirements fluctuate during the year, driven primarily by seasonality and the timing of inventory purchases.
Our capital expenditures are primarily related to infrastructure-related investments, including investments related to upgrading and maintaining our information technology systems, ongoing location improvements, expenditures related to our distribution centers, and new location openings. We expect to fund capital expenditures from net cash provided by operating activities.
Based on our growth plans, we believe our cash and cash equivalents position, net cash provided by operating activities and borrowing availability under our ABL Credit Facility will be adequate to finance our working capital requirements, planned capital expenditures, and debt service over the next 12 months. In the future, we may also allocate capital toward additional strategic acquisitions. If cash provided by operating activities and borrowings under our ABL Credit Facility are not sufficient or available to meet our capital requirements, then we may need to obtain additional equity or debt financing. There can be no assurance that equity or debt financing will be available to us if we need it or, if available, whether the terms will be satisfactory to us.
As of October 2, 2021, outstanding standby letters of credit totaled $9.2 million and, after considering borrowing base restrictions, we had $190.8 million of available borrowing capacity under the terms of the ABL Credit Facility. As of October 2, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants under the ABL Credit Facility and our Term Loan agreements.
Summary of Cash Flows
A summary of our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities is presented in the following table (in thousands):
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased to $169.6 million in fiscal 2021 from $103.4 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of $66.2 million or 64.0%. This increase was primarily driven by the increase in net income related to our sales growth, partially offset by changes in working capital related to the strategic investment in product inventories to meet heightened customer demand across product categories.
Net cash provided by operating activities increased to $103.4 million in fiscal 2020 from $57.8 million in fiscal 2019, an increase of $45.6 million or 78.9%. This increase in cash flows was primarily driven by the increase in net income related to our sales growth, partially offset by an increase in prepaid expenses and a reduction in income taxes payable.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased to $35.4 million in fiscal 2021 from $26.8 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of $8.6 million. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in investments in information technology initiatives.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased to $26.8 million in fiscal 2020 from $37.0 million in fiscal 2019, a decrease of $10.2 million. The decrease was primarily due to the opening of fewer new locations and a reduction in acquisition-related investments.
Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in fiscal 2021 of $53.8 million, was primarily related to net proceeds raised during our IPO in November 2020 of $458.6 million, partially offset by a $396.1 million repayment of long term debt. Net cash used in financing activities in fiscal 2020 of $10.4 million, relates to the net paydown of long term debt. Net cash used in financing activities in fiscal 2019 of $7.5 million was primarily related to mandatory payments on our Term Loan and declared dividends.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual cash obligations as of October 2, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)We are required to pay a commitment fee of 0.25% based on the unused portion of the ABL Credit Facility.
(2)Purchase obligations include all legally binding contracts and primarily relate to firm commitments for inventory purchases. Purchase orders that are not binding agreements are excluded from the table above.
(3)Operating lease obligations relate to our locations, office, distribution, and manufacturing facilities. We are obligated to make cash payments in connection with various lease obligations and purchase commitments and all obligations require cash payments to be made by us over varying periods of time. Certain leases are renewable at our option typically for periods of five to more years and are cancelable on short notice and others require payments upon early termination.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and notes to our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base these estimates on historical results and various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable, all of which form the basis for making estimates concerning the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the following critical accounting policies affect the most significant estimates and management judgments used in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
Vendor Rebates
Many of our vendor arrangements provide for us to receive specified amounts of consideration when we achieve various measures. These measures generally relate to the volume level of purchases from our vendors. We generally account for vendor programs as a reduction of the prices of the vendor’s products and therefore a reduction of inventory until we sell the product, at which time we recognize such consideration as a reduction of cost of merchandise and services sold in our consolidated statements of operations.
Inventories, Net
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market or net realizable value. We value inventory using the weighted-average cost method. We evaluate inventory for excess and obsolescence and record necessary reserves. We provide provisions for losses related to inventories based on historical purchase cost, selling price, margin, and current business trends. When an inventory item is sold or disposed, the associated reserve is released at that time.
Goodwill and Other Intangibles
Goodwill and intangible assets are recorded at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. We review goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets for impairment annually (in the fourth quarter) or on an interim basis whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the fair value of such assets may be below their carrying amount. The Company’s impairment evaluation of goodwill consists of a qualitative assessment to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of its single reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. The Company’s qualitative assessment considered factors including changes macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, a sustained share price or market capitalization decrease, and any reporting unit specific events. If this qualitative assessment indicates it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its
carrying value, no further analysis is required and goodwill is not impaired. Otherwise, we compare the estimated fair value of the asset to its carrying amount with an impairment loss recognized for the amount, if any, by which carrying value exceeds estimated fair value.
The impairment evaluation for the Company’s indefinite-lived intangible assets consists of a qualitative assessment similar to that for goodwill, for each indefinite-lived intangible asset. If the qualitative assessment indicates it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its carrying value, no further analysis is required and the asset is not impaired. Otherwise, the Company compares the estimated fair value of the asset to its carrying amount with an impairment loss recognized for the amount, if any, by which carrying value exceeds estimated fair value. We evaluate whether certain trade names continue to have an indefinite life annually.
Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized to reflect the pattern of economic benefits consumed. We evaluate amortizable intangible assets for potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of the assets may not be fully recoverable. Intangible assets useful lives are reviewed annually.
Leases
We enter into contractual arrangements for the utilization of certain non-owned assets which are evaluated as finance or operating leases upon commencement, and are accounted for accordingly. Specifically, a contract is or contains a lease when (1) the contract contains an explicitly or implicitly identified asset and (2) we obtain substantially all of the economic benefits from the use of that underlying asset and direct how and for what purpose the asset is used during the term of the contract in exchange for consideration. We assess whether an arrangement is or contains a lease at inception of the contract.
We lease certain retail locations, warehouse and distribution space, office space, equipment, and vehicles. A substantial majority of our leases have an initial lease term of five years, typically with the option to extend the lease for at least one additional five-year term. Some of our leases may include the option to terminate in less than five years. The lease term used to calculate the right-of-use asset and lease liability at commencement includes the impacts of options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. When determining whether it is reasonably certain that we will exercise an option at commencement, we consider various existing economic factors, including market conditions, real estate strategies, the nature, length, and terms of the agreement, as well as the uncertainty of the condition of leased equipment at the end of the lease term. Based on these considerations, we generally conclude that the exercise of renewal options would not be reasonably certain in calculating our operating lease liability at commencement. The discount rate used to calculate the present value of lease payments is the rate implicit in the lease, when readily determinable. As the rate implicit in the lease is rarely readily determinable, we use a secured incremental borrowing rate, which is updated on a periodic basis as the discount rate for the present value of lease payments. Real estate taxes, insurance, maintenance, and operating expenses applicable to the leased property are generally our obligations under our lease agreements. In instances where these payments are fixed, they are included in the measurement of our lease liabilities, and when variable, are excluded and recognized in the period in which the obligation for those payments is incurred. For variable payments dependent upon an index or rate, we apply the active index or rate as of the lease commencement date. Variable lease payments not based on an index or rate are not included in the measurement of our operating lease liabilities as they cannot be reasonably estimated, and are recognized in the period in which the obligation for those payments is incurred. Leases that have a term of 12 months or less upon commencement are considered short-term in nature and as such are not included in the measurement of our operating lease right-of-use assets and operating lease liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets and are expensed on a straight line basis over the lease term. In addition, we do separate lease and non-lease components (e.g. common area maintenance). Our lease agreements do not contain any material residual value guarantees or material restrictive covenants.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customer, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for such goods or services. Revenue from merchandise sales at retail locations is recognized at the point of sale, revenue from services are recognized when the services are rendered. Revenue from e-commerce merchandise sales is recognized either at the time of pick-up at one of our locations or at the time of shipment depending on the customer’s order designation. Revenue is recorded net of related discounts and sales tax. Payment from retail customers is generally at the point of sale and payment terms for professional pool operators are based on our credit requirements and generally have terms of less than 60 days. When we receive payment from a consumer before the consumer has taken possession of the merchandise or the service has been performed, the amount received is recorded as deferred revenue or as a customer deposit until the sale or service is
complete. Shipping and handling are treated as costs to fulfill the contract and not a separate performance obligation. We include shipping and handling fees billed to customers within net sales and related costs are charged to cost of merchandise and services sold.
We estimate a liability for sales returns based on current sales levels and historical return trends. At each financial reporting date, we assess our estimates of expected returns, and a corresponding adjustment to cost of sales for our right to recover the goods returned by the customer, net of any expected recovery cost. Adjustments related to changes in return estimates were immaterial in all periods presented.
Our loyalty program allows members to earn reward points based on their purchases. Once a loyalty member achieves a certain point level, the member earns an award that may be used on future purchases, which are valid for 12 months from issuance. The program represents a material right to the customer and points may be redeemed on future products and services. We defer revenue related to points earned that have not yet been redeemed. The amount of deferred revenue is based on the estimated standalone selling price of points earned by members reduced by the percentage of points expected to be redeemed. The estimated redemption percentage is based on historical redemption trends and considers current information or trends. Revenue is recognized when the rewards are redeemed, expired or based on estimated breakage. When a customer redeems points or the points expire, the Company recognizes revenue in net sales on the consolidated statements of operations.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and tax bases of existing assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets, including the benefit of net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards, are evaluated based on the guidelines for realization and are reduced by a valuation allowance if it is deemed more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. We consider several factors in evaluating the realizability of our deferred tax assets, including the nature, frequency and severity of recent losses, the remaining years available for carryforwards, changes in tax laws, the future profitability of the operations in the jurisdiction, and tax planning strategies. Our judgments and estimates concerning realizability of deferred tax assets could change if any of the evaluation factors change, resulting in an increase or decrease to income tax expense in any period.
The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets can be dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which the associated temporary differences become deductible. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate whether it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will be realized in the future and conclude whether a valuation allowance must be established.
We record a liability for uncertain tax positions to the extent a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return does not meet certain recognition or measurement criteria. Considerable management judgment is necessary to assess the inherent uncertainties related to the interpretations of complex tax laws, regulations and taxing authority rulings. Our judgments and estimates may change as a result of the evaluation of new information, such as the outcome of tax audits or changes to or further interpretations of tax laws and regulations, resulting in an increase or decrease to income tax expense in any period. Interest and penalties accrued, if any, relating to uncertain tax positions will be recognized as a component of the income tax provision.
Self-Insurance Reserves
We are self-insured for losses relating to workers’ compensation, general liability, and employee medical. Stop-loss coverage has been purchased to limit exposure to any material level of claims. Liabilities for self-insurance reserves are estimated based on independent actuarial estimates, which are based on historical information and assumptions about future events. We utilize various techniques, including analysis of historical trends and actuarial valuation methods, to estimate the cost to settle reported claims and claims incurred but not yet reported as of the balance sheet date. The actuarial valuation methods consider loss development factors, which include the development time frame and expected claim reporting and settlement patterns, and expected loss costs, which include the expected frequency and severity of claim activity.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.