ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. As described at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could contribute to such differences include those discussed at the beginning of this Report, below in this section and in the section above entitled “Risk Factors.” You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this Report. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect new information, events or circumstances after the date of this Report, or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this Report.
CURRENT OPERATIONS
Life On Earth, Inc. (Company) was incorporated in April 2013 as Hispanica International Delights of America, Inc. as a Delaware corporation. In February 2018, the Company changed its name to Life On Earth, Inc. and was engaged in the distribution of its own proprietary functional beverages throughout the United States. During the year ended May 31, 2021, the Company discontinued the wholesale beverage distribution operations, and the Company announced its intention divest away from its business as a Consumer-Packaged Goods (“CPG”) Company. Accordingly, the Company’s results of operations for the year ended May 31, 2020, reflect a charge in the aggregate amount of $786,436,
In December of 2020 the Company decided to change its business and focus on building a technology company to take advantage of high growth software solution based on in IoT edge technologies. In May of 2021, the company acquired SmartAxiom. SmartAxiom delivers Internet of Things (IoT) edge solutions. The Company has computing IoT platform providing our customers with a truly integrated, secure, scalable, interoperable, and advanced insight and visualization engine for the Internet-of-everything’s. SmartAxiom’s delivers a “Single Pane of Glass” architecture model, that works with third-party solutions to provide the foundation for seamlessly, and securely connecting devices. Delivering trusted data to the cloud, and providing value through big data predictive analytics.
Coronavirus Risks
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China, which has and is continuing to spread throughout China and other parts of the world, including the United States. On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern.” On January 31, 2020, U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Alex M. Azar II declared a public health emergency for the United States to aid the U.S. healthcare community in responding to COVID-19, and on March 11, 2020 the World Health Organization characterized the outbreak as a “pandemic”.
The ultimate extent of the impact of any epidemic, pandemic or other health crisis on our business, financial condition and results of operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning the severity of such epidemic, pandemic or other health crisis and actions taken to contain or prevent their further spread, among others. The significant outbreak of COVID-19 has resulted in a widespread health crisis that has adversely affected the economies and financial markets worldwide, and may continue to do so, which could adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition.
GOING CONCERN QUALIFICATION
Several conditions and events cast substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company has incurred net losses from inception of approximately $18,500,000, has limited revenues and requires additional financing in order to finance its business activities on an ongoing basis. The Company has negative working capital of $4,295,000 as of May 31, 2021. The Company’s future capital requirements will depend on numerous factors including, but not limited to, continued progress in finding business opportunities. We have experienced recurring losses from operations and negative cash flows from operating activities. This situation creates uncertainties about our ability to execute our business plan, finance operations, and indicates substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We continue to experience negative cash flows from operations, as well as an ongoing requirement for additional capital to support working capital needs. Therefore, currently, based upon our near-term anticipated level of operations and expenditures, management believes that cash on hand, excluding cash available under our line of credit, is not sufficient to enable us to fund operations for 12 months from the date the financial statements included in this Report are issued
At May 31, 2021, we had cash on hand of $34,629 and an accumulated deficit of $18,635,356. See“Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, or if management made different judgments or utilized different estimates. Many of our estimates or judgments are based on anticipated future events or performance, and as such are forward-looking in nature, and are subject to many risks and uncertainties, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Report. We do not undertake any obligation to update or revise this discussion to reflect any future events or circumstances. There are certain critical accounting estimates that we believe require significant judgment in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We have identified below our accounting policies that we use in arriving at key estimates that we consider critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. This is not a complete list of all of our accounting policies, and there may be other accounting policies that are significant to us. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and our other accounting policies, see Note 1 to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Report.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue under ASU No. 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606),” (“ASC 606”). The core principle of the revenue standard is that a company should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The Company only applies the five-step model (as described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Report) to contracts when it is probable that the Company will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods and services transferred to the customer.
Revenue consists of the gross sales price, less allowances for which provisions are made at the time of sale, and less certain other discounts, allowances, and rebates that are accounted for as a reduction from gross revenue. Costs incurred by the Company for shipping and handling charges are included in cost of goods sold.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of acquired businesses over the estimated fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired. Goodwill and other intangibles are reviewed for impairment annually or more frequently when events or circumstances indicates that the carrying value of a reporting unit more likely than not exceeds its fair value. The goodwill impairment test is applied by performing a qualitative assessment before calculating the fair value of the asset. If, on the basis of qualitative factors, it is considered more likely than not that the fair value of the asset is greater than the carrying amount, further testing of goodwill for impairment is not required. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the asset’s fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that asset. Identifiable intangible assets acquired in business combinations are recorded at the estimated acquisition date fair value. Finite lived intangible assets are amortized over the shorter of the contractual life or their estimated useful life using the straight-line method, which is determined by identifying the period over which the cash flows from the asset are expected to be generated. As part of the Company’s annual review of goodwill and intangibles we performed a detail analysis of the intangibles recorded as they relate to the acquisitions of JC and VK. Based on this analysis, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $299,000 related to the JC acquisition as of May 31, 2020. The Company also wrote off the goodwill recorded in the VK acquisition, in the amount of $195,000.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Inflation
The amounts presented in the financial statements do not provide for the effect of inflation on our operations or financial position. The net operating losses shown would be greater than reported if the effects of inflation were reflected either by charging operations with amounts that represent replacement costs or by using other inflation adjustments.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
During the year ended May 31, 2021, the Company received $100,000 from the issuance of 100 shares of the Company’s Series B Preferred Stock., and, received $220,000 from the issuance of the 220 shares of the Company’s Series C Preferred Stock. During June 2021, the Company received $170,000 from the issuance of 170 shares of the Company’s Series C Preferred Stock. During the year ended May 31, 2021, the Company received $70,000 from the issuance of convertible notes payable and $30,000 from the issuance of a term note and paid $9,000 of notes payable to related parties.
During the year ended May 31, 2020, the Company received $447,240 from the issuance of convertible notes payable and made a $6,000 principal payment to a convertible note holder. During the year ended May 31, 2020, the Company received approximately $53,000 from the issuance of notes payable to related parties and paid $5,300 of notes payable to related parties.
During the year ended May 31, 2021, the Company received proceeds from various lines of credit in an aggregate total of approximately $19,000 and repaid approximately $30,000. During the year ended May 31, 2020, the Company received proceeds from various lines of credit in an aggregate total of approximately $59,000 and repaid approximately $67,000.
We have experienced recurring losses from operations and negative cash flows from operating activities. This situation creates uncertainties about our ability to execute our business plan, finance operations, and indicates substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We continue to experience negative cash flows from operations, as well as an ongoing requirement for additional capital to support working capital needs. Therefore, currently, based upon our near-term anticipated level of operations and expenditures, management believes that cash on hand is not sufficient to enable us to fund operations for 12 months from the date the financial statements included in this Report are issued. In view of these conditions, our ability to continue as a going concern is in substantial doubt and dependent upon achieving a profitable level of operations and on our ability to obtain necessary financing to fund ongoing operations. The consolidated financial statements included in this Report do not give effect to any adjustments which will be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern and therefore be required to realize our assets and discharge our liabilities in other than the normal course of business and at amounts different from those reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. As of May 31, 2021, the Company had negative working capital of approximately $4,295,000.
We will require additional financing to support our working capital needs in the future. The amount of additional capital that we will require, the timing of our capital needs and the availability of financing to fund those needs will depend on a number of factors, including our strategic initiatives and operating plans, the performance of our business and the market conditions for available debt or equity financing. Additionally, the amount of capital required will depend on our ability to meet our sales goals and otherwise successfully execute our operating plan. We believe it is important that we meet these sales objectives in order to lessen our reliance on external financing in the future. We intend to continually monitor and adjust our operating plan as necessary to respond to developments in our business, our markets and the broader economy. Although we believe various debt and equity financing alternatives will be available to us to support our working capital needs, financing arrangements on acceptable terms may not be available to us when needed. Additionally, these alternatives may require significant cash payments for interest and other costs or could be highly dilutive to our existing shareholders. Any such financing alternatives may not provide us with sufficient funds to meet our long-term capital requirements. If necessary, we may explore strategic transactions that we consider to be in the best interest of our company and our shareholders, which may include, without limitation, public or private offerings of debt or equity securities, a rights offering, and other strategic alternatives; however, these options may not ultimately be available or feasible when needed.
CASH FLOW
Our primary sources of liquidity have been cash from sales of products, sales of shares, the issuance of a convertible promissory notes and from lines of credit.
WORKING CAPITAL
As of May 31, 2021, the Company had total current assets of $113,657 and total current liabilities of $9,881,135 resulting in negative working capital of $9,767,478. As of May 31, 2020, the Company had total current assets of $3,831 and total current liabilities of $4,289,675 resulting in negative working capital of $4,285,844. The increase in negative working capital of $5,481,634 during the year ended May 31, 2021, related, primarily to the accrued cost of the acquisition of Smart Axiom of approximately $5,044,000. In addition, there was an increase in current assets in 2021 compared to 2020 of approximately $117,000, primarily related to an increase in other receivables of $70,000 and the current assets acquired from Smart Axiom of approximately $50,000, including cash of $34,000.
Our current liabilities increased during the year ended May 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended May 31, 2020 by approximately $5,591,000, primarily due to the in thee accrued cost of the acquisition of Smart Axiom of approximately $5,044,000, other increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses in 2021 of $321,000, and an increase in the contingent liability for the acquisition of JCG of approximately $358,000, offset by decreases in our convertible notes payable in 2021 of approximately $232,000.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED MAY 31, 2021, AS COMPARED TO MAY 31, 2020.
Sales
The Company recorded no sales from continuing operations for the years ended May 31, 2021, and 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit
Gross profit during the year ended May 31, 2021, was $0 as compared to a negative gross profit of $55,701 as reported for the year ended May 31, 2020. The negative gross profit during the year ended 2020 was primarily due the write-offs of obsolete inventory because of expiring inventory
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses from continuing operations were $663,564 for the year ended May 31, 2021 as compared to $1,959,408 for the year ended May 31, 2020. The decrease in operating expenses was related to a variety of factors. During the year ended May 31, 2021 our professional fees decreased by $446,000, Officers compensation decreased by $441,000, salaries and benefits decreased by $349,000, other selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $187,000. and amortization increased by $79,000 as compared to the year ended May 31, 2020.
Other Expense
During the year ended May 31, 2021, the Company recorded interest and finance costs from continuing operations of $423,546, as compared to $744,461 during the year ended May 31, 2020. The interest and finance costs incurred by the Company reflect the cost of the debt incurred by the Company to finance operations. During the year ended May 31, 2021, the Company recorded a charge for the fair value of contingent consideration of $357,955 as compared to a credit of the fair value of contingent consideration by $325,309 during the year ended May 31, 2020, related to the acquisition of Just Chill, which arises from the measurement of LFER stock on the 12-month anniversary of the acquisition and subsequent Balance Sheet reporting dates. During the year ended May 31, 2021, the Company recorded a credit change in the fair value of derivative liability of $36,127 as compared to $1,247 during the year ended May 31, 2019.
Net Loss
Net loss from continuing operations for the year ended May 31, 2021, decreased to $1,408,938 from a net loss of $2,432,907 for the year ended May 31, 2020. In addition to the above factors, during the year ended May 31, 2021 the Company recorded a loss on discontinued operations of $25,135. During the year ended May 31, 2020, the Company recorded a loss on discontinued operations of $786,435 and a gain on the disposal of subsidiary of $893,515 related to the disposal of ESD.