ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on June 20, 2019 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the Private Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
All activity through December 31, 2020 relates to our formation, IPO, and search for a prospective initial Business Combination target.
We are incurring significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the IPO. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net income of $101,076, which consisted of interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $787,350 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $2,056, offset by operating costs of $661,218 and a provision for income taxes of $27,112.
For the period from June 20, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had net income of $101,502, which consisted of interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $295,788 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $227, offset by operating costs of $167,531 and a provision for income taxes of $26,982.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 7, 2019, we consummated the IPO of 12,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $120,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 3,750,000 Private Warrants to Merida Holdings, LLC and EarlyBirdCapital at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $3,750,000.
On November 13, 2019, as a result of the underwriters’ election to partially exercise their over-allotment option, the Company consummated the sale of an additional 1,001,552 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, and the sale of an additional 200,311 Private Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating total gross proceeds of $10,215,831.
Following the IPO, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Warrants, a total of $130,015,520 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $3,412,939 in transaction costs, including $2,600,311 of underwriting fees and $812,628 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $610,924. Net income of $101,076 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $787,350, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $2,056 and a deferred tax provision of $384. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $77,022 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from June 20, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $217,499. Net income of $101,502 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $295,788, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $227 and a deferred tax provision of $48. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $23,034 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $130,681,047 (including approximately $666,000 of interest income) consisting of U.S. treasury bills with a maturity of 180 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes and up to $250,000 per 12-month period can be withdrawn for working capital needs. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we withdrew $419,894 of the interest earned on the Trust Account to pay for our franchise and income taxes and for working capital needs. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $171,540 of cash held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $5,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support to the Company. We began incurring these fees on November 4, 2019 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
We have engaged EarlyBirdCapital as an advisor in connection with a Business Combination to assist us in holding meetings with our stockholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with a Business Combination, assist us in obtaining stockholder approval for the Business Combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination. We will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of a Business Combination in an amount equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $4,550,543 (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable); provided that up to 30% of the fee may be allocated at our sole discretion to other FINRA members that assist us in identifying and consummating a Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, if any, by the weighted average number of shares of common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding for the period. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for and non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net loss less income attributable to common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.