ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company, incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. Lazard Ltd, an affiliate of our sponsor, intends to use resources across its international financial advisory and asset management businesses to source and evaluate attractive, high growth private companies. Although we are not limited to a particular industry or geographic region in our identification and acquisition of a target company, we believe the growth-oriented subsectors of the healthcare, technology, energy transition, financial and consumer sectors present particularly attractive investment opportunities. As of December 31, 2020, we had not selected any potential business combination target and we had not, nor had anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any potential business combination target. During the fiscal period ended December 31, 2020, our efforts were limited to organizational activities.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from December 10, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to consummate the IPO. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from December 10, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $7,000, which consists of operating and formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 17, 2020, the sponsor made available to the Company, under an unsecured revolving promissory note (the “IPO Promissory Note”), up to $300,000 to be used for costs and expenses reasonably related to the Company’s formation and IPO. Immediately prior to the IPO, the borrowings outstanding under the IPO Promissory Note were $187,583. The IPO Promissory Note was non-interest bearing and was repaid in full and cancelled.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $25,000. Until the consummation of the IPO, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from our sale of the founder shares and advances from our sponsor. Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we have available to us $1,300,000 from loans committed by our sponsor for working capital as of March, 26, 2021.
On February 12, 2021, we consummated our IPO of 57,500,000 of our units, including 7,500,000 units sold upon exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option. Each unit consists of one Class A ordinary share of the Company, $0.0001 par value per share, and one-fifth of one public warrant, with each whole public warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one Class A ordinary share at an exercise price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. The units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $575,000,000. Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC acted as Book-Running Manager. The securities sold in the IPO were registered under the Securities Act on a registration statement on Form S-1 (No. 333-252408), which was declared effective by the SEC on February 9, 2021.
Simultaneously with the consummation of the IPO and the issuance and sale of the units, the Company consummated the sale to the sponsor of 9,000,000 private placement warrants, with each private placement warrant exercisable to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share subject to adjustment, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant, generating total proceeds of $13,500,000. The private placement warrants are identical to the public warrants, except that, so long as they are held by the sponsor or its permitted transferees, (i) they will not be redeemable by us, (ii) they (including the Class A ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of these private placement warrants) may not, subject to certain limited exceptions, be transferred, assigned or sold by our sponsor until 30 days after the completion of our initial business combination, (iii) they may be exercised by the holders on a cashless basis and (iv) they will be entitled to registration rights.
A total of $575,000,000, comprised of $563,500,000 of the proceeds from the IPO and $11,500,000 of the proceeds of the sale of the private placement warrants, was placed in the trust account. Transaction costs amounted to $32,432,846, consisting of $11,500,000 of underwriting fees (a net underwriting fee of $8,500,000 after giving effect to the underwriter’s reimbursement of the Company for $3,000,000 of financial advisory fees payable by the Company to Lazard Frères & Co. LLC), $20,125,000 of deferred underwriting fees (as may be reduced as a result of the underwriter’s reimbursement to the Company for certain financial advisory fees payable by the Company to Lazard Frères & Co. LLC) and $807,846 of other offering costs.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting commissions), to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest income (if any) to pay taxes, if any. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the trust account. We expect the interest income earned on the amount in the trust account (if any) will be sufficient to pay our income taxes. Any remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, the sponsor has, as of March 26, 2021, committed $1,300,000 to be provided to us to fund our expenses relating to investigating and selecting a target business and other working capital requirements prior to our initial business combination. In addition, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor may, but is not obligated to, loan us additional funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans made available from the sponsor or its affiliates may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such additional loans have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or its affiliates as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
We may need to obtain additional financing to complete our initial business combination, either because the transaction requires more cash than is available from the proceeds held in the trust account, or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of the business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we have not consummated our initial business combination within the required time period because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we would be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K, and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an agreement to pay the sponsor a monthly fee of $20,000 for office space, secretarial and administrative services. We began incurring these fees on February 10, 2021 and expect to continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of our initial business combination and our liquidation.
There will be no finder’s fees, reimbursements or cash payments made by us to our sponsor, our directors and officers or their respective affiliates for services rendered to us prior to or in connection with the completion of our initial business combination, other than the following payments, none of which will be made from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the private placement warrants, in each case held in the trust account, prior to the completion of our initial business combination:
•
payments of $20,000 per month to an affiliate of our sponsor for office space, secretarial and administrative services, as described above;
•
reimbursement for any out-of-pocket expenses related to identifying, investigating, negotiating and completing an initial business combination;
•
payment to Lazard, including to Lazard Frères & Co. LLC, of fees for any financial advisory or other similar investment banking services provided to our company, and reimbursement of Lazard for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by Lazard in connection with the performance of such services; and
•
repayment of loans which may be made by our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, including the $1,300,000 loan commitment made by our sponsor for working capital pursuant to an amended and restated working capital promissory note dated as of March 26, 2021 to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such additional loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of expenses during the reported period. Estimates, by their nature, are based on judgment and available information. Therefore, actual results could differ from those estimates and could have a material impact on the financial statements. We have identified not identified any critical accounting policies.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.