Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions, that are based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Risk Factors.”
We are a medical technology company focused on the development and commercialization of transformative and innovative infectious disease test kits. We have developed a testing platform that produces centralized-laboratory-accurate molecular testing in a single-use and consumer-friendly test kit that is powered by two AA batteries and fits in the palm of a hand. We designed our test kits to provide accurate, reliable and on-the-spot molecular test results anywhere and at any time. We believe the COVID-19, pandemic has shown the infectious disease testing infrastructure in the United States was not designed to accommodate the immediate demands of infectious disease control on a mass-population scale. The testing options today are too expensive, inaccurate, or are inaccessible due to slow time to results or complexity. Mass-population infectious disease testing requires a testing platform that can provide accurate and clinically relevant results on-the-spot, be affordably mass produced, portable and easy-to-use anywhere. Our LUCIRA COVID-19 All-In-One Test Kit used in the POC and prescription at-home settings and pending OTC EUA authorization, if received, for the LUCIRA CHECK IT COVID-19 Test Kit used in the OTC setting, utilize identical components and are referred to as test kit or COVID-19 test kit. Our test kit is designed to provide a clinically relevant COVID-19 result within 30 minutes from sample collection. We believe, at scale, it will be an affordable, mass-population testing solution. Our initial focus is within respiratory diseases, starting with COVID-19 and influenza A and B virus indications.
Our first clinical trial was conducted among symptomatic individuals and demonstrated the molecular accuracy of our COVID-19 test kit as comparable to the known high sensitivity Hologic Panther Fusion was initiated in September 2020 and supported our first Emergency Use Authorization, or EUA. The Hologic Panther Fusion is a high sensitivity molecular assay due to its LoD as labeled in its FDA EUA. In this clinical trial, we collected samples from 101 subjects, tested the samples head-to-head against the Hologic Panther Fusion and achieved 94.1% positive percent agreement (96.0% with discrepant testing) and 98.0% negative percent agreement. Our strong clinical performance was enabled by our LoD of 900 cps / mL VTM equivalent, which allows our COVID-19 test kit to detect viral genetic material in orders of magnitude better than antigen tests. In addition, our COVID-19 test kit is easy-to-use. Specifically, 100% of patients successfully performed self-testing at home using our COVID-19 test kit in less than two minutes in a human usability study we conducted with 398 users at research facilities in Sunnyvale and Fresno, California. The measure for successful performance was the ability to collect a nasal specimen and start the test running on the first try, either without having to look back at the directions or with only one look back. On November 17, 2020, we received an EUA, from the FDA for (1) prescription at-home use with self-collected nasal swab specimens in individuals aged 14 and older who are suspected of COVID-19 by their healthcare provider and (2) use at the POC, with self-collected nasal swab specimens in individuals aged 14 and older, and in individuals aged 13 and under when the specimen is collected by a healthcare provider at the POC. Our test kit was the first FDA-authorized, under an EUA, COVID-19 test that allows patients to test themselves and receive results at home. Our prescription at-home use indication does not require healthcare provider telehealth or video observation.
In December 2020, we initiated a follow-on clinical trial among asymptomatic individuals to support both a new EUA submission for OTC non-prescription use, as well as an EUA amendment to our initial EUA to expand the indicated population to include asymptomatic individuals. We refer to our clinical trial among symptomatic individuals and our follow-up clinical trial among asymptomatic individuals as our Community Testing Studies. The asymptomatic study enrolled a total of 303 individuals, including 81 asymptomatic positives, and again utilized the Hologic Panther Fusion as the comparator. Results of the follow-on asymptomatic study showed no statistical difference in our test performance compared to the first study among symptomatic individuals. Hence, simply increasing the sample and confidence in our molecular accuracy as compared to the known high sensitivity Hologic Panther Fusion assay. Our accuracy across both Community Testing Studies as compared to the
Hologic Panther Fusion was 96% across all 404 samples. Our sensitivity, or positive percent agreement (PPA), was 92% across all 132 positive samples. Excluding samples with very low levels of virus that possibly were no longer infectious, our sensitivity, or PPA was 97%. Our specificity, or negative percent agreement (NPA) across both studies was 98%.
We submitted EUA applications to the FDA for the expansion of our current EUA to include asymptomatic individuals and OTC use in February 2021. Both of these submissions are pending authorization as of the date of this filing. If we receive these additional EUAs, our indicated population will expand to include individuals with and without symptoms, as well as in the prescription at-home and OTC non-prescription indication to include children aged two to 13 with adult collected samples. If we receive an additional EUA for OTC, our COVID-19 test kit product will be one of the first single-use molecular tests that provides polymerase chain reaction, or PCR, quality molecular accuracy pending FDA authorization. Further, pending EUA authorization, to facilitate public health reporting for OTC users, we have developed a text based secure web portal to provide verified test results back to a user’s phone, as well as transmit results to relevant public health authorities. We believe our portal is easy to use and it can be accessed without downloading an app.
We plan to develop a combination COVID-19 and influenza A and B viruses test kit for prescription at-home use and later our influenza test kit, for OTC use.
Since inception and prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, we focused our research and development efforts on developing our molecular nucleic acid amplification technology for use in our influenza test kit, for which we have received government grants from the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, or BARDA, to assist with development. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and based on clinical trials of our influenza test kit to date, we refocused our near-term business strategy to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and focus on the development and commercialization of our COVID-19 test kit.
To date, we have not derived any significant revenue from our test kits, and prior to the closing of our IPO, we had financed our operations principally from net proceeds of approximately $137.3 million from sales of our preferred stock, issuances of convertible debt and common stock purchases. We have historically incurred substantial net losses, including net losses of $37.3 million and $8.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $63.7 million.
Since the second quarter of 2020, we have primarily devoted our resources to the research, development, manufacturing and commercialization of our COVID-19 test kit. Research and development activities related to our test kits, including the COVID-19 test kit, include clinical, regulatory and manufacturing process initiatives to obtain marketing approval. We expect that our sales and marketing, research and development, regulatory and other expenses will continue to increase as we expand our marketing efforts to promote adoption of our COVID-19 test kit, build relationships with our customers, obtain regulatory clearances or approvals for current and any future test kits, and conduct clinical trials. In addition, we expect our general and administrative expenses to increase due to the additional costs associated with scaling our business operations as well as being a public company, including legal, accounting, insurance, Nasdaq and SEC compliance, investor relations and other expenses. As a result, we will require substantial capital to fund manufacturing expansion, inventory purchases and expenses related to our operating activities, including selling, general and administrative expenses, as well as research and development.
In 2020, we entered into license and manufacturing and services agreements. For a more detailed description of our license and manufacturing and services agreements, see Part I, Item 1, “Business- Intellectual Property- License Agreement with Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd.” and “Business-Manufacturing and Supply,” and Note 5 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Factors Affecting Our Business
We believe the following significant factors affect our business:
•
Approval and Market Adoption of Our Test Kits. Our commercial success, including acceptance and use of our COVID-19 test kit, will depend upon a number of factors, some of which are beyond our control, including the receipt of regulatory approvals for additional indications of our COVID-19 test kit and timing thereof, size of the market opportunity, demand from the public and members of the medical community for our COVID-19 test kit and rate of adoption of our COVID-19 test kit. The commercial success of our COVID-19 test kit will initially be dependent upon physicians and healthcare providers accepting and adopting our test kit. Our ability to successfully execute on this strategy, and thereby increase our revenue, will in part drive our results of operations and impact on our business.
•
Cost of Revenue. The results of our business will depend in part on our ability to establish and increase our gross margins by effectively managing our costs to produce our test kits, including, initially, our COVID-19 test kit. To better meet the market demand for COVID-19 diagnostic testing, a key part of our growth strategy includes expanding our current manufacturing capacity and automating much of the manufacturing process. Our test kits have been designed for automated production. Eventually, we could expand manufacturing to additional locations around the world to further our manufacturing capacity and reach.
•
Status of COVID-19 Pandemic. Given the unpredictable nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, the potential size of the COVID-19 diagnostic testing market and the timing of its development are highly uncertain. The FDA issued two EUAs in December 2020 and third EUA in February 2021 for COVID-19 vaccines. The widely administered use of efficacious vaccines or new therapeutic treatment for COVID-19 may reduce the demand for COVID-19 diagnostic tests and, as a result, the COVID-19 diagnostic testing market may not develop or substantially grow. However, we believe COVID-19, like influenza, will remain endemic for the foreseeable future and there will be a continued need for COVID-19 testing even after an effective vaccine has been widely distributed and compliantly administered. We believe this is largely due to the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in hyper-sensitivity to symptoms and broader awareness of the disease. Our future success is substantially dependent on the manner in which the market for COVID-19 diagnostics develops and grows.
•
Seasonality. Our ability to accurately forecast demand for our test kits could be negatively affected by many factors, including seasonal demand. We anticipate that we will experience fluctuations in customer and user demand based on seasonality, which for COVID-19, remains unknown. However, for example, because influenza typically occurs in the fall and winter seasons, we expect our forecasts of inventory for these seasons to reflect a significant increase in inventory relative to our forecasts for the spring and summer seasons. Inventory levels in excess of customer and user demand may result in inventory write-downs or write-offs, which would cause our gross margin to be adversely affected.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
On November 17, 2020 we received an EUA from the FDA for (1) prescription at-home use with self-collected nasal swab specimens in individuals aged 14 and older who are suspected of COVID-19 by their healthcare provider and (2) use at the POC, with self-collected nasal swab specimens in individuals aged 14 and older, and in individuals aged 13 and under when the specimen is collected by a healthcare provider at the POC. Subsequent to the EUA and through the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated net revenue of $0.3 million from the sale of COVID-19 test kits.
We will continue to develop our commercialization strategy of our COVID-19 test kit within POC and prescription at-home settings through partnerships with customers, such as hospital networks, payors, corporate senior living facilities and large employers.
In February 2021, we submitted an amended EUA application for our COVID-19 test kit to include asymptomatic people. Also, in February 2021, we submitted an EUA application for an OTC indication for our COVID-19 test kit. Additionally, we plan to develop a combination COVID-19 and influenza A and B viruses test kit for prescription at-home use and later an influenza test kit for OTC use.
Our ability to generate revenue will depend on our ability to maintain our current EUA, obtain FDA approvals for additional indications of, and successfully commercialize our current and any future test kits.
We currently derive all of our revenue from the sales of our test kits in accordance with the provisions of Accounting Standards Codifications, or ASC, Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Our product revenue is recognized upon the transfer of control of our test kits to the customer. We anticipate that we will experience fluctuations in customer and user demand based on seasonality, which for COVID-19 remains unknown. As a result, our revenue may fluctuate from quarter to quarter due to seasonality. Our revenue may also fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter due to a variety of factors, including the availability of reimbursement, the size and success of our sales force and the number of hospitals and physicians who are aware of and use our tests.
Costs of Revenue
Costs of revenue include cost of raw materials and supplies for our finished test kits, direct labor, contract manufacturing fees, in-bound and internal shipping and handling costs incurred in manufacturing our test kits, royalties, allocated overhead, and depreciation expense.
We expect that our costs of revenue will increase on an absolute basis as the number of COVID-19 test kits we sell increases. We expect that the cost per test kit will decrease over time due to anticipated volume discounts on outsourced manufacturing costs, materials and shipping costs, and through other volume efficiencies we may gain as the number of test kits manufactured increases. We expect our costs of revenue to fluctuate from quarter to quarter.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
We expect our gross profit to be affected by a variety of factors, including sales volume of our COVID-19 test kit, pricing pressures, the success of our cost-reduction strategies, the cost of test kit materials, manufacturing costs, and headcount. We expect our margin to increase over the long term to the extent we are successful in our ability to lower the costs associated with the production of our test kits, that includes expanding our current production capacity into a lower cost environment and automating much of the production process, as our test kits have been designed for automated production. If these efforts are successful, we believe we will lower production costs and will be able to increase our gross margin. While our gross margin may increase over the long term, we also anticipate it will likely fluctuate from quarter to quarter.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses since inception have substantially consisted of research and development costs and general and administrative costs. We had nominal selling expenses through December 31, 2020, although, we expect these to increase in the near-term.
Research and Development Expenses
We primarily perform our own research and development while obtaining supplemental resources from third parties to conduct our pre-clinical studies, clinical trials and manufacturing of test batches of test kits. The costs of these activities consist primarily of personnel related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, third-party consultants, costs associated with regulatory compliance and laboratory supplies and materials, along with other direct and allocated expenses such as facility costs, depreciation, and other shared expenses. We expense research and development costs in the periods in which they are incurred. At any one time, we may be working on the development of multiple test kits. Our internal resources, employees and allocated expenses are not directly tied to any one test kit and are typically deployed across multiple test kits. As such, we do not track internal
costs on a specific test kit basis. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars, but will vary as a percentage of revenue, as we continue to invest in development activities related to our current and future test kits and as our revenue increases as a result of sales of our COVID-19 test kits.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs, including stock-based compensation expense, accounting and legal expenses, consulting costs, insurance and allocated overhead including rent, depreciation and utilities.
We expect that our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase because of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and Nasdaq, additional insurance, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services such as accounting, legal, regulatory and tax. In addition, we expect that our selling expenses will increase as we establish our sales, sales support functions and marketing efforts due to the commercialization of our COVID-19 test kit. We also expect our administrative expenses to increase as we increase our headcount and expand our facilities and information technology to support our operations as a public company. We also expect to see an increase in our stock-based compensation expense due to the establishment of a new equity plan in February 2021 and the increase in our grant date fair values as a result of our public offering related to grants either in the form of restricted stock units or options. Our selling, general and administrative expenses may fluctuate from period to period due to seasonality.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of grant income, offset by interest expense, loss on extinguishment of debt and adjustment upon remeasurement of derivative liabilities and convertible notes.
We classify our derivatives and certain convertible notes as liabilities on our balance sheets and record changes in fair value at each balance sheet date with the corresponding change recorded as other income (expense).
Grant Income
To date, we have derived substantially all of our income from government grants. The income from these grants is included in other income, net in our statements of operations.
We earn grant income for performing tasks under research and development agreements with governmental agencies, such as BARDA in respect of our influenza test kit. Income derived from reimbursement of direct out-of-pocket expenses, overhead allocations and fringe benefits for research costs associated with government contracts are recorded within grant income. Grant income is recorded at the gross amount of the reimbursement. The direct costs associated with these reimbursements are reflected as a component of research and development expense in our statements of operations.
We expect that our grant income will decrease as we refocused our near-term business strategy to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and focus on the development of our COVID-19 test kit for additional indications and the fact that we have not performed any fundable research and development activities toward our influenza test kit since June 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of contractual and effective interest incurred on our outstanding convertible notes during the relevant periods.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
From July 2018 to January 2019, we issued and sold convertible promissory notes, or the 2018 Notes, in the aggregate principal amount of approximately $4.0 million. The aggregate principal amount and accrued interest on the outstanding 2018 Notes were converted into shares of our Series B preferred stock in March 2019 in connection with our Series B preferred stock financing. The incremental value of our Series B preferred stock issued compared to the carrying value of 2018 Notes was recognized as a loss on the extinguishment of debt during 2019.
From June 2020 to July 2020, we issued and sold convertible promissory notes, or the 2020A Notes, in the aggregate principal amount of approximately $11.1 million. The aggregate principal amount and accrued interest on the outstanding 2020A Notes were converted into shares of our Series C preferred stock in August 2020 in connection with our Series C preferred stock financing. As the 2020A Notes were held at fair value there was no difference between the issuance price of our Series C preferred stock and the fair value of the 2020A Notes, and therefore no loss on extinguishment of debt was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Remeasurement of Derivative Liabilities and Convertible Notes
The 2018 Notes contained embedded features that met the definition of derivatives. As a result, these embedded features were bifurcated from the 2018 Notes and are accounted for as liabilities and recorded at fair value. The derivative liabilities were remeasured at fair value until the 2018 Notes converted and changes in the fair value were recorded as a component of other income. Upon conversion of the 2018 Notes into shares of our Series B preferred stock in March 2019, the derivative liabilities were remeasured and extinguished.
In December 2020, we issued and sold convertible promissory notes in the aggregate principal amount of approximately $20.0 million, or the 2020B Notes. The 2020B Notes and the 2020A Notes are collectively referred to herein as the 2020 Notes. The 2020 Notes, met the conditions to be classified as liabilities under ASC 480-Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity and were recorded at fair value at issuance and their respective conversions. The change in fair value from issuance through conversion of the 2020A Notes into shares of our Series C preferred stock on August 7, 2020 were recognized in other income (expense), net on the statement of operations through the year then ended. The change in fair value of the 2020B Notes from issuance through year end December 31, 2020 were recognized in other income (expense), net on the statement of operations through the period then ended.
Provision for Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method to account for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against our deferred tax assets. Our provision for income taxes primarily consists of state tax expense.
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we continuously monitor the circumstances impacting the expected realization of our deferred tax assets. We consider all available evidence, including historical operating results in each jurisdiction, expectations and risks associated with estimates of future taxable income, and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in assessing the need for a valuation allowance. A full valuation allowance is established to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. These deferred tax assets primarily consist of net operating loss carryforwards and research and development tax credits. We intend to maintain such valuation allowance until sufficient evidence exists to support its reduction. Our deferred tax liabilities primarily consist of book and tax basis differences in fixed assets. The deferred tax assets, net of the valuation allowance, reduce the deferred tax liabilities in full, resulting in no deferred tax assets or liabilities recorded on the balance sheet. We make estimates and judgments about our future taxable income that are based on assumptions that are consistent with our plans and estimates. Should the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of our valuation allowance could be materially impacted. Changes in these estimates may result in
significant increases or decreases to our tax provision in a period in which such estimates are changed, which in turn would affect net income or loss.
We recognize the financial statement effects of a tax position when it is more likely than not, based on the technical merits, that the position will be sustained upon examination. Any interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions have not been material.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the significant components of our results of operations for the years presented.
NM = not meaningful
Net Sales, Cost of Products Sold and Gross Profit (Loss)
We began to generate sales during December 2020 after we received an EUA from the FDA for POC and prescription-at-home use of our COVID-19 test kit. We did not conduct revenue generating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased $13.2 million, or 115%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to increased expenses related to our development and clinical activities to support our initial EUA application with respect to our COVID-19 test kit. We supported research and development activities such as test kit development and testing, clinical trials and pre-commercial manufacturing related to our COVID-19 test kit through increased personnel-related expenses of $1.3 million, third-party consultants of $6.3 million, and $5.3 million in laboratory supplies and materials purchased, which was additionally supported by a $0.3 million in increased facilities costs allocation. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we had limited working capital and incurred less expenditures related to research and development for our influenza test kit. While certain costs of our research and development activities related to our influenza test kit were previously reimbursed through grants provided by government agencies such as BARDA, we are not reliant on future grant income to fund our current COVID-19 test kit programs. Therefore, we do not believe discontinuing our grant-related research and development activities will have a material impact on our planned operations.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $3.2 million, or 133%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to an increase in headcount of key, executive-level employees and professional expenses to support our research and development efforts, impending commercial activities and preparation for the initial public offering that closed on February 9, 2021.
Grant Income
Grant income decreased $4.0 million, or 65%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the stoppage of BARDA billing in June 2020 as we shifted our near-term business strategy from the development of influenza test kits to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest Expense
Interest expense, net decreased by an immaterial amount in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the conversion of our 2018 Notes for shares of our Series B preferred stock in the first quarter of 2019. As the 2020A Notes converted into shares of our Series C preferred stock in August 2020 shortly after their issuance, and the 2020B Notes were issued at December 2020 year end with nominal stated interest, we did not incur a significant amount of interest expense during the same period.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
We did not record any losses on extinguishment during the year ended December 31, 2020. The loss on extinguishment of debt was $0.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 as the 2018 Notes were converted into shares of our Series B preferred stock in the first quarter of 2019.
Remeasurement of Derivative Liabilities and Convertible Notes
The change in remeasurement of derivative liabilities and convertible notes increased $7.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to significant losses incurred on remeasurement of the 2020 Notes to fair value upon conversion in the case of the 2020A Notes and in the case of the 2020B Notes through the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Based on our current planned operations, we expect that our existing cash, including net proceeds from our IPO, will enable us to fund our business operations for at least 12 months from the date hereof. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Sources of Liquidity
We have incurred net losses since our inception. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred a net loss of $37.3 million and $8.5 million, respectively. We expect to incur additional losses and increased operating expenses in future periods. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $63.0 million. To date, we have generated only limited grant income and product revenue, and we may never achieve revenue sufficient to offset our expenses or at all.
Prior to our IPO, our primary sources of capital were from the sales and issuances of convertible notes, shares of preferred stock, grant income, and to a lesser extent, option exercises. As of December 31, 2020, we had $58.2 million in cash.
In December 2020, we issued and sold 2020B Notes in the aggregate principal amount of $20.0 million in a private placement, which, in addition to the accrued interest thereon, automatically converted into shares of our common stock at a conversion price equal to 80% of the IPO price per share. On February 9, 2021, we closed our IPO of 10,350,000 shares of common stock, including 1,350,000 shares issued pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares in the IPO, at a price to the public of $17.00 per share. The net proceeds to us from the IPO were $160.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $12.3 million and offering expenses of $3.5 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC, during the periods presented.
Uses of Liquidity
Our primary uses of cash are to fund our operations as we continue to grow our business. We will require a significant amount of cash to fund capital expenditures, inventory purchases and timing of accounts receivable as we grow our commercial infrastructure. We expect to continue to incur operating losses in the near term as our operating expenses will be increased to support the growth of our business. We expect that our selling, general and administrative expenses, and research and development expenses will continue to increase as we seek additional regulatory approvals and further develop test kits, increase our test kit manufacturing volume, expand our marketing efforts and increase our internal sales force to drive increased adoption of our test kits.
In January 2015, we entered into a lease for office, research and development space located in Emeryville, California that expires in March 2022. Pursuant to the same lease agreement, we leased additional square feet of office and development space in Emeryville, California that expires in January 2024. For the 12 month period ending December 31, 2021, we project that our fixed commitments will include $0.5 million of lease payments.
Pursuant to the Eiken Agreement we entered into in July 2020, we are obligated to make milestone payments upon the achievement of specified regulatory milestones as well as royalty payments. The future payments under this agreement are contingent upon future events, such as our achievement of specified milestones and product sales. We are currently unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving these milestones or generating future test kit sales. See Part I, Item 1 “Business-Intellectual Property-License Agreement with Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd” in this Annual Report
As of December 31, 2020, we had non-cancellable purchase commitments of $39.8 million, consisting primarily of $27.9 million of raw material purchase commitments and fixed assets related to expanding our manufacturing capacity, and $11.9 million pursuant to the Jabil MSA and Jabil TSA through January 31, 2021. Under the Jabil MSA, we are obligated to provide, on a monthly basis, a rolling 12-month forecast to Jabil as well as 12-months of historical aggregate end customer demand at the finished product level, when available, which will be used to constitute written purchase orders from us, and we are obligated to purchase the quantity of products that is required by the first four months of each forecast.
We also enter into contracts in the normal course of business with various vendors that generally provide for contract termination following a certain notice period. These contracts do not contain any minimum purchase commitments. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided, expenses incurred up to the date of cancellation and de minimis termination penalties.
We expect that our near and longer-term liquidity requirements will continue to consist of working capital and general corporate expenses associated with the growth of our business. Based on our current planned operations, we expect that our existing cash and net proceeds of $160.1 million from our IPO will enable us to fund our operating expenses for at least 12 months from the date of this filing. We have based our estimates as to how long we expect we will be able to fund our operations on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we would use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect, in which case we would be required to obtain
additional financing, which may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Furthermore, we may elect to raise additional capital on an opportunistic basis to fund operations. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. We may raise additional capital through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our existing stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through other third-party funding, collaborations agreements, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements or marketing and distribution arrangements, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or test kits or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, including severely diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates, and uncertainty about economic stability. If the equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult, more costly and more dilutive. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding when needed, we will need to re-evaluate our operating plan and may be forced to make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible, limit, suspend or curtail planned test kit development programs and commercialization efforts, cease operations entirely. Having insufficient funds may also require us to relinquish rights to technology that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves, or on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose. The foregoing actions and circumstances could materially adversely impact our business, results of operations and future prospects.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years indicated:
Cash Flows Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $32.5 million, consisting primarily of our net loss of $37.3 million and changes in our net operating assets and liabilities of $3.8 million, partially offset by adjustments for non-cash charges of $8.5 million. The non-cash charges were primarily driven by the loss incurred of $7.5 million on the remeasurement to fair value of the 2020B Notes and to a lesser extent by $0.7 million in share-based compensation expense and depreciation and amortization expense. The net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by $4.9 million of inventory purchases and $6.4 million of prepaid expenses and deferred costs related to our IPO, partially offset by collections of $1.6 million in grant income receivable and $6.5 million increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities. The increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities were largely due to increased expenditures in research and development and selling, general and administrative activities.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $7.1 million, consisting primarily of our net loss of $8.5 million and changes in our net operating assets and liabilities of $0.2 million,
partially offset by adjustments for non-cash charges of $1.6 million. Our non-cash charges resulted primarily from several non-cash expenses consisting of stock-based compensation, depreciation, remeasurement of derivative liabilities, reductions in our right-of-use assets and loss on extinguishment of debt. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.2 million resulted largely from a decrease of $0.7 million in grant income receivable partially offset by the increase of $0.5 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $18.8 million and $75,000 respectively, consisting of purchases of property and equipment. The increase was primarily due to investing in our manufacturing capabilities to support the commercialization of our COVID-19 test kit.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $107.8 million, consisting primarily of $76.1 million in proceeds from the issuance and sale of shares of our preferred stock and $31.1 million from the issuance of convertible debt.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $11.1 million, consisting of $10.8 million in proceeds from the issuance and sale of shares of our preferred stock
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Management Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K that have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported income generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our audited financial statements, included elsewhere in this Form 10-K, we believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2019, we adopted ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Under ASC 606, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps:
(i)
identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(ii)
identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(iii)
determine the transaction price;
(iv)
allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(v)
recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Under ASC 606, assuming all other revenue recognition criteria have been met, we recognize revenue for arrangements upon the transfer of control of our products to our customers, which is currently upon the shipment of the product to the customer under our standard terms and conditions, unless underlying customer agreements specify otherwise. There are no further performance obligations by us to the customer after shipment of the product. Control of our products is transferred at a point in time.
Revenue is measured based on the amount of consideration that we expect to receive as reduced by estimated discounts and allowances.
Inventories Produced in Preparation for Product Launches
We capitalize our inventories produced in preparation for product launches sufficient to support estimated initial market demand. Typically, capitalization of such inventory begins when positive results have been obtained for the clinical trials that the Company determines are necessary to support regulatory approval, uncertainties regarding ultimate regulatory approval have been significantly reduced and we determine it is probable that these capitalized costs will provide future economic benefit in excess of capitalized costs. The factors considered by us in evaluating these uncertainties include the receipt and analysis of positive clinical test results for the underlying product, results from meetings with the relevant regulatory authorities prior to the filing of regulatory applications, and the submission of the regulatory application. We closely monitor the status of each respective product within the regulatory approval process, including all relevant communication with regulatory authorities. If we are aware of any specific material risks or contingencies other than the normal regulatory review and approval process or if there are any specific issues identified relating to safety, efficacy, manufacturing, marketing or labeling, the related inventory would generally not be capitalized.
For inventories that are capitalized in preparation of product launch, anticipated future sales, expected approval date and shelf lives are evaluated in assessing realizability. The shelf life of a product is determined as part of the regulatory approval process; however, in evaluating whether to capitalize pre-launch inventory production costs, we consider the product stability data of all of the pre-approval production to date to determine whether there is adequate expected shelf life for the capitalized pre-launch production costs. Prior to obtaining the EUA for our COVID-19 test kit on November 17, 2020, we charged $2.3 million of preapproval inventory to research and development expense. After the receipt of the EUA in November, we account for all production item purchases as inventory in accordance with its standard inventories policy. Preapproval inventories previously recorded as research and development expense that are subsequently sold will have a zero cost of product.
Inventories
We value our inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value and determine the cost of inventory using the first-in, first-out method. Lower of cost or net realizable value is evaluated by considering obsolescence, excessive levels of inventory, deterioration and other factors.
In order to assess the ultimate realization of inventories, we are required to make judgments as to future demand requirements compared to current or committed inventory levels. We periodically review our inventories for shelf life, excess or obsolescence and writes-down obsolete or otherwise unmarketable inventory to its estimated net realizable value. If the actual net realizable value is less than that estimated us, or if it is determined that inventory utilization will further diminish based on estimates of demand, additional inventory write-downs may be required. Amounts written-down due to unmarketable inventory are recorded in cost of revenue and a new lower-cost basis for the inventory is established.
Grant Income
We earn grant income for performing tasks under research and development agreements with governmental agencies such as BARDA. Grant income derived from reimbursement of direct out-of-pocket expenses, overhead allocations and fringe benefits for research costs associated with government contracts and grants are recorded within grant income. Grant income is recorded at the gross amount of the reimbursement. The
direct costs associated with these reimbursements are reflected as a component of research and development expense in our statements of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock options and other stock-based awards granted to employees, directors and other service providers based on their fair value on the date of grant and recognize compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We recognize the impact of forfeitures on stock-based compensation expense as forfeitures occur. We apply the straight-line method of expense recognition to all awards with only service-based vesting conditions.
We estimate the fair value of each stock option grant on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the use of highly subjective assumptions including:
•
Expected Term-We have opted to use the “simplified method” for estimating the expected term of plain-vanilla options, whereby the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option (generally 10 years).
•
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free rate assumption is based on the U.S. Treasury instruments with maturities similar to the expected term of our stock options.
•
Expected Dividend-We have not issued any dividends and do not anticipate to issue dividends on our common stock. As a result, we have estimated the dividend yield to be zero.
•
Expected Volatility-Due to our limited operating history and a lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we have based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded. The historical volatility data was computed using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of the stock-based awards.
Determination of Fair Value of Common Stock
Prior to our IPO, as there had been no public market for our common stock to date, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by our board of directors as of the date of each option grant, with input from management, considering our most recently available third-party valuations of common stock and our board of directors’ assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. Historically, these independent third-party valuations of our equity instruments were performed contemporaneously with identified value inflection points, including recent preferred stock financings. These third-party valuations were performed in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, or the Practice Aid. The Practice Aid identifies various available methods for allocating the enterprise value across classes of capital stock in determining the fair value of our common stock at each valuation date. Based on our stage of development and other relevant factors, for valuations prior to January 2020, we determined that the option pricing method, or OPM, was the most appropriate method for estimating our enterprise value to determine the fair value of our common stock. The OPM treats common stock and preferred stock as call options on the total equity value of a company, with exercise prices based on the value thresholds at which the allocation among the various holders of a company’s securities changes. Under this method, the common stock has value only if the funds available for distribution to stockholders exceeded the value of the preferred stock liquidation preferences at the time of the liquidity event, such as a strategic sale or a merger. A discount for lack of marketability of the common stock is then applied to arrive at an indication of value for the common stock. Starting in January 2020, we determined that the hybrid method was the most appropriate method for determining the fair value of our common stock. The hybrid method is a probability-weighted expected return method, or PWERM, where the equity value in one or more scenarios is calculated using an OPM. The PWERM is a scenario-based methodology that estimates the fair value of common stock based upon an analysis of future values for the company, assuming various outcomes. The common
stock value is based on the probability-weighted present value of expected future investment returns considering each of the possible outcomes available as well as the rights of each class of stock. The future value of the common stock under each outcome is discounted back to the valuation date at an appropriate risk-adjusted discount rate and probability weighted to arrive at an indication of value for the common stock. In addition to considering the results of these independent third-party valuations, our board of directors considered various objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock as of each grant date, including:
•
the prices at which we sold shares of our preferred stock and the superior rights, preferences and privileges of our preferred stock relative to our common stock at the time of each grant;
•
the conversion features of the 2018 Notes and the 2020 Notes, including valuation terms;
•
our stage of development and outlook for the commercialization of our test kits and our business strategy;
•
the progress of our research and development programs, including the status and results of pre-clinical studies and clinical trials for our test kits;
•
external market conditions affecting the diagnostics industry and trends within the molecular diagnostics industry, including a review of the performance and metrics of guideline public companies;
•
our financial position, including cash on hand, and our historical and forecasted performance and operating results;
•
the lack of an active public market for our common stock and our preferred stock; and
•
the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering, or sale of our company in light of prevailing market conditions.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represented management’s best estimates, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if we had used significantly different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our common stock and our stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different.
As a public trading market for our common stock was established upon the initial trading of our common stock on February 5, 2021, it is no longer necessary for our board of directors to estimate the fair value of our common stock in connection with our accounting for granted stock options and other such awards we may grant, as the fair value of our common stock will be determined based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant.
As of December 31, 2020, the unrecognized stock-based compensation expense related to employee stock options was $2.6 million and is expected to be recognized as expense over a weighted-average period of approximately 1.6 years.
Accrued Research and Development Costs
We record accrued expenses for estimated costs of our research and development activities conducted by third-party service providers, which include clinical trial activities. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services or supplies provided but not yet invoiced and include these costs in accrued liabilities in the balance sheets and within research and development expense in the statements of operations. These expenses are a significant component of our research and development costs. We record accrued expenses for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed or supplies received and in accordance with agreements established with these vendors. Any payments made in advance of
services or supplies provided are recorded as prepaid assets, which are expensed as the services or supplies are received.
We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued estimates. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed could vary from actual results and result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. Our accrued expenses are dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from service providers, consultants and suppliers. For the periods presented, we have experienced no material differences between our accrued expenses and actual expenses.
Research and Development Expenses
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Research and development expenses include costs incurred for internal and sponsored research and development activities. Research and development expenses consist of salaries and benefits, including associated stock-based compensation, materials acquired prior to capitalization of inventory, and laboratory supplies and facility costs, as well as fees paid to other entities that conduct certain research and development activities on our behalf.
The above listing is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by U.S. GAAP. There are also areas in which our management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result. Please see our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which contain accounting policies and other disclosures required by U.S. GAAP.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards
See Note 2 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Emerging Growth Company Status
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, reduce certain reporting requirements for an “emerging growth company.” The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (1) are no longer an emerging growth company or (2) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies who have adopted new or revised accounting pronouncements.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (1) (a) December 31, 2026, (b) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion or (c) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period.