Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of the Results of Operations and Financial Condition
The information contained in this section should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and the information contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K under the headings “Risk Factors,” “Selected Financial Data,” and “Business.”
Overview
We provide expedition sailing and adventure travel experiences that include itineraries featuring up-close encounters with wildlife and nature, history and culture and promote guest empowerment and interactivity. Our mission is to offer life-changing adventures and wildlife experiences around the world and pioneer innovative ways to allow our guests to connect with exotic and remote places. Many of these expeditions involve travel to remote places, such as voyages to the Arctic, Antarctic, the Galapagos Islands, Alaska, Baja’s Sea of Cortez, the South Pacific, Costa Rica and Panama, polar bear tours in Churchill, Canada and Alaskan grizzly bear tours and African safaris.
We currently operate a fleet of nine owned expedition ships and five seasonal charter vessels under the Lindblad brand. We have a strategic business alliance with National Geographic founded on a shared interest in exploration, research, technology and conservation. This relationship includes a co-selling, co-marketing and branding arrangement whereby our owned vessels carry the National Geographic name and National Geographic sells our expeditions through its internal travel division. We collaborate with National Geographic on voyage planning to enhance the guest experience by having National Geographic experts, including photographers, writers, marine biologists, naturalists, field researchers and film crews, join our expeditions. Guests have the ability to interface with these experts through lectures, excursions, dining and other experiences throughout their voyage.
We deploy chartered vessels for various seasonal offerings and continually seek to optimize our charter fleet to balance our inventory with demand and maximized yields. We use our charter inventory as a mechanism to both increase travel options of our existing and prospective guests and also to test demand for certain areas and seasons to understand the potential for longer term deployments and additional vessel needs.
Management considers investments in new ships to be an important step to meet increasing demand for our expedition cruise offerings. The National Geographic Quest launched in 2017 and operates in Alaska, British Columbia and the Pacific Northwest during the summer months and voyages to the Channel Islands, Belize, Columbia, Costa Rica and Panama to provide expeditions for the Northern Hemisphere winter season. The National Geographic Venture launched in 2018 and operates primarily in the Channel Islands, Baja California and the Sea of Cortez during the Northern Hemisphere winter seasons and Alaska, British Columbia and the Pacific Northwest during the summer. The National Geographic Endurance launched in 2020 and will operate primarily in the Arctic and Antarctic. Our new polar ice class vessel, the National Geographic Resolution, is scheduled to be delivered in the fourth quarter of 2021 and will operate primarily in the Arctic and Antarctic.
COVID-19 Business Update
Due to the spread of the COVID-19 virus and the effects of travel restrictions around the world, we have suspended or rescheduled the majority of our expeditions departing March 16, 2020 through May 31, 2021. We have been working with guests to amend travel plans and refund payments, as applicable. Our ships are currently being maintained with minimally required crew on-board to ensure they comply with all necessary regulations and can be fully put back into service quickly as needed. In accordance with local regulations, we closed our offices and most employees are working remotely to maintain general business operations, to provide assistance to existing and potential guests and to maintain information technology systems.
We moved quickly to implement a comprehensive plan to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 and preserve and enhance our liquidity position. We are employing a variety of cost reduction and cash preservation measures, while accessing available capital under our existing debt facilities and through the issuance of preferred stock, while exploring additional sources of capital and liquidity. These measures include the following operating expense and capital expenditure reductions:
●
Significantly reduced ship and land-based expedition costs including crew payroll, land costs, fuel and food. All ships have been safely laid up.
●
Lowered expected annual maintenance capital expenditures by over $15 million, savings of more than 70% from originally planned levels.
●
Meaningfully reduced general and administrative expenses through staff furloughs, payroll reductions and the elimination of all non-essential travel, office expenses and discretionary spending.
●
Suspended the majority of planned advertising and marketing spend.
●
Suspended all repurchases of common stock under the stock repurchase plan.
Bookings Trends
We were off to a strong start to the year with Lindblad segment bookings at the end of February up 25% for the full year 2020 as compared to the same point a year ago for 2019, and had sold 86% of our originally projected guest ticket revenues for the year. Since that point, we have experienced a substantial impact from the COVID-19 virus including elevated cancellations and softness in near-term demand. Despite the COVID-19 impact, we still have substantial advanced bookings for future travel. Bookings for the second half of 2021 are 1% ahead of bookings for 2020 as of the same date a year ago, despite less available guest nights, and 33% ahead of bookings for 2019 as of the same date two years ago. Bookings for the full year 2022 are 32% ahead of the bookings for 2021 as of the same date a year ago. We continue to see new bookings for future travel including over $110.0 million since March 1, 2020, and we are receiving deposits and final payments for future travel.
For 2020 and 2021 voyages that have been cancelled or rescheduled, we are providing future travel credits with incremental value or full refunds, as applicable, to our paid guests. As of February 25, 2021, the majority of guests have opted for future travel credits.
Balance Sheet and Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, we had $187.5 million in unrestricted cash and $17.0 million in restricted cash primarily related to deposits on future travel originating from U.S. ports. During the first quarter of 2020 we drew down $45.0 million under our revolving credit facility to provide working capital and general corporate purposes given the uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic and borrowed $107.7 million under our first export credit agreement in conjunction with final payment on delivery of the National Geographic Endurance in March 2020. During April 2020, we drew down $30.6 million under our second export credit agreement in conjunction with the third installment payment on the National Geographic Resolution, scheduled for delivery in the fourth quarter of 2021.
During May 2020, we amended our $2.5 million promissory note, changing the maturity date of the principal payments to be due in three equal installments, with the first payment made on December 22, 2020, the second due on December 22, 2021 and the final payment due on December 22, 2022.
During June 2020, we amended our export credit agreements to defer approximately $9.0 million in aggregate scheduled amortization payments originally due in June 2020 through March 2021 and to suspend the total net leverage ratio covenant from June 2020 through June 2021. On August 7, 2020, we amended our term loan and revolving credit facilities to waive the application of the total net leverage ratio covenant through June 2021. In connection with the amendment, the interest rate of the term loan has been increased 125 basis points, to be paid-in-kind at maturity, a LIBOR minimum of 0.75% has been added to the term loan and revolving credit facilities and certain covenants have been amended to be more restrictive.
During August 2020, we raised $85.0 million in gross proceeds through the private placement issuance of 85,000 shares of Series A Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock, that carries a 6.0% annual dividend, which is payable in kind for two years and thereafter in cash or in-kind at the Company’s option. The redeemable convertible preferred stock is convertible into shares of Lindblad common stock at a conversion price of $9.50 per share, representing a premium of 23% to Lindblad’s 30-day trading volume weighted average price on the date of issuance. The holders may request redemption of the Preferred Stock at the six-year anniversary of the issuance.
During December 2020, we amended our term loan and revolving credit facilities, and borrowed an incremental $85.0 million under the amended term loan through the Main Street Expanded Loan Facility program. The incremental borrowing carries an interest rate of LIBOR plus 3.0% and matures December 2025 with no early payment restrictions.
As of December 31, 2020, we had a total debt position of $496.5 million and were in compliance with all of our debt covenants currently in effect. We have no material debt maturities until 2023.
We estimate our monthly cash usage while our vessels are not in operations to be approximately $10-15 million including ship and office operating expenses, necessary capital expenditures and interest and principal payments. This excludes guest payments for future travel and cash refunds requested on previously made guest payments. We continue to evaluate additional strategies to enhance our liquidity position which may include, but are not limited to, further reductions in operating expenses, capital expenditures and administrative costs as well as additional financings.
We have not previously experienced a complete cessation of our operations and, as a consequence, our ability to predict the impact of such cessation on our costs and future prospects is limited. Given the dynamic nature of this situation, we cannot reasonably estimate the impacts of the COVID-19 virus on our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, plans and growth for the foreseeable future. It is unknown when travel restrictions and various border closures will be lifted and what the demand for expedition travel will be once these restrictions are no longer in place. The estimates for monthly cash usage reflect our current forecast for operating costs, capital expenditures and expected debt and interest payments. Based on current liquidity, the actions taken to date and our current forecast, which assumes rescheduled operations starting in June 2021 and a ramp up in operations throughout 2021, we believe that our liquidity should be adequate to meet our obligations for the next 12 months from March 12, 2021, the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Return to Operations
We already have a robust set of operating protocols and, in preparation for the resumption of operations, have been continuously and proactively working in close cooperation with various medical policy experts and public health authorities to ensure our procedures and protocols for health and safety onboard our vessels are up-to-date with the latest medical guidelines to mitigate the potential impacts of the COVID-19 virus. These protocols encompass, but are not limited to, medical care, screening, testing, social distancing, personal protective equipment, and sanitization during all aspects of an expedition.
While it is uncertain when we will return to operations, we believe there are a variety of strategic advantages that should enable us to deploy our ships safely and quickly once travel restrictions have been lifted. The most notable is the size of our owned and operated vessels which range from 48 to 148 passengers, allowing for a highly controlled environment that includes stringent cleaning protocols. The small nature of our ships should also allow us to efficiently and effectively test our guests and crew prior to boarding. On average, we estimate it will only take a few thousand tests a month to ensure all guests and crew across our entire fleet have been tested. Additionally, the majority of our expeditions take place in remote locations where human interactions are limited, so there is less opportunity for external influence. We also have the ability to be flexible with regards to existing itineraries and are actively investigating additional itinerary opportunities both internationally and domestically. Lastly, our guests are explorers by nature, eager to travel and have historically been very resilient following periods of uncertainty.
Financial Presentation
The discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition are organized as follows:
●
a description of certain line items and operational and financial metrics we utilize to assist us in managing our business;
●
a comparable discussion of our consolidated and segment results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018;
●
a discussion of our liquidity and capital resources, including future capital and contractual commitments and potential funding sources; and
●
a review of our critical accounting policies.
Description of Certain Line Items
Tour revenues
Tour revenues consist of the following:
●
Guest ticket revenues recognized from the sale of guest tickets; and
●
Other tour revenues from the sale of pre- or post-expedition excursions, hotel accommodations and land-based expeditions; air transportation to and from the ships, goods and services rendered onboard that are not included in guest ticket prices, trip insurance and cancellation fees.
Cost of tours
Cost of tours includes the following:
●
Direct costs associated with revenues, including cost of pre- or post-expedition excursions, hotel accommodations and land-based expeditions, air and other transportation expenses and cost of goods and services rendered onboard;
●
Payroll costs and related expenses for shipboard and expedition personnel;
●
Food costs for guests and crew, including complimentary food and beverage amenities for guests;
●
Fuel costs and related costs of delivery, storage and safe disposal of waste; and
●
Other tour expenses, such as land costs, port costs, repairs and maintenance, equipment expense, drydock, ship insurance and charter hire costs.
Selling and marketing
Selling and marketing expenses include commissions, royalties and a broad range of advertising and promotional expenses.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses include the cost of shoreside vessel support and other administrative functions, including salaries and related benefits, credit card commissions, professional fees and rent.
Operational and Financial Metrics
We use a variety of operational and financial metrics, including non-GAAP financial measures, such as Adjusted EBITDA, Net Yield, Occupancy and Net Cruise Cost, to enable us to analyze our performance and financial condition. We utilize these financial measures to manage our business on a day-to-day basis and believe that they are the most relevant measures of performance. Some of these measures are commonly used in the cruise and tourism industry to evaluate performance. We believe these non-GAAP measures provide expanded insight to assess revenue and cost performance, in addition to the standard GAAP-based financial measures. There are no specific rules or regulations for determining non-GAAP measures, and as such, our non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to measures used by other companies within the industry.
The presentation of non-GAAP financial information should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. You should read this discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition together with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto also included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Adjusted EBITDA is net income (loss) excluding depreciation and amortization, net interest expense, other income (expense), income tax (expense) benefit, (gain) loss on foreign currency, (gain) loss on transfer of assets, reorganization costs, and other supplemental adjustments. Other supplemental adjustments include certain non-operating items such as stock-based compensation, executive severance costs, the National Geographic fee amortization, debt refinancing costs, acquisition-related expenses and other non-recurring charges. We believe Adjusted EBITDA, when considered along with other performance measures, is a useful measure as it reflects certain operating drivers of the business, such as sales growth, operating costs, selling and administrative expense, and other operating income and expense. We believe Adjusted EBITDA helps provide a more complete understanding of the underlying operating results and trends and an enhanced overall understanding of our financial performance and prospects for the future. Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be a measure of liquidity or cash flows from operations or a measure comparable to net income as it does not take into account certain requirements, such as unearned passenger revenues, capital expenditures and related depreciation, principal and interest payments, and tax payments. Our use of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other companies within the industry.
The following metrics apply to our Lindblad segment:
Adjusted Net Cruise Cost represents Net Cruise Cost adjusted for Non-GAAP other supplemental adjustments which include certain non-operating items such as stock-based compensation, the National Geographic fee amortization and acquisition-related expenses.
Available Guest Nights is a measurement of capacity and represents double occupancy per cabin (except single occupancy for a single capacity cabin) multiplied by the number of cruise days for the period. We also record the number of guest nights available on our limited land programs in this definition.
Gross Cruise Cost represents the sum of cost of tours plus selling and marketing expenses, and general and administrative expenses.
Gross Yield per Available Guest Night represents tour revenues divided by Available Guest Nights.
Guest Nights Sold represents the number of guests carried for the period multiplied by the number of nights sailed within the period.
Maximum Guests is a measure of capacity and represents the maximum number of guests in a period and is based on double occupancy per cabin (except single occupancy for a single capacity cabin).
Net Cruise Cost represents Gross Cruise Cost excluding commissions and certain other direct costs of guest ticket revenues and other tour revenues.
Net Cruise Cost Excluding Fuel represents Net Cruise Cost excluding fuel costs.
Net Yield represents tour revenues less commissions and direct costs of other tour revenues.
Net Yield per Available Guest Night represents Net Yield divided by Available Guest Nights.
Number of Guests represents the number of guests that travel with us in a period.
Occupancy is calculated by dividing Guest Nights Sold by Available Guest Nights.
Voyages represent the number of ship expeditions completed during the period.
Foreign Currency Translation
The U.S. dollar is the functional currency in our foreign operations and re-measurement adjustments and gains or losses resulting from foreign currency transactions are recorded as foreign exchange gains or losses in the consolidated statements of operations.
Seasonality
Lindblad segment tour revenues from the sale of guest tickets are mildly seasonal, historically larger in the first and third quarters. The seasonality of our operating results increases due to our vessels being taken out of service for scheduled maintenance or drydocking, which is typically during non-peak demand periods, in the second and fourth quarters. Our drydock schedules are subject to cost and timing differences from year-to-year due to the availability of shipyards for certain work, drydock locations based on ship itineraries, operating conditions experienced especially in the polar regions, and the applicable regulations of class societies in the maritime industry, which require more extensive reviews periodically. Drydocking impacts operating results by reducing tour revenues and increasing cost of tours. Natural Habitat is a seasonal business, with the majority of its tour revenue earned in the third and fourth quarters from its summer season departures and polar bear tours.
Results of Operations - Consolidated
We reported consolidated tour revenues, cost of tours, operating expenses, operating income and net income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 as shown in the following table:
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 - Consolidated
Tour Revenues
Tour revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $260.7 million, or 76%, to $82.4 million compared to $343.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. At the Lindblad segment, tour revenues decreased by $202.8 million, primarily related to cancelled, disrupted and rescheduled expeditions scheduled to depart after March 16, 2020 due to COVID-19. At the Natural Habitat segment, tour revenues decreased $57.9 million over the prior year period, primarily related to cancelled, disrupted and rescheduled trips due to COVID-19.
Cost of Tours
Total cost of tours for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $93.7 million, or 56%, to $72.9 million compared to $166.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. At the Lindblad segment, cost of tours decreased $62.4, primarily related to rescheduled expeditions due to COVID-19, partially offset by costs incurred while ships are laid up and from the addition of the National Geographic Endurance to our fleet in March 2020. At the Natural Habitat segment, cost of tours decreased $31.2, primarily due to cancelled, disrupted and rescheduled trips directly related to COVID-19.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $17.2 million to $45.5 million compared to $62.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. At the Lindblad segment, general and administrative expenses decreased $10.6 million from the prior year primarily due to reduced personnel costs and credit card commissions related to the disruption of operations due to COVID-19. At the Natural Habitat segment, general and administrative expenses decreased $6.6 million primarily due to a decrease in personnel costs related to the disruption of operations due to COVID-19.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses decreased $34.6 million, or 63%, to $20.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $54.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. At the Lindblad segment, selling and marketing expenses decreased $30.9 million, primarily due to lower commission expenses related to the impact of COVID-19 on revenue and decreased advertising expenditures. At the Natural Habitat segment, selling and marketing expenses decreased $3.7 million, primarily driven by a decrease in advertising expenditures.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $6.3 million, or 25%, to $32.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $25.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the addition of the National Geographic Endurance to the fleet in March 2020.
Other (Expense) Income
Other expenses were $21.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020﻿, compared to $12.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $9.2 million increase was primarily due to the following factors:
●
A $4.8 million loss in foreign currency translation in 2020 due primarily to a loss of $5.3 million on the maturity of a foreign currency hedge related to the installment payment for the National Geographic Resolution, compared to a $0.1 million gain in 2019.
●
A $4.4 million increase in interest expense, net to $16.7 million in 2020, primarily due to increased borrowings related to our new vessel builds, the draw down under the revolving credit facility during the first quarter and an increase in rates under the term loan.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 - Consolidated
Tour Revenues
Tour revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $33.4 million, or 11%, to $343.1 million compared to $309.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. At the Lindblad segment, tour revenues increased by $26.1 million driven primarily by an increase in Available Guest Nights during 2019 due to the addition of the National Geographic Venture to our fleet in the fourth quarter of 2018. At the Natural Habitat segment, tour revenues increased $7.3 million over the prior year period primarily due to additional departures, increased travelers and itinerary changes that drove higher average pricing.
Cost of Tours
Total cost of tours for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $12.9 million, or 8%, to $166.6 million compared to $153.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. At the Lindblad segment, cost of tours increased $10.5 million primarily due to incremental costs related to the National Geographic Venture and higher charter costs, partially offset by lower drydock expense. At the Natural Habitat segment, cost of tours increased $2.4 million due to additional departures.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $0.2 million to $62.7 million compared to $62.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. At the Lindblad segment, general and administrative expenses decreased $2.3 million from the prior year primarily as a result of lower value-added tax (“VAT”) expense, a decrease in stock-based compensation expense and the absence of debt refinancing costs incurred in 2018, partially offset by costs incurred related to the 2019 exchange of our previously outstanding warrants for our common stock, higher personnel costs and increased credit card fees associated with higher bookings. At the Natural Habitat segment, general and administrative expenses increased $2.1 million primarily due to increased personnel costs.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses increased $7.8 million, or 17%, to $54.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $47.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to a $6.6 million increase at the Lindblad segment driven by higher advertising spend, costs related to implementation of our new reservation and customer relationship management systems and increased commission expense associated with the higher tour revenues. At the Natural Habitat segment, selling and marketing expenses increased $1.2 million primarily driven by an increase in advertising expenditures and commission expense.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $5.0 million, or 24%, to $25.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $20.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily related to a full year of depreciation on the National Geographic Venture.
Other (Expense) Income
Other expenses were $12.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019﻿, compared to $13.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The $0.9 million decrease was primarily due to the following factors:
●
In 2019, we recorded an $0.1 million gain in foreign currency translation compared to a loss of $2.2 million in 2018 due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar primarily in relation to the Canadian dollar, South African rand and the euro in the same period a year ago.
●
Interest expense, net, increased $1.5 million to $12.3 million in 2019 from $10.8 million in 2018 due to borrowings and the commitment fees under our senior secured credit agreements and related foreign exchange hedge expenses, partially offset by lower interest rates on our term loan facility and higher capitalized interest for the National Geographic Endurance and the National Geographic Resolution.
Results of Operations - Segments
Selected information for our segments is below. The presentation of non-GAAP financial information should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Results of Operations - Lindblad Segment
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Tour Revenues
Tour revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $202.8 million, or 74%, to $69.6 million compared to $272.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by cancelled, disrupted and rescheduled expeditions due to COVID-19.
Operating Income
Operating income decreased $104.8 million to a loss of $78.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to income of $26.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by lower revenue from cancelled, disrupted and rescheduled voyages due to COVID-19 and costs associated with adding the National Geographic Endurance to the fleet in March 2020.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Tour Revenues
Tour revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $26.1 million, or 11%, to $272.4 million compared to $246.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was driven by higher guest ticket revenue primarily from an increase in Available Guest Nights due to the addition to our fleet of the National Geographic Venture in the fourth quarter of 2018﻿. Additionally, Net Yield per Available Guest Night for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased to $1,051 compared to $1,044 for the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily driven by price increases and changes in itineraries. Occupancy of 91% was in line with the prior year as increased demand filled the additional capacity from the National Geographic Venture.
Operating Income
Operating income increased $6.4 million to $26.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $19.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily driven by a full year of operations of the National Geographic Venture, as well as lower VAT expense and a decline in stock-based compensation expense, partially offset by higher selling and marketing expenditures, increased personnel costs, higher credit card fees associated with revenue growth and costs related to the warrant exchange.
Results of Operations - Natural Habitat Segment
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2019
Tour Revenues
Tour revenues decreased $57.9 million, or 82%, to $12.7 million compared to $70.7 million in 2019, due primarily to cancelled, disrupted and rescheduled expeditions due to COVID-19.
Operating Income
Operating income decreased $16.8 million to a loss of $9.8 million in 2020 compared to income of $7.0 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily a result of cancelled, disrupted and rescheduled expeditions due to COVID-19.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2018
Tour Revenues
Tour revenues increased $7.3 million, or 11%, to $70.7 million compared to $63.4 million in 2018 primarily due to additional departures, increased travelers and itinerary changes that drove higher average pricing.
Operating Income
Operating income increased $1.5 million, or 26%, to $7.0 million in 2019 compared to $5.5 million in 2018 primarily due to the growth in tour revenues, partially offset by higher operating costs related to the additional departures, as well as increased personnel expenses and marketing costs to support future growth initiatives.
Adjusted EBITDA - Consolidated
The following table outlines the reconciliation to Net income and calculation of consolidated Adjusted EBITDA. The presentation of non-GAAP financial information should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Reconciliation of Net Income to Adjusted EBITDA
The following tables outline the reconciliation for each segment from operating income to Adjusted EBITDA:
Reconciliation of Operating Income to Adjusted EBITDA
Guest Metrics - Lindblad Segment
The following tables set forth our Guest Metrics for the Lindblad segment. Please refer to our Description of Certain Line Items above for the specific definition by line item and segment. The presentation of non-GAAP financial information should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP.
The following table reconciles operating income to our Net Yield Guest Metric for the Lindblad Segment.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Due to the spread of the COVID-19 virus and the effects of travel restrictions around the world, we suspended or rescheduled the majority of expeditions and fleet operations departing March 16, 2020 through May 31, 2021. We have been working with guests to reschedule travel plans and refund payments, as applicable. The COVID-19 pandemic has already had a material negative impact on our operations and financial results and we expect the evolving pandemic to have ongoing material negative effects on operations, financial results and liquidity. Given the dynamic nature of this situation, we cannot reasonably estimate the impacts of the COVID-19 virus on our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, plans and growth for the foreseeable future. It is unknown when travel restrictions and various border closures will be lifted and what the demand for expedition travel will be once these restrictions are no longer in place.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $496.5 million in long-term debt obligations, including the current portion of long-term debt. We estimate that our monthly cash usage while our vessels are not in operations is approximately $10-15 million, excluding guest payments for future travel and cash refunds requested on previously made guest payments. To date, the majority of guests on rescheduled voyages have requested future travel credits. Additionally, we continue to see deposits for future travel. We believe that our cash on hand, our Second Export Credit Agreement and expected future operating cash inflows will be sufficient to fund operations, debt service requirements, and necessary capital expenditures. However, there can be no assurance that we will commence operating in the near term or if we do commence operations, that the level of initial demand will generate cash flows from operations will be sufficient enough to fund future obligations. We continue to evaluate additional strategies to enhance our liquidity position which may include, but are not limited to, further reductions in operating expenses, capital expenditures and administrative costs as well as additional financings.
Sources and Uses of Cash for the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Net cash used in operating activities was $92.3 million in 2020 compared to $62.6 million provided by operations in 2019. The $154.8 million decrease was primarily due to the rescheduling of expeditions due to COVID-19 pandemic. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $6.2 million in 2019 to $62.6 million from $56.4 million in 2018 primarily due to improved operating results.
Net cash used in investing activities was $155.5 million in 2020 compared to $100.1 million in 2019. The $55.4 million increase was mainly due to the $59.4 million increase in purchases of property and equipment in 2020, primarily related to spend on the two new polar ice-class vessels. Net cash used in investing activities was $100.1 million in 2019 compared to $54.3 million in
2018. The $45.7 million increase was mainly due to the $41.7 million increase in purchases of property and equipment in 2019, primarily related to spend on the two new polar ice-class vessels.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $343.0 million in 2020 compared to $24.6 million in 2019. The $318.4 million increase in cash provided was primarily due to borrowing $107.7 million under the first senior secured credit agreement for the final contracted payment of the National Geographic Endurance, $85.0 million generated from the issuance of Preferred Stock, $85.0 million incremental borrowing under our Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement through the Main Street Expanded Loan Facility program, a $45.0 million drawdown of our revolving credit facility and borrowing $30.6 million under the second senior secured credit agreement for a contracted installment payment on the National Geographic Resolution, partially offset by the 2019 borrowing of $30.5 million under the second senior secured credit agreement for a contracted installment payment on the National Geographic Resolution. Cash provided by financing activities of $24.6 million in 2019 compared to $16.5 million in 2018. The $8.1 million increase was primarily due to lower deferred financing fee payments in 2019, a reduction in stock and warrant repurchases in 2019 compared to 2018, including tax withholding on vested grants, and borrowings under a senior secured credit agreement associated with new builds, offset by the net proceeds from debt financing in 2018.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, our contractual obligations were as follows:
__________
(a) Long-term debt obligations include future payments related to the Second Export Credit Agreement based on the $61.1 million principal outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and the scheduled delivery date of the National Geographic Resolution during the fourth quarter 2021.
Funding Sources and Needs
Debt Facilities
Credit Facility
On March 27, 2018, we entered into the Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Amended Credit Agreement”) providing for a refinancing and amendment of the terms of our prior secured credit facility. The Amended Credit Agreement provided for a $200.0 million senior secured term facility (the “Term Facility”), maturing March 27, 2025, and a $45.0 million senior secured incremental revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Facility”), which includes a $5.0 million letter of credit sub-facility. During March 2020, we drew down the entire Revolving Facility which matures in March 2023.
In connection with the Amended Credit Agreement, we capitalized $4.2 million related to lender and third-party fees. In addition, the entry into the Amended Credit Agreement was considered a debt modification with a partial extinguishment, as a result we expensed $1.0 million of related costs during the year ended December 31, 2018, which is included in general and administrative expenses on the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. Our obligations under the Amended Credit Agreement remain secured by substantially all of our assets.
On August 7, 2020, we amended our Term Facility and Revolving Facility to waive the application of the total net leverage ratio covenant through June 2021. In connection with the amendment, the interest rate of the term loan has been increased 125 basis points, to be paid-in-kind at maturity, a LIBOR minimum of 0.75% has been added to the term loan and revolving credit facilities and certain covenants have been amended to be more restrictive. Borrowings under the Term Facility, as amended, bear interest at an adjusted Intercontinental Exchange (“ICE”) Benchmark administration LIBOR, with a minimum of 0.75%, plus a spread of 4.75%, for an aggregated rate of 5.50% as of December 31, 2020. The Revolving Facility bears interest at an adjusted ICE Benchmark administration LIBOR, with a minimum of 0.75%, plus a spread of 3.00%, for an aggregated rate of 3.75% as of December 31, 2020.
On December 10, 2020, we amended our term loan and revolving credit facilities to provide for the borrowing of a new tranche of incremental term loans under the Amended Credit Agreement in an amount of $85.0 million, maturing on December 11, 2025, made under the Main Street Expanded Loan Facility (the “Main Street Loan”). The Main Street Loan shall bear interest at a rate per annum of LIBOR for an interest period of 3-months plus 3.00%, for an aggregated rate of 3.24% as of December 31, 2020. Interest shall be paid-in-kind for the first year after the effective date of the Third Amendment and the principal shall amortize at a rate of 15% in each of the third and fourth years after the effective date of the Third Amendment, with the remaining amounts to be paid at maturity. We may voluntarily prepay the Main Street Loan at any time and from time to time, without premium or penalty, other than customary “breakage costs” and fees for LIBOR-based loans.
In 2018, we entered into interest rate cap agreements to hedge a portion of our exposure to interest rate movements and manage our interest rate expense related to the Term Facility.
The Amended Credit Agreement contains financial covenants that, among other things, (i) require us to maintain a total net leverage ratio defined as on any date of determination, the ratio of total debt on such date less up to $50.0 million of the unrestricted cash and cash equivalents to Adjusted EBITDA, as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement, for the trailing 12-month period of 5.0 to 1.00 until June 30, 2022 when the total net leverage ratio shall be 4.75 to 1.00 thereafter; (ii) limit the amount of indebtedness we may incur generally and specifically for intercompany debt, debt incurred to finance acquisitions and improvements, for capital and synthetic lease obligations, for standby letters of credit, and in connection with refinancing; (iii) limit the amount we may spend in connection with certain types of investments; and (iv) require the delivery of certain periodic financial statements and an operating budget. The net leverage ratios covenant of Amended Credit Agreement has been waived through June 2021. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants currently in effect.
Senior Secured Credit Agreements
On January 8, 2018, we entered into a senior secured credit agreement (the “Export Credit Agreement”) with Citibank, N.A., London Branch (“Citi”) and Eksportkreditt Norge AS (together with Citi, the “Lenders”). Pursuant to the Export Credit Agreement, in March 2020 we borrowed $107.7 million for the purpose of providing financing for up to 80% of the purchase price of our new polar ice-class vessel, the National Geographic Endurance. Seventy percent of the loan is guaranteed by Garantiinstituttet for Eksportkreditt, the official export credit agency of Norway. The loan amortizes quarterly based on a twelve-year profile, with 70% maturing over twelve years from drawdown, and 30% maturing over five years from drawdown. The Export Credit Agreement bears interest at a floating interest rate equal to three-month LIBOR plus a margin of 3.00% per annum, or 3.22% for the period covered as of December 31, 2020.
On April 8, 2019, we entered into a senior secured credit agreement (the “Second Export Credit Agreement”) with the Lenders. Pursuant to the Second Export Credit Agreement, the Lenders have agreed to make available to us, at our option and subject to certain conditions, a loan in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $122.8 million for the purpose of providing pre- and post- delivery financing for up to 80% of the purchase price of our new expedition ice-class cruise vessel, the National Geographic Resolution, scheduled to be delivered in the fourth quarter of 2021. The loan amortizes quarterly based on a twelve-year profile, with 70% maturing over twelve years from drawdown, and 30% maturing over five years from drawdown. Additionally, 70% percent of the loan will be guaranteed by Garantiinstituttet for Eksportkreditt. In September 2019 and April 2020, we drew approximately $30.5 million and $30.6 million, respectively, under the Second Export Credit Agreement for the second and third contracted payments, respectively, on the National Geographic Resolution. The Second Export Credit Agreement bears a variable interest rate equal to three-month LIBOR plus a margin of 3.00% per annum, or 3.24% for the period covered as of December 31, 2020. After completion of the vessel, the Second Export Credit Agreement, at our option, will bear an interest rate of either a fixed rate of 6.36% or a variable rate equal to three-month LIBOR plus a margin of 3.00% per annum.
During 2019, we entered into foreign exchange forward contracts, designated as cash flow hedges, to hedge our exposure to the Norwegian kroner (“NOK”), related to our installment payments under the contract to purchase the National Geographic Resolution.
During June 2020, we amended our export credit agreements to defer approximately $9.0 million in aggregate scheduled amortization payments originally due in June 2020 through March 2021 and to suspend the total net leverage ratio covenant from June 2020 through June 2021. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants currently in effect.
The Export Credit Agreement and Second Export Credit Agreement contains financial covenants that, among other things, require us to maintain a total net leverage ratio defined as on any date of determination, the ratio of total debt on such date, less up to $50.0 million of the unrestricted cash and cash equivalents to Adjusted EBITDA, as defined in the Export Credit Agreement, for the trailing 12-month period of 5.25 to 1.00.
Equity
Preferred Stock
On August 31, 2020, we issued and sold 85,000 shares of Series A Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock, par value of $0.0001, (“Preferred Stock”) for $1,000 per share for gross proceeds of $85.0 million. The Preferred Stock has senior and preferential ranking to our common stock. The Preferred Stock is entitled to cumulative dividends of 6.00% per annum, and for the first two years, the dividends will be paid-in-kind. After the second anniversary of the issuance date, the dividends may be paid-in-kind or be paid in cash at our option. The Preferred Stock is convertible at any time, at the holder’s election, into a number of shares of our common stock equal to the quotient obtained by dividing the then-current accrued value by the conversion price of $9.50. At any time after the third anniversary of the issuance, we may, at our option, convert all, but not less than all, of the Preferred Stock into common stock if the closing price of shares of common stock is at least 150% of the conversion price for 20 out of 30 consecutive trading days. The number of shares of common stock received in such conversion shall be equal to the quotient obtained by dividing the then-current accrued value by the conversion price. At the six-year anniversary of the closing date, each investor has the right to request that we repurchase their Preferred Stock and any Preferred Stock not requested to be repurchased shall be converted into our common shares equal to the quotient obtained by dividing the then-current accrued value by the conversion price.
Funding Needs
Similar to others in the industry, we have historically operated with a meaningful working capital deficit. This deficit is mainly attributable to the fact that, under our business model, a vast majority of guest ticket receipts are collected in advance of the applicable expedition date. These advance passenger receipts remain a current liability until the expedition date and the cash generated from these advance receipts is used interchangeably with cash on hand from other cash from operations. The cash received as advanced receipts can be used to fund operating expenses for the applicable future expeditions or otherwise, pay down credit facilities, make long-term investments or any other use of cash. As of December 31, 2020 we had working capital of $73.4﻿ million and as of December 31, 2019 we had a working capital deficit of $36.3 million. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash and cash equivalents, excluding restricted cash, of $187.5 million and $101.6 million, respectively.
Our Board of Directors approved a stock and warrant repurchase plan (“Repurchase Plan”) in November 2015 and increased the repurchase plan to $35.0 million in November 2016. The Repurchase Plan authorizes us to purchase from time to time our outstanding common stock and our previously outstanding warrants. Any shares and warrants purchased will be retired. The Repurchase Plan has no time deadline and will continue until otherwise modified or terminated at the sole discretion of our Board of Directors. These repurchases exclude shares repurchased to settle statutory employee tax withholding related to the exercise of stock options and vesting of stock awards. During March 2020, the Repurchase Plan was suspended due to the uncertain impact of the COVID-19 virus and our borrowings through the Main Street Expanded Loan Facility program places restrictions on stock repurchases. Prior to its suspension, we repurchased 8,517 shares of common stock for approximately $127,000 during 2020. We have cumulatively repurchased 875,218 shares of common stock for $8.3 million and 6,011,926 warrants for $14.7 million, since plan inception. All repurchases were made using cash resources. The balance for the Repurchase Plan was $12.0 million as of December 31, 2020.
In February 2019, we entered into an agreement with Ulstein Verft to construct a polar ice-class vessel, the National Geographic Resolution, a sister ship of the National Geographic Endurance, with a total purchase price of 1,291.0 million NOK, which was amended in December 2019 to (i) provide a $4 million loan to the builder, to be repaid at 112% of the principle balance on maturity in December 2023, and (ii) an expedited delivery incentive that, if the National Geographic Resolution is delivered early, as determined by the expedited delivery schedule per the agreement, that all or a portion of the of the loan will be considered as a delivery bonus and forgiven. The purchase price is due in installments, with the first 20% paid shortly after execution of the agreement, 50% being paid over the duration of the build and the final 30% due upon delivery and acceptance of the vessel. The vessel is scheduled to be delivered in the fourth quarter of 2021. The new-build process exposes us to certain risks typically associated with new ship construction which we manage through detailed planning and close monitoring by our internal marine team. As noted, in September 2019 and April 2020, we drew approximately $30.5 million and $30.6 million, respectively, under the Second Export Credit Agreement for the second and third contracted payments, respectively, on the National Geographic Resolution. The remaining purchase price will be funded through a combination of available cash, borrowing under our Second Export Credit Agreement and our Revolving Facility and excess cash flows generated by our existing operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which require us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods and the related disclosures in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying footnotes. Out of our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K, certain accounting policies are deemed “critical,” as they require management’s highest degree of judgment, estimates and assumptions. While management believes its judgments, estimates and assumptions are reasonable, they are based on information presently available and actual results may differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Ship Accounting
Ships, including ship improvements and ships under construction, are our most significant assets, comprising over 90% of our non-current assets at December 31, 2020. We make several critical accounting estimates with respect to our ship accounting. Given the very large and complex nature of our ships, our accounting estimates related to ships and determinations of ship improvement costs to be capitalized require considerable judgment and are inherently uncertain.
We have to estimate the useful life of each of our ships as well as their residual values. We account for ship improvement costs by capitalizing those costs we believe add value to our ships and have a useful life greater than one year and depreciate those improvements over its estimated remaining useful life. The costs of repairs and maintenance, including minor improvement costs and dry-dock expenses, are charged to expense as incurred.
If materially different conditions existed, or if we materially changed our assumptions of ship useful lives and residual values, our depreciation expense, loss on retirement of ship components and net book value of our ships would be materially different. In addition, if we change our assumptions in making our determinations as to whether improvements to a ship add value, the amounts we expense each year as repair and maintenance expense could increase, which would be partially offset by a decrease in depreciation expense, resulting from a reduction in capitalized costs. We believe we have made reasonable estimates for ship accounting purposes.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation issued to employees, non-employee directors or other service providers in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, that requires awards to be recorded at their fair value on the date of grant and amortized over the service period of the award. Stock-based compensation costs are recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award, which is generally the vesting term of the equity instrument issued.
Income Taxes
To measure deferred tax assets and liabilities, we provide a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets if, based upon the weight of available evidence, we do not believe it is “more-likely-than-not” that some or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. We will continue to evaluate the deferred tax asset valuation allowance balances in all of our foreign and U.S. companies to determine the appropriate level of valuation allowances. While we believe that the amount of the recorded financial statement benefits and tax reserves reflect the more-likely-than-not criteria, it is possible that the ultimate outcome of current or future examinations may result in a reduction to the tax benefits previously recorded on our consolidated financial statements or may exceed the current income tax reserves in amounts that could be material.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
We review our long-lived assets, principally our vessels and operating rights, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of these assets may not be fully recoverable. Upon the occurrence of a triggering event, the assessment of possible impairment is based on our ability to recover the carrying value of our asset, which is determined by using the asset’s estimated undiscounted future cash flows. If these estimated undiscounted future cash flows are less than the carrying value of the asset, an impairment charge is recognized for the excess, if any, of the asset’s carrying value over its estimated fair value. A significant amount of judgment is required in estimating the future cash flows and fair values of our vessels and operating rights.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
On April 8, 2019, the Company entered into a Second Export Credit Agreement, as described under our debt facilities above.
Future Application of Accounting Standards
Refer to Item 8 of this Annual Report Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for further information on Recent Accounting Pronouncements.