ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
The Company is a drug discovery company that uses biomarker technology to identify enzyme targets associated with serious common diseases and then designs novel compounds to attack those targets. The Company’s product pipeline is primarily focused on inhibitors of protein phosphatases, used alone and in combination with cytotoxic agents and/or x-ray and immune checkpoint blockers, and encompasses two major categories of compounds at various stages of pre-clinical and clinical development that the Company believes have broad therapeutic potential not only for cancer but also for other debilitating and life-threatening diseases.
The Company’s activities are subject to significant risks and uncertainties, including the need for additional capital. The Company has not yet commenced any revenue-generating operations, does not have positive cash flows from operations, and is dependent on periodic infusions of equity capital to fund its operating requirements.
Reverse Stock Split
On November 18, 2020, the Company effected a 1-for-6 reverse split of its outstanding shares of common stock. No fractional shares were issued in connection with the reverse split, with any fractional shares resulting from the reverse split were rounded up to the nearest whole share.
All share and per share amounts and information presented herein have been retroactively adjusted to reflect the reverse stock split for all periods presented.
Sale of Common Stock
Effective March 2, 2021, the Company completed the sale of 1,133,102 shares of common stock at a price of $3.70 per share in a registered direct equity offering, generating gross proceeds of $4,192,477. The total cash costs of this offering were approximately $502,447, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $3,690,030. Pursuant to the placement agents’ agreement, the Company granted to the placement agents warrants to purchase up to 113,310 shares of common stock commencing on March 2, 2021 and expiring on March 2, 2026, at an exercise price of $3.70 per share.
Going Concern
At December 31, 2020, the Company had cash of $5,069,266 available to fund its operations. Because the Company is currently engaged in Phase 2 clinical trials, it is expected that it will take a significant amount of time and resources to develop any product or intellectual property capable of generating sustainable revenues. Accordingly, the Company’s business is unlikely to generate any sustainable operating revenues in the next several years and may never do so. Even if the Company is able to generate revenues through licensing its technologies or through product sales, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to achieve positive earnings and operating cash flows.
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been presented on the basis that it will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has no recurring source of revenue and has experienced negative operating cash flows since inception. The Company has financed its working capital requirements primarily through the recurring sale of its equity securities.
As a result, management has concluded that there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year of the date that the accompanying consolidated financial statements have been issued. The Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, in its report on the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, has also expressed substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company’s consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards board (the “FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”). ASU 2019-12 simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions and enhances and simplifies various aspects of the income tax accounting guidance in ASC 740. ASU 2019-12 will be effective January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2019-12 is not expected to have any impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statement presentation or disclosures subsequent to its adoption.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06). ASU 2020-06 simplifies the accounting for convertible debt by eliminating the beneficial conversion and cash conversion accounting models. Upon adoption of ASU 2020-06, convertible debt proceeds, unless issued with a substantial premium or an embedded conversion feature that is not clearly and closely related to the host contract, will no longer be allocated between debt and equity components. This modification will reduce the issue discount and result in less non-cash interest expense in financial statements. ASU 2020-06 also updates the earnings per share calculation and requires entities to assume share settlement when the convertible debt can be settled in cash or shares. ASU 2020-06 will be effective January 1, 2024, and a cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings is required upon adoption. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than January 1, 2021, including interim periods within that year. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 is not expected to have any impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statement presentation or disclosures subsequent to its adoption, with any effect being largely dependent on the composition and terms of outstanding financial instruments at the time of adoption.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, authoritative guidance, if currently adopted, would have a material impact on the Company’s financial statement presentation or disclosures.
Concentration of Risk
The Company periodically contracts with vendors and consultants to provide services related to the Company’s operations. Charges incurred for these services can be for a specific time period (typically one year) or for a specific project or task. Costs and expenses incurred that represented 10% or more of general and administrative costs or research and development costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are described as follows.
General and administrative costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include charges from a legal firm for general licensing and patent prosecution costs relating to the Company’s intellectual properties representing 27.3% and 44.5%, respectively, of total general and administrative costs. General and administrative costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 also include charges for the amortized value of stock options granted to directors and officers representing 23.7% and 18.8%, respectively, of total general and administrative costs.
Research and development costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 include charges from a consultant, and the value associated with extending stock options previously granted to that consultant, representing 65.6% of total research and development costs, and charges from a vendor representing 13.7% of total research and development costs. Research and development costs for the year ended December 31, 2019 include charges for the value associated with fully-vested stock options granted to a consultant representing 52.9% of total research and development costs, and charges from a consultant and from a vendor representing 12.2% and 10.7%, respectively, of total research and development costs.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Some of those judgments can be subjective and complex, and therefore, actual results could differ materially from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable in relation to the financial statements taken as a whole under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Management regularly evaluates the key factors and assumptions used to develop the estimates utilizing currently available information, changes in facts and circumstances, historical experience and reasonable assumptions. After such evaluations, if deemed appropriate, those estimates are adjusted accordingly. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include those related to assumptions used in accruals for potential liabilities, valuing equity instruments issued for services, and the realization of deferred tax assets.
The following critical accounting policies affect the more significant judgements and estimates used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development
Research and development costs consist primarily of fees paid to consultants and contractors, and other expenses relating to the acquisition, design, development and clinical trials with respect to the Company’s compounds and product candidates. Research and development costs also include the costs to produce the compounds used in research and clinical trials.
Research and development costs are charged to operations ratably over the life of the underlying contracts, unless the achievement of milestones, the completion of contracted work, or other information indicates that a different expensing schedule is more appropriate.
Obligations incurred with respect to mandatory scheduled payments under research agreements with milestone provisions are recognized as charges to research and development costs in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations based on the achievement of such milestones, as specified in the agreement. Obligations incurred with respect to mandatory scheduled payments under research agreements without milestone provisions are recognized ratably over the appropriate period, as specified in the agreement, and are recorded as liabilities in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet, with a corresponding charge to research and development costs in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations.
Payments made pursuant to research and development contracts are initially recorded as advances on research and development contract services in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet and are then charged to research and development costs in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations as those contract services are performed. Expenses incurred under research and development contracts in excess of amounts advanced are recorded as research and development contract liabilities in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet, with a corresponding charge to research and development costs in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations. The Company reviews the status of its research and development contracts on a quarterly basis.
Patent and Licensing Related Legal and Filing Costs
Due to the significant uncertainty associated with the successful development of one or more commercially viable products based on the Company’s research efforts and related patent applications, all patent-related legal and filing fees and licensing-related legal fees are charged to operations as incurred. Patent and licensing related legal and filing costs are included in general and administrative costs in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company periodically issues common stock and stock options to officers, directors, employees, Scientific Advisory Committee members, contractors and consultants for services rendered. Options vest and expire according to terms established at the issuance date of each grant. Stock grants, which are generally time vested, are measured at the grant date fair value and charged to operations ratably over the vesting period.
The Company accounts for stock-based payments to officers, directors, employees, Scientific Advisory Committee members contractors and consultants by measuring the cost of services received in exchange for equity awards utilizing the grant date fair value of the awards, with the cost recognized as compensation expense on the straight-line basis in the Company’s financial statements over the vesting period of the awards.
The fair value of stock options granted as stock-based compensation is determined utilizing the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, and is affected by several variables, the most significant of which are the expected life of the stock option, the exercise price of the stock option as compared to the fair market value of the common stock on the grant date, and the estimated volatility of the common stock. Unless sufficient historical exercise data is available, the expected life of the stock option is calculated as the mid-point between the vesting period and the contractual term (the “simplified method”). Estimated volatility is based on the historical volatility of the Company’s common stock, calculated utilizing a look-back period approximately equal to the contractual life of the stock option being granted. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant. The fair market value of the common stock is determined by reference to the quoted market price of the Company’s common stock on the grant date.
The Company recognizes the fair value of stock-based compensation awards in general and administrative costs and in research and development costs, as appropriate, in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations. The Company issues new shares of common stock to satisfy stock option exercises.
Summary of Business Activities and Plans
Company Overview
The Company is a drug discovery company that uses biomarker technology to identify enzyme targets associated with serious common diseases and then designs novel compounds to attack those targets. The Company’s product pipeline is primarily focused on inhibitors of protein phosphatases, used alone and in combination with cytotoxic agents and/or x-ray and immune checkpoint blockers, and encompasses two major categories of compounds at various stages of pre-clinical and clinical development that the Company believes have broad therapeutic potential not only for cancer but also for other debilitating and life-threatening diseases.
The Company has developed two series of pharmacologically active drugs, the LB-100 series and the LB-200 series. The Company believes that the mechanism by which compounds of the LB-100 series affect cancer cell growth is different from cancer agents currently approved for clinical use. Lead compounds from each series have activity against a broad spectrum of common and rarer human cancers in cell culture systems. In addition, compounds from both series have anti-cancer activity in animal models of glioblastoma multiforme, neuroblastoma, and medulloblastoma, all cancers of neural tissue. Lead compounds of the LB-100 series also have activity against melanoma, breast cancer and sarcoma in animal models and enhance the effectiveness of commonly used anti-cancer drugs in these model systems. The enhancement of anti-cancer activity of these anti-cancer drugs occurs at doses of LB-100 that do not significantly increase toxicity in animals. It is therefore hoped that, when combined with standard anti-cancer regimens against many tumor types, the Company’s compounds will improve therapeutic benefit without enhancing toxicity in humans.
Product Candidates
The LB-100 series consists of novel structures which have the potential to be first in their class and may be useful in the treatment of not only several types of cancer but also vascular and metabolic diseases. The LB-200 series contains compounds which have the potential to be the most effective in its class and may be useful for the treatment of chronic hereditary diseases, such as Gaucher’s disease, in addition to cancer and neurodegenerative diseases.
The Company has demonstrated that lead compounds of both the LB-100 series and the LB-200 are active against a broad spectrum of human cancers in cell culture and against several types of human cancers in animal models. The research on these compounds was initiated in 2006 under a Cooperative Research and Development Agreement, or CRADA, with the National Institute of Neurologic Disorders and Stroke, or NINDS, of the National Institutes of Health, or NIH, dated March 22, 2006 that was subsequently extended through a series of amendments until it terminated on April 1, 2013. As discussed below, the Company’s primary focus is on the clinical development of LB-100.
The LB-200 series consists of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi). Many pharmaceutical companies are also developing drugs of this type, and at least two companies have HDACi approved for clinical use, in both cases for the treatment of a type of lymphoma. Despite this significant competition, the Company has demonstrated that its HDACi have broad activity against many cancer types, have neuroprotective activity, and have anti-fungal activity. In addition, these compounds have low toxicity. LB-200 has not yet advanced to the clinical stage and would require additional capital to fund further development. Accordingly, because of the Company’s focus on the clinical development of LB-100 and analogs for cancer therapy as described below in more detail, the Company have decided not to actively pursue the pre-clinical development of our LB-200 series of compounds at this time. At this time, the Company intend to only maintain composition of matter patents for LB-200.
Collaborations with leading academic research centers in the United States, Europe and Asia have established the breadth of activity of LB-100 in pre-clinical models of several major cancers. There is considerable scientific interest in LB-100 because it exerts its activity by a novel mechanism and is the first of its type to be evaluated so broadly in multiple animal models of cancer and now in human beings. LB-100 is one of a series of serine/threonine phosphatase (s/t ptase) inhibitors designed by the Company. The s/t ptases are ubiquitous enzymes that regulate many cell signaling networks important to cell growth, division and death. The s/t ptases have long been appreciated as potentially important targets for anti-cancer drugs. However, because of the multi- functionality of these enzymes, it had been widely held that pharmacologic inhibitors of s/t ptases would be too toxic to allow their development as anti-cancer treatments, but the Company has shown that this is not the case. LB-100 was well tolerated at doses associated with objective regression (significant tumor shrinkage) and/or the arresting of tumor progression in patients with progressive cancers.
Pre-clinical studies showed that LB-100 itself inhibits a spectrum of human cancers and that combined with standard cytotoxic drugs and/or radiation, LB-100 potentiates their effectiveness against hematologic and solid tumor cancers without enhancing toxicity. Given at very low doses in animal models of cancer, LB-100 markedly increased the effectiveness of a PD-1 blocker, one of the widely used new immunotherapy drugs. This finding raises the possibility that LB-100 may further expand the value of the expanding field of cancer immunotherapy.
The Company completed a Phase 1 clinical trial of LB-100 to evaluate its safety that showed it is associated with antitumor activity in humans at doses that are readily tolerable. Responses included objective regression (tumor shrinkage) lasting for 11 months of a pancreatic cancer and cessation of growth (stabilization of disease) for 4 months or more of 9 other progressive solid tumors out of 20 patients who had measurable disease. As Phase 1 clinical trials are fundamentally designed to determine safety of a new compound in humans, the Company was encouraged by these results. The next step is to demonstrate in Phase 2 clinical trials the efficacy of LB-100 in one or more specific tumor types, against which the compound has well documented activity in pre-clinical models.
As a compound moves through the FDA-approval process, it becomes an increasingly valuable property, but at a cost of additional investment at each stage. As the potential effectiveness of LB-100 has been documented at the clinical trial level, the Company has allocated resources to expand the breadth and depth of its patent portfolio. The Company’s approach has been to operate with a minimum of overhead, moving compounds forward as efficiently and inexpensively as possible, and to raise funds to support each of these stages as certain milestones are reached. The Company’s longer-term objective is to secure one or more strategic partnerships or licensing agreements with pharmaceutical companies with major programs in cancer.
Impact of the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) on the Company’s Business Operations
The global outbreak of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has led to severe disruptions in general economic activities worldwide, as businesses and governments have taken broad actions to mitigate this public health crisis. In light of the uncertain and continually evolving situation relating to the spread of COVID-19, this pandemic could pose a risk to the Company. The extent to which the coronavirus may impact the Company’s business operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. The Company intends to continue to monitor the situation and may adjust its current business plans as more information and guidance become available.
The coronavirus pandemic presents a challenge to medical facilities worldwide. As the Company’s clinical trials are conducted on an outpatient basis, it is not currently possible to predict the full impact of this developing health crisis on such clinical trials, which could include delays in and increased costs of such clinical trials. Current indications from the clinical research organizations conducting the clinical trials for the Company are that such clinical trials are being delayed or extended for several months as a result of the coronavirus pandemic.
There is also significant uncertainty as to the effect that the coronavirus may have on the amount and type of financing available to the Company in the future.
Results of Operations
At December 31, 2020, the Company had not yet commenced any revenue-generating operations, does not have any positive cash flows from operations, and is dependent on its ability to raise equity capital to fund its operating requirements.
The Company’s consolidated statements of operations as discussed herein are presented below.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues. The Company did not have any revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
General and Administrative Costs. For the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative costs were $2,042,764, which consisted of the fair value of vested stock options issued to officers and consultants of $580,634, patent and licensing legal fees and costs of $553,173, other consulting and professional fees of $403,983, insurance expense of $142,575, officer’s salary and related costs of $268,457, licensing fees of $25,001, stock transfer fees of $11,801, listing fees of $12,000, filing fees of $10,616, travel of $718, and other operating costs of $33,806.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, general and administrative costs were $1,669,160, which consisted of the fair value of vested stock options issued to officers and consultants of $314,631, patent and licensing legal fees and costs of $742,918, other consulting and professional fees of $350,534, insurance expense of $55,935, officer’s salary and related costs of $67,684, licensing fees of $80,669, stock transfer fees of $10,202, listing fees of $12,000, filing fees of $10,016, travel of $4,703, and other operating costs of $19,868.
General and administrative costs increased by $373,604 or 22.4% in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of an increase in the fair value of vested stock options issued to officers and consultants of $266,003, an increase in officer’s salary and related costs of $200,773, an increase in insurance expense of $86,640, offset by a decrease in patent and licensing legal fees and costs of $189,745.
Research and Development Costs. For the year December 31, 2020, research and development costs were $1,223,676, which consisted of the fair value of vested stock options issued to consultants of $670,715, and contractor costs, primarily in connection with the Company’s pre-clinical research focused on the development of additional novel anti-cancer compounds to add to its clinical pipeline, including $43,411 to GEIS, $41,142 to Moffitt, $31,388 to Theradex, $131,650 to BioPharmaWorks, $167,120 to a contract research and development firm for the synthesis work to develop a new supply of LB-100 for the GEIS clinical trial, and $138,250 to various other contractors.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, research and development costs were $820,906, which consisted of the fair value of vested stock options issued to consultants of $434,024, and contractor costs, primarily in connection with the Company’s pre-clinical research focused on the development of additional novel anti-cancer compounds to add to its clinical pipeline, including $87,471 to GEIS, $45,093 to Moffitt, $64,624 to Theradex, $100,000 to BioPharmaWorks and $89,694 to various other contractors.
Research and development costs increased by $402,770 in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of an increase in the fair value of vested stock options issued to consultants of $236,691 and an increase in contractor costs, primarily in connection with the Company’s pre-clinical research focused on the development of additional novel anti-cancer compounds to add to its clinical pipeline.
Interest Income. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had interest income of $5,232, as compared to interest income of $49,723 for the year ended December 31, 2019, as a result of a reduction in the Company’s cash resources previously invested in short-term federally insured certificates of deposit.
Interest Expense. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had interest expense of $3,674 related to the financing of its directors and officers liability insurance premium. The Company had no interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Loss. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred a net loss of $3,264,882, as compared to a net loss of $2,440,343 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources - December 31, 2020
At December 31, 2020, the Company had working capital of $5,011,951, as compared to working capital of $2,434,135 at December 31, 2019, reflecting an increase in working capital of $2,577,816 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital during the year ended December 31, 2020 was the result of the net cash proceeds of $4,591,349 from the Company’s November 2020 public offering, which are being utilized to fund the Company’s research and development activities and ongoing operating expenses, including the Company’s clinical trial program and maintaining and developing the patent portfolio. At December 31, 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $5,069,266 available to fund its operations.
The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to raise additional equity capital to fund its research and development activities and to ultimately achieve sustainable operating revenues and profitability. The amount and timing of future cash requirements depends on the pace and design of the Company’s clinical trial program, which, in turn, depends on the availability of operating capital to fund such activities.
Effective November 30, 2020, the Company listed on The Nasdaq Capital Market in conjunction with the completion of its public offering of units of common stock and warrants that generated net cash proceeds of $4,591,349. Subsequently, on January 18, 2021, the Company entered into a clinical trial agreement to carry out a Phase 1b clinical trial of LB-100, combined with a standard regimen for untreated, extensive stage-disease small cell lung cancer. This new clinical trial is being conducted through City of Hope, and is estimated to cost from $2,500,000 to $2,900,000 and take approximately 18 to 24 months to conduct from its expected commencement during the quarter ending June 30, 2021. Combined with the Company’s existing clinical trial commitments, this new clinical trial commitment represents an additional demand on the Company’s working capital resources. Although the Company completed a sale of common stock under a registered direct equity offering on March 2, 2021 that generated net proceeds of approximately $3,690,000, the Company estimates that it will need to raise additional capital to fund its operations, including its various clinical trial commitments, by mid-2022. In addition, the Company’s operating plan may change as a result of many factors which are currently unknown to the Company, including possible additional clinical trials, and the Company may need additional funds sooner than currently planned.
As market conditions present uncertainty as to the Company’s ability to secure additional funds, there can be no assurances that the Company will be able to secure additional financing on acceptable terms, as and when necessary to continue to conduct operations. There is also significant uncertainty as to the effect that the coronavirus may have on the Company’s clinical trial schedule and the amount and type of financing available to the Company in the future.
If cash resources are insufficient to satisfy the Company’s ongoing cash requirements, the Company would be required to scale back or discontinue its clinical trial program, as well as its licensing and patent prosecution efforts and its technology and product development efforts, or obtain funds, if available, through strategic alliances or joint ventures that could require the Company to relinquish rights to and/or control of LB-100, or to discontinue operations entirely.
Operating Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities utilized cash of $2,131,414, as compared to utilizing cash of $1,674,148 for the year ended December 31, 2019, to fund the Company’s ongoing research and development activities and to fund its other ongoing operating expenses, including maintaining and developing its patent portfolio.
Investing Activities. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had no investing activities.
Financing Activities. For the year December 31, 2020, financing activities consisted of the gross proceeds from the sales of units and warrants in the Company’s public offering of $5,701,800, offset by the payment of offering costs of $1,099,984. The Company had no financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Principal Commitments
Clinical Trial Agreements
Moffitt. Effective August 20, 2018, the Company entered into a Clinical Trial Research Agreement with the Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute Hospital Inc., Tampa, Florida (“Moffitt”), effective for a term of five years, unless terminated earlier by the Company pursuant to 30 days written notice. Pursuant to the Clinical Trial Research Agreement, Moffitt agreed to conduct and manage a Phase 1b/2 clinical trial to evaluate the therapeutic benefit of the Company’s lead anti-cancer clinical compound LB-100 to be administered intravenously in patients with low or intermediate-1 risk myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS).
In November 2018, the Company received approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for its Investigational New Drug Application (“IND”) to conduct a Phase 1b/2 clinical trial to evaluate the therapeutic benefit of LB-100 in patients with low and intermediate-1 risk MDS who have failed or are intolerant of standard treatment. Patients with MDS, although usually older, are generally well except for severe anemia requiring frequent blood transfusions. This Phase 1b/2 clinical trial utilizes LB-100 as a single agent in the treatment of patients with low and intermediate-1 risk MDS, including patients with del(5q) myelodysplastic syndrome (del5qMDS) failing first line therapy. The bone marrow cells of patients with del5qMDS are deficient in PP2A by virtue of an acquired mutation and are especially vulnerable to further inhibition of PP2A by LB-100. The clinical trial began at a single site in April 2019 and the first patient was entered into the clinical trial in July 2019. A total enrollment of 41 patients is planned. An interim analysis will be done after the first 21 patients are entered. If there are 3 or more responders but fewer than 7, an additional 20 patients will be entered. If at any point there are 7 or more responders, this will be sufficient evidence to support continued development of LB-100 for the treatment of low and intermediate-1 risk MDS. Recruitment has been slow and the Covid-19 pandemic has further reduced recruitment of patients into the protocol. At the current rate of accrual, the trial would be completed over a period of four years from its initiation, with the final analysis and reporting expected by July 2023. However, with additional funds, the Company’s objective would be to add two additional MDS centers to the Phase 2 portion of the study to accelerate patient accrual, with the goal of an earlier reporting date.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company paid Moffitt $41,142 and $45,093, respectively, pursuant to this agreement. As of December 31, 2020, total costs of $102,944 have been incurred pursuant to this agreement.
GEIS. Effective July 31, 2019, the Company entered into a Collaboration Agreement for an Investigator-Initiated Clinical Trial with the Spanish Sarcoma Group (Grupo Español de Investigación en Sarcomas or “GEIS”), Madrid, Spain, to carry out a study entitled “Randomized phase I/II trial of LB-100 plus doxorubicin vs. doxorubicin alone in first line of advanced soft tissue sarcoma”. The purpose of this clinical trial is to obtain information about the efficacy and safety of LB-100 combined with doxorubicin in soft tissue sarcomas. Doxorubicin is the global standard for initial treatment of advanced soft tissue sarcomas (“ASTS”). Doxorubicin alone has been the mainstay of first line treatment of ASTS for over 40 years, with little therapeutic gain from adding cytotoxic compounds to or substituting other cytotoxic compounds for doxorubicin. In animal models, LB-100 consistently enhances the anti-tumor activity of doxorubicin without apparent increases in toxicity.
GEIS has a network of referral centers in Spain and across Europe that have an impressive track record of efficiently conducting innovative studies in ASTS. The Company agreed to provide GEIS with a supply of LB-100 to be utilized in the conduct of this clinical trial, as well as to provide funding for the clinical trial. The goal was to enter the first patient during the quarter ending December 31, 2020, with approximately 150 patients to be enrolled over two years. Advanced sarcoma is a very aggressive disease. The design of the study assumes a median progression free survival (PFS, no evidence of disease progression or death from any cause) of 4.5 months in the doxorubicin arm and an alternative median PFS of 7.5 months in the doxorubicin plus LB-100 arm to demonstrate a statistically significant decrease in relative risk of progression or death by adding LB-100. There is a planned interim analysis of the primary endpoint when about half of the 102 events required for final analysis is reached.
The Company had previously expected that this clinical trial would commence during the quarter ended June 30, 2020. However, during July 2020, the Spanish regulatory authority advised the Company that although it had approved the scientific and ethical basis of the protocol, it required that the Company manufacture new inventory of LB-100 under current Spanish pharmaceutical manufacturing standards. These regulations were adopted subsequent to the production of the Company’s existing LB-100 inventory. The Company is in the process of obtaining approval from the European Union regulatory authorities for new inventory of LB-100. Accordingly, the clinical trial is now estimated to begin during the quarter ending September 30, 2021 and to be completed by the quarter ending September 30, 2024. The interim analysis is expected in June 2023 and could indicate either inferiority or superiority of LB-100 plus doxorubicin as compared to doxorubicin alone. A positive study would have the potential to change the standard therapy for this disease after four decades of failure to improve the marginal benefit of doxorubicin alone.
The Company’s agreement with GEIS provides for various payments based on achieving specific milestones over the term of the agreement. On February 18, 2020, the Company advanced $43,411 to GEIS towards a second milestone payment obligation of $87,471, which was expected to become due and payable during the quarter ended June 30, 2020 based on the anticipated achievement of the second milestone, and which was therefore recorded as an advance on the Company’s balance sheet at March 31, 2020. However, as a result of the substantial delay in commencing the clinical trial as described above, the achievement of the second milestone had been delayed until mid-2021 and the Company therefore determined to charge such advance to research and development costs in the Company’s statement of operations at June 30, 2020. Subsequently, on March 9, 2021, the Company paid an additional $23,802 to GEIS for current work being done under this agreement.
Accordingly, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company incurred costs of $43,411 and $87,471, respectively, pursuant to this agreement. As of December 31, 2020, total costs of $130,882 have been incurred pursuant to this agreement.
The Company’s aggregate commitments pursuant to the aforementioned clinical trial agreements, less amounts previously paid to date under these agreements, totaled approximately $5,230,000 as of December 31, 2020, consisting of approximately $4,614,000 relating to the GEIS clinical trial and approximately $616,000 relating to the Moffit clinical trial, which are expected to be incurred over the next five years through December 31, 2025.
In order to manufacture a new inventory supply of LB-100 for the GEIS clinical trial, the Company has engaged a number of vendors to carry out the multiple tasks needed to make and gain approval of a new clinical product for investigational study in Spain. These tasks include the synthesis under good manufacturing practices (GMP) of the active pharmacologic ingredient (API), with documentation of each of the steps involved by an independent auditor. The API is then transferred to a vendor that prepares the clinical drug product (DP), also under GMP conditions documented by an independent auditor. The DP is then sent to a vendor to test for purity and sterility, provide appropriate labels, store the drug, and distribute the drug to the clinical centers for use in the clinical trials. A formal application documenting all steps taken to prepare the DP for clinical use must be submitted to the appropriate regulatory authorities for review and approval before being used in a clinical trial.
The Company estimates that this program to provide new inventory of the DP for the Spanish sarcoma study, and potentially for subsequent multiple trials within the European Union, will cost from $600,000 and $700,000. The Company’s remaining aggregate commitments under this program, less amounts previously paid to date, totaled approximately $300,000 as of December 31, 2020, which are expected to be incurred through June 30, 2021.
Clinical Trial Agreement Entered into Subsequent to December 31, 2020
City of Hope. Effective January 18, 2021, the Company executed a Clinical Research Support Agreement with City of Hope National Medical Center, an NCI-designated comprehensive cancer center, and City of Hope Medical Foundation (collectively, “City of Hope”), to carry out a Phase 1b clinical trial of LB-100, the Company’s first-in-class protein phosphatase inhibitor, combined with a standard regimen for untreated, extensive stage-disease small cell lung cancer (ED-SCLC). LB-100 will be given in combination with carboplatin, etoposide and atezolizumab, an FDA-approved but marginally effective regimen, to previously untreated ED-SCLC patients. The dose of LB-100 will be escalated with the standard fixed doses of the 3-drug regimen to reach a recommended Phase 2 dose (RP2D). Patient entry will be expanded so that a total of 12 patients will be evaluable at the RP2D to confirm the safety of the LB-100 combination and to look for potential therapeutic activity as assessed by objective response rate, duration of overall response, progression-free-survival and overall survival.
The Company estimates that from 24 to 30 patients will be needed to complete this clinical trial, at an estimated cost of $2,500,000 to $2,900,000, respectively. If a significant number of patients fail during the dose-escalation process, an increase of up to 12 patients would likely be necessary, at an estimated additional cost of $800,000.
The clinical trial is planned to commence during the quarter ending June 30, 2021, with patient accrual expected to take approximately 18 to 24 months to conduct. If LB-100 does potentiate the benefit of the standard regimen, some evidence could be noted at 12 months into the clinical trial, but an assessment of potential increased activity is likely to require at least 24 months.
Clinical Trial Monitoring Agreements
On September 12, 2018, the Company finalized a work order agreement with Theradex Systems, Inc. (“Theradex”), an international contract research organization (“CRO”), to monitor the Phase 1b/2 clinical trial being managed and conducted by Moffitt. The clinical trial began in April 2019 and the first patient was entered into the clinical trial in July 2019. At the current rate of accrual, the trial would be completed over a period of four years from its initiation, with the final analysis and reporting expected by July 2023.
Costs under this work order agreement are estimated to be approximately $954,000, with such payments expected to be divided approximately 94% to Theradex for services and approximately 6% for payments for pass-through costs. The costs of the Phase 1b/2 clinical trial being paid to or through Theradex are being recorded and charged to operations based on the periodic documentation provided by the CRO. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company incurred costs of $18,663 and $51,586, respectively, pursuant to this work order. As of December 31, 2020, total costs of $75,788 have been incurred pursuant to this work order agreement.
The Company’s aggregate commitments pursuant to this clinical trial monitoring agreement, less amounts previously paid to date under this agreement, totaled approximately $874,000 as of December 31, 2020, which are expected to be incurred over the next five years through June 30, 2025.
On February 5, 2021, the Company signed a new work order agreement with Theradex to monitor the City of Hope investigator-initiated clinical trial in small cell lung cancer in accordance with FDA requirements for oversight by the sponsoring party. The Company estimates that it will incur approximately $335,000 of costs under this work order agreement through September 30, 2023.
Patent and License Agreements
On March 22, 2018, the Company entered into a Patent Assignment and Exploitation Agreement with INSERM TRANSFERT SA, acting as delegatee of the French National Institute of Health and Medical Research, for the assignment to the Company of INSERM’S interest in United States Patent No. 9,833,450 entitled “Oxabicyloheptanes and Oxabicycloheptenes for the Treatment of Depressive and Stress Disorders”, which was filed with the United States Patent and Trademark Office in the name of INSERM and the Company as co-owners on February 19, 2015 and granted on May 12, 2017, and related patent applications and filings. INSERM is a French public institution dedicated to research in the field of health and medicine that had previously entered into a Material Transfer Agreement (“MTA”) with the Company to allow INSERM to conduct research on the Company’s proprietary compound LB-100 and/or its analogs for the treatment of depressive or stress disorders in humans. Pursuant to the Agreement, the Company has agreed to make certain milestone payments to INSERM aggregating up to $1,750,000 upon achievement of development milestones and up to $6,500,000 upon achievement of commercial milestones. The Company also agreed to pay INSERM certain commercial royalties on net sales of products attributed to the Agreement. The Company’s current plan is to complete the validation process to evaluate LB-100 for the treatment of depressive or stress disorders in humans within three years; however, the exploitation of this patent for the treatment of depressive and stress disorders in humans will require substantial additional capital and/or a joint venture or other type of business arrangement with a pharmaceutical company with substantially greater capital and business resources than those available to the Company. As there can be no assurances that the Company will be able to obtain the capital or business resources necessary to focus on the exploitation of this patent, it is uncertain as to when, if at all, the Company may reach any of the development or commercialization milestones under the Agreement. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, no amounts were due under this agreement.
Effective April 2, 2018, the Company entered into a consulting agreement for a term of two years with Liberi Life Sciences Consultancy BV, located in The Netherlands, for consulting and advisory services with respect to sales and licensing, as well as the procurement of investors in China, Japan and South Korea. The Consulting Agreement provided for the payment of a fixed, one-time retainer of EURO 15,000 (US $18,348), which was paid on April 5, 2018, and 2.5% of the net payments received by the Company from sales of products or licensing activities arising directly and exclusively from leads generated by the advisor during the term of the Consulting Agreement, and any investors introduced to the Company by the advisor that results in an investment in the Company during the term of the Consulting Agreement. The Company recorded the payment of the retainer as a prepaid expense in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet and amortized the retainer payment over the two-year life of the Consulting Agreement, as a result of which the Company recorded charges to operations of $2,294 and $9,174 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the prepaid consulting fee had been fully amortized. At December 31, 2019, the unamortized balance of the retainer payment was $9,174, all of which was classified as a current asset in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet at such date. On March 1, 2020, the Consulting Agreement was extended to April 2, 2021 without any additional consideration.
Effective August 20, 2018, the Company entered into an Exclusive License Agreement with Moffitt. Pursuant to the License Agreement, Moffitt granted the Company an exclusive license under certain patents owned by Moffitt relating to the treatment of MDS and a non-exclusive license under inventions, concepts, processes, information, data, know-how, research results, clinical data, and the like (other than the Licensed Patents) necessary or useful for the practice of any claim under the Licensed Patents or the use, development, manufacture or sale of any product for the treatment of MDS which would otherwise infringe a valid claim under the Licensed Patents. The Company was obligated to pay Moffitt a non-refundable license issue fee of $25,000 after the first patient is entered into a Phase 1b/2 clinical trial to be managed and conducted by Moffitt. The clinical trial began at a single site in April 2019 and the first patient was entered into the clinical trial in July 2019. The Company is also obligated to pay Moffitt an annual license maintenance fee of $25,000 commencing on the first anniversary of the Effective Date and every anniversary thereafter until the Company commences payment of minimum royalty payments. The Company has also agreed to pay non-refundable milestone payments to Moffitt, which cannot be credited against earned royalties payable by the Company, based on reaching various clinical and commercial milestones aggregating $1,897,000, subject to reduction by 40% under certain circumstances relating to the status of Valid Claims, as such term is defined in the License Agreement. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded charges to operations of $25,001 and $80,669, respectively, in connection with its obligations under the License Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, no milestones had yet been attained.
The Company will be obligated to pay Moffitt earned royalties of 4% on worldwide cumulative net sales of royalty-bearing products, subject to reduction to 2% under certain circumstances, on a quarterly basis, with a minimum royalty payment of $50,000 in the first four years after sales commence, and $100,000 in year five and each year thereafter, subject to reduction by 40% under certain circumstances relating to the status of Valid Claims, as such term is defined in the License Agreement. The Company’s obligation to pay earned royalties under the License Agreement commences on the date of the first sale of a royalty-bearing product, and shall automatically expire on a country-by-country basis on the date on which the last valid claim of the Licensed Patents expires, lapses or is declared invalid, and the obligation to pay any earned royalties under the License Agreement shall terminate on the date on which the last valid claim of the Licensed Patents expires, lapses, or is declared to be invalid in all countries.
Employment Agreements
Dr. John Kovach. On July 15, 2020, the Company entered into an employment agreement with Dr. John Kovach pursuant to which Dr. Kovach is to continue to act as the Company’s President, Chief Executive Officer and Chief Scientific Officer. His responsibilities shall be for the oversight of the Company’s entire operations and strategic planning, and shall be the primary contact between the Company’s executive team and the Board of Directors, to whom he shall report. Dr. Kovach shall supervise all scientific endeavors, providing guidance to the Chief Medical Officer. He shall be the principal spokesperson for the Company. Dr. Kovach will receive an annual salary of $250,000, payable monthly. The effective date of the agreement was October 1, 2020 and shall remain in effect until the earlier of (i) one year from the effective date, automatically renewable for additional one-year periods unless terminated by either party upon 60 days written notice prior to the end of the applicable one-year period, (ii) his death, or (iii) termination for cause. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred charges for salary in the amount of $62,500 with respect to this agreement, which amount is included in general and administrative costs in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
Eric Forman. On July 15, 2020, as amended on August 12, 2020, the Company entered into an employment agreement with Eric Forman, pursuant to which Mr. Forman will act as the Company’s Chief Administrative Officer reporting directly to the Company’s Chief Executive Officer. Mr. Forman’s primary function shall be to oversee the Company’s internal operations, including IT, licensing, legal, personnel, marketing, and corporate governance. Mr. Forman will receive an annual salary of $120,000, payable monthly. Mr. Forman was also granted stock options to acquire 350,000 shares of the Company’s common stock. The effective date of the agreement was October 1, 2020 and shall remain in effect until the earlier of (i) one year from the effective date, automatically renewable for additional one-year periods unless terminated by either party upon 60 days written notice prior to the end of the applicable one-year period, (ii) his death, or (iii) termination for cause. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred charges for salary in the amount of $30,000 with respect to this agreement, which amount is included in general and administrative costs in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
Dr. James Miser. On August 1, 2020, the Company entered into an employment agreement with Dr. James Miser, M.D., pursuant to which Dr. Miser was appointed as the Company’s Chief Medical Officer. Under the employment agreement, Dr. Miser will play a leadership role in planning, implementation and oversight of clinical trials. Dr. Miser will be responsible for assisting and developing strategic clinical goals and the implementation and safety monitoring of investigational studies. Dr. Miser will be the primary medical monitor for all clinical investigational studies and for the oversight of third party CRO monitors. Dr. Miser will work closely with the Company’s Chief Executive Officer on the development of specific goals needed to ensure the timely implementation of appropriate clinical studies needed for successful registration of therapeutic products and new drug development. Dr. Miser will be required to devote at least 50% of his business time to the Company’s activities. Dr. Miser will receive an annual salary of $150,000. Dr. Miser was also granted stock options to acquire 500,000 shares of the Company’s common stock. The effective date of the agreement was August 1, 2020. The agreement shall remain in effect until the earlier of (i) one year from the effective date, automatically renewable for additional one-year periods unless terminated by either party upon 60 days written notice prior to the end of the applicable one-year period, (ii) his death, or (iii) termination for cause. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred charges for salary in the amount of $62,500 with respect to this agreement, which amount is included in general and administrative costs in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
Robert N. Weingarten. On August 12, 2020, the Company entered into an employment agreement with Robert N. Weingarten pursuant to which Mr. Weingarten was appointed as the Company’s Vice-President and Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Weingarten will receive an annual salary of $120,000. Mr. Weingarten was also granted stock options to acquire 350,000 shares of the Company’s common stock. The effective date of the agreement was August 12, 2020. The agreement shall remain in effect until the earlier of (i) one year from the effective date, automatically renewable for additional one-year periods unless terminated by either party upon 60 days written notice prior to the end of the applicable one-year period, (ii) his death, or (iii) termination for cause. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred charges for salary in the amount of $46,451 with respect to this agreement, which amount is included in general and administrative costs in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
Other Significant Agreements and Contracts
On December 24, 2013, the Company entered into an agreement with NDA Consulting Corp. for consultation and advice in the field of oncology research and drug development. As part of the agreement, NDA also agreed to cause its president, Dr. Daniel D. Von Hoff, M.D., to become a member of the Company’s Scientific Advisory Committee. The term of the agreement was for one year and provided for a quarterly cash fee of $4,000. The agreement has been automatically renewed for additional one-year terms on its anniversary date since 2014. Consulting and advisory fees charged to operations pursuant to this agreement were $16,000 and $62,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which were included in research and development costs in the consolidated statements of operations.
Effective September 14, 2015, the Company entered into a Collaboration Agreement with BioPharmaWorks, pursuant to which the Company engaged BioPharmaWorks to perform certain services for the Company. Those services included, among other things: (a) assisting the Company to (i) commercialize its products and strengthen its patent portfolio, (ii) identify large pharmaceutical companies with potential interest in the Company’s product pipeline, and (iii) prepare and deliver presentations concerning the Company’s products; (b) at the request of the Board of Directors, serving as backup management for up to three months should the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and scientific leader be temporarily unable to carry out his duties; (c) being available for consultation in drug discovery and development; and (d) identifying providers and overseeing tasks relating to clinical use and commercialization of new compounds.
BioPharmaWorks was founded in 2015 by former Pfizer scientists with extensive multi-disciplinary research and development and drug development experience. The Collaboration Agreement was for an initial term of two years and automatically renews for subsequent annual periods unless terminated by a party not less than 60 days prior to the expiration of the applicable period. In connection with the Collaboration Agreement, the Company agreed to pay BioPharmaWorks a monthly fee of $10,000, subject to the right of the Company to pay a negotiated hourly rate in lieu of the monthly payment and agreed to issue to BioPharmaWorks certain equity-based compensation. In April 2018, it was mutually agreed to suspend services and payments under the Collaboration Agreement, without extending its term, for the period from February 1, 2018 through the September 13, 2019 anniversary date. In February 2019, the Company and BioPharmaWorks subsequently agreed to resume the Collaboration Agreement effective March 1, 2019, and the Collaboration Agreement is currently in effect. The Company recorded charges to operations pursuant to this Collaboration Agreement of $131,650, including reimbursed expenses of $11,650, and $100,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which were included in research and development costs in the consolidated statements of operations.
Effective August 12, 2020, the Company entered into a Master Service Agreement with the Foundation for Angelman Syndrome Therapy (FAST) to collaborate in supporting preclinical studies of the potential benefit of LB-100 in a mouse model of Angelman Syndrome (AS) as reported in The Proceedings of The National Academy of Science (Wang et al, June 3, 2019). The preclinical studies will take place at The University of California - Davis under the direction of Dr. David Segal, an internationally recognized leader in AS research. If the preclinical studies confirm that LB-100 reduces AS signs in rodent models, the Company has agreed to enter into discussions with FAST with respect to possible collaborations to most efficiently assess the benefit of LB-100 in patients with AS, which is a rare disease affecting an estimated one out of 12,000 to one out of 20,000 persons in the United States. The genetic cause of AS, reduced function of a specific maternal gene called Ube3, has been understood for some time, but the molecular abnormality resulting from the genetic lesion has now been shown to be increased concentrations of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), a molecular target of the Company’s investigational compound, LB-100. The Company has agreed to provide FAST with a supply of LB-100 to be utilized in the conduct of this study, which is initially expected to be completed within three years. Conditioned on FAST’s completion of this study, the Company has agreed to pay FAST five percent (5%) of all proceeds, as defined in the Master Service Agreement, received by the Company, up to a maximum of $250,000 from the exploitation of the study results.
Effective December 21, 2020, the Company entered into a services agreement with IRTH Communications, LLC for investor/public relations, financial communications and strategic consulting services, effective for an initial term of twelve months and renewable annually thereafter. The Company agreed to pay a monthly fee of $7,500, including any renewal term, and also agreed to issue restricted shares of common stock, fully vested upon issuance, with a grant date fair value of $100,000. Upon the commencement of any renewal term, the Company will be obligated to issue additional restricted shares of common stock, fully vested upon issuance, with a grant date fair value of $100,000.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any transactions, obligations or relationships that could be considered off-balance sheet arrangements.
Trends, Events and Uncertainties
Research and development of new pharmaceutical compounds is, by its nature, unpredictable. Although we will undertake research and development efforts with commercially reasonable diligence, there can be no assurance that our cash position will be sufficient to enable us to develop our pharmaceutical compounds to the extent needed to create future sales to sustain operations as contemplated herein.
There can be no assurances that one or more of our pharmaceutical compounds will obtain the regulatory approvals and market acceptance to achieve sustainable revenues sufficient to support our operations. Even if we are able to generate revenues, there can be no assurances that we will be able to achieve operating profitability or positive operating cash flows. There can be no assurances that we will be able to secure additional financing, to the extent required, on acceptable terms or at all. If cash resources are insufficient to satisfy our ongoing cash requirements, we would be required to reduce or discontinue our research and development programs, or attempt to obtain funds, if available (although there can be no assurances), through strategic alliances that may require us to relinquish rights to certain of our pharmaceutical compounds, or to curtail or discontinue our operations entirely.
Other than as discussed above, we are not currently aware of any trends, events or uncertainties that are likely to have a material effect on our financial condition in the near term, although it is possible that new trends or events may develop in the future that could have a material effect on our financial condition.