Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Condition
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(Tables present dollars in millions, except per-share data)
General
Management’s discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition is intended to assist the reader in understanding and assessing significant changes and trends related to the results of operations and financial position of our consolidated company. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying footnotes in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain statements in this Item 7 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K constitute forward-looking statements. Various risks and uncertainties, including those discussed in "Forward-Looking Statements" and Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” may cause our actual results, financial position, and cash generated from operations to differ materially from these forward-looking statements.
Executive Overview
This section provides an overview of our financial results, recent product and late-stage pipeline developments, and other matters affecting our company and the pharmaceutical industry. Earnings per share (EPS) data are presented on a diluted basis.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have been focused on maintaining a reliable supply of our medicines; reducing the strain on the medical system; developing treatments for COVID-19; protecting the health, safety, and well-being of our employees; supporting our communities; and ensuring affordability of and access to our medicines, particularly insulin.
We have experienced negative impacts to our underlying business due to the COVID-19 pandemic, including decreases in new prescriptions as a result of fewer patient visits to physician’s offices to begin or change treatment, changes in payer segment mix, and the use of patient affordability programs in the United States (U.S.) due to rising unemployment. Additionally, we have experienced, and may continue to experience, decreased demand as a result of lack of normal access and fewer in-person interactions by patients and our employees with the healthcare system. In certain locations in the U.S. and around the world with COVID-19 outbreaks, we temporarily halted in-person interactions by our employees with healthcare providers and increased virtual interactions. While in-person interactions have resumed in many locations, we may decide to halt such activity in the future and, in those cases, expect to resume such interactions as it is safe to do so and in compliance with applicable guidance and requirements. We may experience additional pricing pressures resulting from the financial strain of the COVID-19 pandemic on government-funded healthcare systems around the world.
We remain committed to discovering and developing new treatments for the patients we serve. At the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, we paused new clinical trial starts and enrollment in new trials in order to reduce the strain on the medical system, and we have resumed this activity in our clinical trials. However, significant delays or unexpected issues, such as higher discontinuation rates or delays accumulating data, affecting the timing, conduct, or regulatory review of our clinical trials, could adversely affect our ability to commercialize some assets in our product pipeline if the COVID-19 pandemic continues for a protracted period.
In regards to COVID-19 therapies, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted Emergency Use Authorizations (EUA) for bamlanivimab and bamlanivimab and etesevimab administered together for higher-risk patients who have been recently diagnosed with mild-to-moderate COVID-19 and for baricitinib in combination with remdesivir in hospitalized COVID-19 patients. We are actively working with a variety of organizations, including governmental agencies, to facilitate access to our COVID-19 treatments in various countries. However, we face unique risks and uncertainties in our development, manufacture, and uptake of potential treatments for COVID-19, including vulnerability to supply chain disruptions, higher manufacturing costs, difficulties in manufacturing sufficient quantities of our therapies, restrictions on administration that limit widespread and timely access to our therapies, and risks related to handling, return, and/or refund of product after delivery by us. Expedited authorization processes, including our EUAs for bamlanivimab and bamlanivimab and etesevimab administered together, have allowed restricted distribution of products with less than typical safety and efficacy data, and additional data that become available may call into question the safety or effectiveness of our COVID-19 therapies. Additionally, the availability of superior or competitive therapies, or preventative measures, such as vaccines, coupled with the transient nature of pandemics, could negatively impact or eliminate demand for our COVID-19 therapies. In addition, we may be required to accept returns of certain product previously shipped pursuant to EUAs if the relevant EUA is revoked or terminated. Mutations or the spread of other variants of the coronavirus could also render our therapies ineffective. Any of these risks could prevent us from recouping our substantial investments in the research, development, and manufacture of our COVID-19 therapies.
Our ability to continue to operate without significant negative impacts will in part depend on our ability to protect our employees and our supply chain. We have taken steps to protect our employees worldwide, with particular measures in place for those working in our manufacturing sites and distribution facilities. For 2020, we were able to largely maintain our normal operations. However, uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic could have an adverse impact on our manufacturing operations, global supply chain, and distribution systems, which could impact our ability to produce and distribute our products and the ability of third parties on which we rely to fulfill their obligations to us, and could increase our expenses.
Although the COVID-19 pandemic has affected our operations and demand for our products, it has not negatively impacted our liquidity position. We expect to continue to generate cash flows to meet our short-term liquidity needs and to have access to liquidity via the short-term and long-term debt markets. We also have not observed any material impairments of our assets or significant changes in the fair value of assets due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The degree to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business operations, financial results, and liquidity will depend on future developments, is highly uncertain, and cannot be predicted due to, among other things, the duration and severity of the pandemic, the actions taken to reduce its transmission, including widespread availability of vaccines, and the speed with which, and extent to which, more stable economic and operating conditions resume. Should the COVID-19 pandemic and any associated recession or depression continue for a prolonged period, our results of operations, financial condition, liquidity, and cash flows could be materially impacted by lower revenues and profitability and a lower likelihood of effectively and efficiently developing and launching new medicines. See “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on risk factors that could impact our results.
Elanco Animal Health (Elanco) Disposition
On March 11, 2019, we completed the disposition of our remaining 80.2 percent ownership of Elanco common stock through a tax-free exchange offer. As a result, we recognized a gain on the disposition of approximately $3.7 billion in the first quarter of 2019 and now operate as a single segment. See Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
Financial Results
The following table summarizes our key operating results:
NM - not meaningful
Revenue increased in 2020 driven by increased volume, partially offset by lower realized prices. Operating expenses, defined as the sum of research and development and marketing, selling, and administrative expenses, increased in 2020, driven primarily by approximately $450 million of development expenses for COVID-19 therapies. The decreases in net income and EPS in 2020 were driven primarily by the approximately $3.7 billion gain recognized on the disposition of Elanco in 2019, partially offset by higher gross margin and higher other income in 2020.
The following highlighted items affect comparisons of our 2020 and 2019 financial results:
Acquired in-process research and development (IPR&D) (Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements)
•We recognized acquired IPR&D charges of $660.4 million resulting from the acquisitions of Disarm Therapeutics, Inc. (Disarm) and a pre-clinical stage company as well as collaborations with Innovent Biologics, Inc. (Innovent), Sitryx Therapeutics Limited (Sitryx), Fochon Pharmaceuticals, Ltd. (Fochon), AbCellera Biologics Inc. (AbCellera), Evox Therapeutics Ltd (Evox), and Shanghai Junshi Biosciences Co., Ltd. (Junshi Biosciences).
Asset Impairment, Restructuring, and Other Special Charges (Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements)
•We recognized charges of $131.2 million primarily related to severance costs incurred as a result of actions taken worldwide to reduce our cost structure, as well as acquisition and integration costs incurred as part of the acquisition of Dermira, Inc. (Dermira).
Other-Net, (Income) Expense (Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements)
•We recognized $1.44 billion of net investment gains on equity securities.
Acquired IPR&D (Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements)
•We recognized acquired IPR&D charges of $239.6 million resulting from collaborations with AC Immune SA (AC Immune), Centrexion Therapeutics Corporation (Centrexion), ImmuNext, Inc. (ImmuNext), and Avidity Biosciences, Inc. (Avidity).
Asset Impairment, Restructuring, and Other Special Charges (Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements)
•We recognized charges of $575.6 million primarily associated with the accelerated vesting of Loxo Oncology, Inc. (Loxo) employee equity awards as part of the acquisition of Loxo.
Other-Net, (Income) Expense (Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements)
•We recognized $401.2 million of net investment gains on equity securities.
•We recognized a gain of $309.8 million on the sale of our antibiotics business in China.
•We recognized a debt extinguishment loss of $252.5 million related to the repurchase of debt.
Net Income from Discontinued Operations (Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements)
•We recognized a gain related to the disposition of Elanco of approximately $3.7 billion.
Late-Stage Pipeline
Our long-term success depends on our ability to continually discover or acquire, develop, and commercialize innovative new medicines. We currently have approximately 45 candidates in clinical development or under regulatory review, and a larger number of projects in the discovery phase.
The following new molecular entities (NMEs) and diagnostic agent are currently in Phase III clinical trials or have been submitted for regulatory review or have received first regulatory approval in the U.S., Europe, or Japan in 2020. In addition, the following table includes certain NMEs currently in Phase II clinical trials. The following table reflects the status of these NMEs and diagnostic agent, including certain other developments since January 1, 2020.
(1) In collaboration with Almirall, S.A. (Almirall) in Europe.
(2) Fast Track designation is designated to expedite the development and review of new therapies to treat serious conditions and address unmet medical needs.
(3) In collaboration with Pfizer, Inc.
(4) Continued approval may be contingent on verification and description of clinical benefit in confirmatory Phase III trials.
As part of our collaboration with Innovent, we plan to pursue registration of sintilimab injection (Tyvyt®) in the U.S. and other markets.
Our pipeline also contains several new indication line extension (NILEX) products. The following certain NILEX products are currently in Phase II or Phase III clinical testing, have been submitted for regulatory review, or have received first regulatory approval in the U.S., Europe, or Japan for use in the indication described in 2020. The following table reflects the status of certain NILEX products, including certain other developments since January 1, 2020:
(1) In collaboration with Boehringer Ingelheim.
(2) Fast Track designation is designated to expedite the development and review of new therapies to treat serious conditions and address unmet medical needs.
(3) Breakthrough Therapy designation is designed to expedite the development and review of potential medicines that are intended to treat a serious condition where preliminary clinical evidence indicates that the treatment may demonstrate substantial improvement over available therapy on a clinically significant endpoint.
There are many difficulties and uncertainties inherent in pharmaceutical research and development and the introduction of new products, as well as a high rate of failure inherent in new drug discovery and development. To bring a drug from the discovery phase to market can take over a decade and often costs in excess of $2 billion. Failure can occur at any point in the process, including in later stages after substantial investment. As a result, most funds invested in research programs will not generate financial returns. New product candidates that appear promising in development may fail to reach the market or may have only limited commercial success because of efficacy or safety concerns, inability to obtain or maintain necessary regulatory approvals or payer reimbursement or coverage, limited scope of approved uses, changes in the relevant treatment standards or the availability of new or better competitive products, difficulty or excessive costs to manufacture, or infringement of the patents or intellectual property rights of others. Regulatory agencies continue to establish high hurdles for the efficacy and safety of new products. Delays and uncertainties in drug approval processes can result in delays in product launches and lost market opportunity. In addition, it can be very difficult to predict revenue growth rates of new products.
We manage research and development spending across our portfolio of potential new medicines. A delay in, or termination of, any one project will not necessarily cause a significant change in our total research and development spending. Due to the risks and uncertainties involved in the research and development process, we cannot reliably estimate the nature, timing, and costs of the efforts necessary to complete the development of our research and development projects, nor can we reliably estimate the future potential revenue that will be generated from any successful research and development project. Each project represents only a portion of the overall pipeline, and none is individually material to our consolidated research and development expense. While we do accumulate certain research and development costs on a project level for internal reporting purposes, we must make significant cost estimations and allocations, some of which rely on data that are neither reproducible nor validated through accepted control mechanisms. Therefore, we do not have sufficiently reliable data to report on total research and development costs by project, by preclinical versus clinical spend, or by therapeutic category.
Other Matters
Patent Matters
We depend on patents or other forms of intellectual property protection for most of our revenue, cash flows, and earnings.
Our formulation patents for Forteo® expired in December 2018, and our use patents expired in August 2019 in major European markets and the U.S. Both the formulation patent and the use patent expired in August 2019 in Japan. We expect further volume decline as a result of the anticipated entry of generic and biosimilar competition following the loss of patent exclusivity in these markets. In the aggregate, we expect that the decline in revenue will have a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations and cash flows.
The Alimta® vitamin regimen patents, which we expect to provide us with patent protection for Alimta through June 2021 in Japan and major European countries, and through May 2022 in the U.S., have been challenged in each of these jurisdictions. In the U.S., most challenges have been finally resolved in our favor, and one remains in active litigation. We and Eagle Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Eagle) reached an agreement in December 2019 to settle all pending litigation, allowing Eagle a limited initial entry into the market with its product starting February 2022 (up to an approximate three-week supply) and subsequent unlimited entry starting April 2022. We expect that the entry of generic competition in the U.S. either from an unfavorable outcome to the patent challenge or following the loss of patent exclusivity, will cause a rapid and severe decline in revenue and have a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations and cash flows.
We are aware that several companies have received approval to market generic versions of pemetrexed in major European markets and that generic competitors may choose to attempt a launch at risk. Following a final decision in the Supreme Court of Germany in July 2020 overturning the lower court and upholding the validity of our Alimta patent, several generics that were on the market at risk in Germany left. We have removed the remaining generics from the market in Germany by obtaining preliminary injunctions in our favor. In September 2020, the Paris Court of First Instance in France issued a final decision upholding the validity of our Alimta patent and found infringement by Fresenius Kabi France and Fresenius Kabi Groupe France’s (collectively, Kabi) pemetrexed product. The court issued an injunction against Kabi and provisionally awarded us damages. In January 2021, that same court issued a preliminary injunction against Zentiva France S.A.S. (Zentiva), the last remaining company with a generic pemetrexed product on the French market, and provisionally awarded us damages. In October 2020, the Court of Appeal of the Netherlands overturned a lower court decision and ruled that our Alimta patent is valid and infringed and reinstated an injunction against Kabi, thereby removing Kabi's pemetrexed product from the Netherlands market. Kabi has appealed this decision to the Netherlands Supreme Court. Kabi's generic pemetrexed product was the only at risk generic on the market in the Netherlands. Our vitamin regimen patents have also been challenged in other smaller European jurisdictions.
We expect that further entry of generic competition for Alimta in major European markets following either the loss of effective patent protection or of patent exclusivity will cause a rapid and severe decline in revenue. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for a more detailed account of the legal proceedings currently pending in the U.S., Europe, and Japan regarding, among others, our Alimta patents.
The compound patent for Humalog® (insulin lispro) has expired in major markets. Global regulators have different legal pathways to approve similar versions of insulin lispro. A competitor launched a similar version of insulin lispro in certain European markets in 2017 and in the U.S. in the second quarter of 2018. While it is difficult to estimate the severity of the impact of insulin lispro products entering the market, we do not expect and have not experienced a rapid and severe decline in revenue; however, we expect additional pricing pressure and some loss of market share that would continue over time.
Our compound patent protection for Cymbalta® expired in Japan in January 2020. We expect generics to enter the market in mid-2021. We expect that the entry of generic competition will cause a rapid and severe decline in revenue and will have a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations and cash flows.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rates
As a global company with substantial operations outside the U.S., we face foreign currency risk exposure from fluctuating currency exchange rates, primarily the U.S. dollar against the euro and Japanese yen. While we seek to manage a portion of these exposures through hedging and other risk management techniques, significant fluctuations in currency rates can have a material impact, either positive or negative, on our revenue, cost of sales, and operating expenses. While there is uncertainty in the future movements in foreign exchange rates, fluctuations in these rates could negatively impact our future consolidated results of operations and cash flows.
Trends Affecting Pharmaceutical Pricing, Reimbursement, and Access
U.S.
In the U.S., public concern over access to and affordability of pharmaceuticals continues to drive the regulatory and legislative debate. These policy and political issues increase the risk that taxes, fees, rebates, or other cost control measures may be enacted to manage federal and state budgets. Key health policy initiatives affecting biopharmaceuticals include:
•the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act and subsequent stimulus bills that focus on ensuring availability and access to lifesaving drugs during a public health crisis,
•foreign reference pricing in Medicare and private insurance,
•modifications to Medicare Parts B and D,
•provisions that would allow the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to negotiate prices for biologics and drugs in Medicare,
•a reduction in biologic data exclusivity,
•proposals related to Medicaid prescription drug coverage and manufacturer drug rebates,
•proposals that would require biopharmaceutical manufacturers to disclose proprietary drug pricing information, and
•state-level proposals related to prescription drug prices and reducing the cost of pharmaceuticals purchased by government health care programs.
On July 24, 2020 and September 13, 2020, former U.S. President Donald Trump signed Executive Orders related to the 340B Prescription Drug Program, rebate reform in Medicare Part D, drug importation including insulin, and foreign reference pricing in Medicare Part B and Part D. Although their current status is unclear given the change in presidential administration, these Executive Orders, if implemented, could have a material adverse impact on our future consolidated results of operations, liquidity, and financial position. On September 1, 2020, Lilly announced it would distribute all 340B ceiling priced products directly to covered entities and their child sites only. Lilly provides 340B discounts to a contract pharmacy only if it is a wholly owned subsidiary of a covered entity, if a covered entity does not have an in-house pharmacy or, in the case of insulin, if the subject covered entity and its contract pharmacies agree to pass along the discount to patients without any markup for dispensing fees and without billing insurance or collecting duplicate discounts. Lilly has been transparent with regulators on its distribution activity and continues to comply with all 340B program requirements. Certain covered entities and their trade associations have threatened litigation, questioning whether Lilly’s program, and similar actions by other manufacturers, violate 340B program requirements. On October 9, 2020, three covered entities sued HHS and the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia seeking to compel the agencies to take enforcement action against Lilly and three other companies, among other requested relief. On October 21, 2020, a trade association representing certain covered entities sued HHS in the same court seeking to compel the agency to promulgate administrative dispute resolution regulations. On December 11, 2020, a number of associations and entities filed suit against HHS in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California requesting immediate enforcement of the contract pharmacy guidance. On December 31, 2020, the General Counsel of HHS issued an advisory opinion alleging that honoring contract pharmacy agreements is mandatory. In January 2021, Lilly filed suit against HHS, the Secretary of HHS, the HRSA, and the Administrator of the HRSA in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Indiana seeking a declaratory judgment that HHS's attempt to require manufacturers to permit contract pharmacy distribution is unlawful and a preliminary injunction enjoining implementation of the alternative dispute resolution process created by defendants and, with it, their application of the advisory opinion, and other related relief. The cases are pending and the impact of these cases and any subsequent litigation is uncertain. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
California and several other states have enacted legislation related to prescription drug pricing transparency and it is unclear the effect this legislation will have on our business. Several states have also passed importation legislation, including Colorado, Florida, Maine, New Hampshire, New Mexico, and Vermont. As of late 2020 several of these states were actively working with the former presidential administration to implement an importation program from Canada. On November 22, 2020, Florida announced it submitted a proposed importation plan to the U.S. In 2020, HHS and the FDA also took several actions to advance state importation initiatives, including issuing requests for proposals for personal importation and reimportation of insulin and a final rule on the Importation of Prescription Drugs. Additionally, on November 27, 2020, the Canadian Minister of Health issued an interim order to ensure that participation in bulk importation frameworks, such as the one recently established by the U.S., does not cause or exacerbate a drug shortage in Canada. We continue to review these state proposals and legislation, as well as federal rules and guidance published by HHS and the FDA, the impact of which is uncertain at this time. Currently, it is unclear if the current presidential administration will adopt any of the importation initiatives put forth by the former presidential administration. We will continue to monitor and assess these developments.
In the private sector, consolidation and integration among healthcare providers significantly affects the competitive marketplace for pharmaceuticals. Health plans, pharmacy benefit managers, wholesalers, and other supply chain stakeholders have been consolidating into fewer, larger entities, thus enhancing their purchasing strength and importance. Private third-party insurers, as well as governments, typically maintain formularies that specify coverage (the conditions under which drugs are included on a plan's formulary) and reimbursement (the associated out-of-pocket cost to the consumer) to control costs by negotiating discounted prices in exchange for formulary inclusion. Formulary placement can lead to reduced usage of a drug for the relevant patient population due to coverage restrictions, such as prior authorizations and formulary exclusions, or due to reimbursement limitations that result in higher consumer out-of-pocket cost, such as non-preferred co-pay tiers, increased co-insurance levels, and higher deductibles. Consequently, pharmaceutical companies compete for formulary placement not only on the basis of product attributes such as efficacy, safety profile, or patient ease of use, but also by providing rebates. Value-based agreements, where pricing is based on achievement (or not) of specified outcomes, are another tool that may be utilized between payers and pharmaceutical companies as formulary placement and pricing are negotiated. Price is an increasingly important factor in formulary decisions, particularly in treatment areas in which the payer has taken the position that multiple branded products are therapeutically comparable. We expect these downward pricing pressures will continue to negatively affect our consolidated results of operations. In addition to formulary placement, changes in insurance designs continue to drive greater consumer cost-sharing through high deductible plans and higher co-insurance or co-pays. We continue to invest in patient affordability solutions (resulting in lower revenue) in an effort to assist patients in affording their medicines.
The main coverage expansion provisions of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) are currently in effect through both state-based exchanges and the expansion of Medicaid. A trend has been the prevalence of benefit designs containing high out-of-pocket costs for patients, particularly for pharmaceuticals. In addition to the coverage expansions, many employers in the commercial market continue to evaluate strategies such as private exchanges and wider use of consumer-driven health plans to reduce their healthcare liabilities over time. Federal legislation, litigation, or administrative actions to repeal or modify some or all of the provisions of the ACA could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations and cash flows. At the same time, the broader paradigm shift towards performance-based reimbursement and the launch of several value-based purchasing initiatives have placed demands on the pharmaceutical industry to offer products with proven real-world outcomes data and a favorable economic profile.
International
International operations also are generally subject to extensive price and market regulations. Cost-containment measures exist in a number of countries, including additional price controls and mechanisms to limit reimbursement for our products. Such policies are expected to increase in impact and reach, given the pressures on national and regional health care budgets that come from a growing, aging population and ongoing economic challenges. As additional reforms are finalized, we will assess their impact on future revenues. In addition, governments in many emerging markets are becoming increasingly active in expanding health care system offerings. Given the budget challenges of increasing health care coverage for citizens, policies may be proposed that promote generics and biosimilars only and reduce current and future access to branded pharmaceutical products. The COVID-19 pandemic is also creating additional pressure on health systems worldwide. As a result, cost containment and other measures may intensify as governments manage and emerge from the pandemic.
Tax Matters
We are subject to income taxes and various other taxes in the U.S. and in many foreign jurisdictions; therefore, changes in both domestic and international tax laws or regulations could affect our effective tax rate, results of operations, and cash flows. Countries around the world, including the U.S., are actively considering and enacting tax law changes. The current presidential administration's tax proposal contains significant changes, including the rate at which income of U.S. companies would be taxed. Further, actions taken with respect to tax-related matters by associations such as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the European Commission could influence tax policy in countries in which we operate. In addition, global tax authorities routinely examine our tax returns and are expected to become more aggressive in their examinations of profit allocations among jurisdictions, which could affect our anticipated tax liabilities.
Acquisitions
We strategically invest in external research and technologies that we believe complement and strengthen our own efforts. These investments can take many forms, including acquisitions, strategic alliances, collaborations, investments, and licensing arrangements. We view our business development activity as an important way to achieve our strategies, as we seek to bolster our pipeline and enhance shareholder value. We continuously evaluate business development transactions that have the potential to strengthen our business.
In 2019, we acquired all shares of Loxo for a purchase price of $6.92 billion, net of cash acquired. Under the terms of the agreement, we acquired a pipeline of investigational medicines, including selpercatinib, an oral RET inhibitor, and LOXO-305, an oral BTK inhibitor. In the second quarter of 2020, the FDA approved selpercatinib (Retevmo) under its Accelerated Approval regulations and continued approval may be contingent upon verification and description of clinical benefit in confirmatory trials.
In 2020, we acquired all shares of Dermira for a purchase price of $849.3 million, net of cash acquired. Under terms of the agreement, we acquired lebrikizumab, a novel, investigational, monoclonal antibody being evaluated for the treatment of moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis. Lebrikizumab was granted Fast Track designation from the FDA. We also acquired Qbrexza® cloth, a medicated cloth for the topical treatment of primary axillary hyperhidrosis (uncontrolled excessive underarm sweating).
In January 2021, we acquired all shares of Prevail Therapeutics Inc. (Prevail) for a purchase price of approximately $880 million in cash plus one non-tradable contingent value right (CVR). The CVR entitles Prevail stockholders to up to an additional approximately $160 million payable, subject to certain terms and conditions, upon the first regulatory approval of a Prevail product in one of the following countries: U.S., Japan, United Kingdom, Germany, France, Italy, or Spain. Under the terms of the agreement, we acquired a biotechnology company developing potentially disease-modifying AAV9-based gene therapies for patients with neurodegenerative diseases.
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding our recent acquisitions.
Operating Results-2020
Revenue
The following table summarizes our revenue activity by region:
Numbers may not add due to rounding.
The following are components of the change in revenue compared with the prior year:
Numbers may not add due to rounding.
In the U.S., the revenue increase in 2020 was driven by increased volume primarily for Trulicity®, bamlanivimab, and Taltz®. Excluding bamlanivimab revenue, U.S. revenue grew 5 percent. The increase in revenue due to volume was partially offset by a decrease in realized prices. The decrease in realized prices in the U.S. was primarily driven by increased rebates to gain and maintain broad commercial access across the portfolio and, to a lesser extent, unfavorable segment mix and changes to estimates for rebates and discounts, most notably impacting Humalog. The decrease in realized prices in the U.S. was partially offset by modest list price increases and lower utilization in the 340B segment.
Outside the U.S., the revenue increase in 2020 was driven by increased volume primarily for Tyvyt, Trulicity, Alimta, and Olumiant. The increase in revenue due to volume was partially offset by lower realized prices primarily for Tyvyt and Alimta. The increase in volume and decrease in realized prices for Tyvyt and Alimta was driven primarily by their inclusion in government reimbursement programs in China.
The following table summarizes our revenue activity in 2020 compared with 2019:
Numbers may not add due to rounding.
NM - Not meaningful
(1) Humalog revenue includes insulin lispro.
(2) Jardiance revenue includes Glyxambi®, Synjardy®, and Trijardy® XR.
(3) Bamlanivimab sales are pursuant to EUA.
(4) Trajenta revenue includes Jentadueto®.
Revenue of Trulicity, a treatment for type 2 diabetes and to reduce the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events in adult patients with type 2 diabetes and established cardiovascular disease or multiple cardiovascular risk factors, increased 22 percent in the U.S., driven by increased volume, partially offset by lower realized prices primarily due to higher contracted rebates. Revenue outside the U.S. increased 27 percent, primarily driven by increased volume.
Revenue of Humalog, an injectable human insulin analog for the treatment of diabetes, decreased 11 percent in the U.S., driven by lower realized prices, partially offset by higher demand. Revenue outside the U.S. decreased 1 percent, primarily driven by the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange rates. Included in the revenue of Humalog in the U.S. are our own insulin lispro authorized generics, which began launching in the second quarter of 2019 in order to lower out-of-pocket costs for patients. While it is difficult to estimate the severity of the impact of similar insulin lispro products entering the market, we do not expect and have not experienced a rapid severe decline in revenue. However, due to the impact of competition and due to pricing pressure in the U.S. and some international markets, we expect some price decline and loss of market share to continue over time.
Revenue of Alimta, a treatment for various cancers, increased 4 percent in the U.S., primarily driven by higher realized prices. Revenue outside the U.S. increased 19 percent, primarily driven by increased volume in China and Germany, partially offset by lower realized prices. We will lose our patent protection for Alimta in Japan and major European countries in June 2021. We expect the limited entry of generic competition in the U.S. starting February 2022 and subsequent unlimited entry starting April 2022. We expect that the entry of generic competition following the loss of exclusivity will cause a rapid and severe decline in revenue. See "Results of Operations - Executive Overview - Other Matters" for more information.
Revenue of Taltz, a treatment for moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis, active psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and active non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis, increased 27 percent in the U.S., primarily driven by increased demand. Revenue outside the U.S. increased 43 percent, primarily driven by increased volume.
Revenue of Humulin, an injectable human insulin for the treatment of diabetes, decreased 2 percent in the U.S., driven by lower realized prices, partially offset by higher volume. Revenue outside the U.S. decreased 4 percent, driven by decreased volume and the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange rates, partially offset by higher realized prices.
Revenue of Jardiance, a treatment for type 2 diabetes and to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death in adult patients with type 2 diabetes and established cardiovascular disease, increased 10 percent in the U.S., driven by increased volume. Revenue outside the U.S. increased 41 percent, driven primarily by increased volume. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding our collaboration with Boehringer Ingelheim involving Jardiance.
Revenue of Basaglar, a long-acting human insulin analog for the treatment of diabetes, decreased 4 percent in the U.S., driven by lower realized prices. Revenue outside the U.S. increased 19 percent, driven primarily by increased volume. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding our collaboration with Boehringer Ingelheim involving Basaglar. A competitor launched a similar version of glargine in the U.S. in 2020. Due to the impact of competitive pressures, we expect some price decline and loss of market share over time.
Revenue of Forteo, an injectable treatment for osteoporosis in postmenopausal women and men at high risk for fracture and for glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis in men and postmenopausal women, decreased 21 percent in the U.S., primarily driven by decreased demand. Revenue outside the U.S. decreased 29 percent, driven by decreased volume and, to a lesser extent, lower realized prices. We expect further volume declines as a result of the anticipated entry of generic and biosimilar competition due to the loss of patent exclusivity in the U.S., Japan, and major European markets. See "Executive Overview - Other Matters - Patent Matters" for more information.
Revenue of Cyramza, a treatment for various cancers, increased 14 percent in the U.S., driven primarily by increased demand and, to a lesser extent, higher realized prices. Revenue outside the U.S. increased 10 percent, driven primarily by increased volume.
Revenue of Verzenio, a treatment for HR+, HER2- metastatic breast cancer, increased 36 percent in the U.S., driven by increased demand and, to a lesser extent, higher realized prices. Revenue outside the U.S. increased $169.5 million driven by higher volume.
Gross Margin, Costs, and Expenses
Gross margin as a percent of revenue was 77.7 percent in 2020, a decrease of 1.1 percentage points compared with 2019, primarily due to the impact of lower realized prices on revenue, the unfavorable effect of foreign exchange rates on international inventories sold, and higher intangibles amortization expense related to Retevmo, partially offset by charges in 2019 resulting from the withdrawal of Lartruvo® and greater manufacturing efficiencies. Gross margin percent for 2020 was also negatively impacted as a result of bamlanivimab sales in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Research and development expenses increased 9 percent to $6.09 billion in 2020, driven primarily by approximately $450 million of development expenses for COVID-19 therapies. Excluding these expenses related to COVID-19 therapies, research and development expenses were relatively flat.
Marketing, selling, and administrative expenses decreased 1 percent to $6.12 billion in 2020 primarily due to lower marketing activity.
We recognized acquired IPR&D charges of $660.4 million in 2020 resulting from the acquisitions of Disarm and a pre-clinical stage company as well as collaborations with Innovent, Sitryx, Fochon, AbCellera, Evox, and Junshi Biosciences. In 2019, we recognized acquired IPR&D charges of $239.6 million resulting from collaborations with AC Immune, Centrexion, ImmuNext, and Avidity.
We recognized asset impairment, restructuring, and other special charges of $131.2 million in 2020. The charges were primarily related to severance costs incurred as a result of actions taken worldwide to reduce our cost structure, as well as acquisition and integration costs incurred as part of the acquisition of Dermira. In 2019, we recognized $575.6 million of asset impairment, restructuring, and other special charges primarily associated with the accelerated vesting of Loxo employee equity awards as part of the acquisition of Loxo.
Other-net, (income) expense was income of $1.17 billion in 2020 compared to income of $291.6 million in 2019 primarily driven by higher net gains on investment securities.
Our effective tax rate was 14.3 percent in 2020, compared with an effective tax rate of 11.9 percent in 2019 driven by net discrete tax benefits in 2019.
Operating Results-2019
For a discussion of our results of operations pertaining to 2019 and 2018 see Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Condition" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
FINANCIAL CONDITION AND LIQUIDITY
We believe our available cash and cash equivalents, together with our ability to generate operating cash flow and our access to short-term and long-term borrowings, are sufficient to fund our existing and planned capital requirements, which include:
•working capital requirements, including related to employee payroll, clinical trials, manufacturing materials, and taxes;
•capital expenditures;
•share repurchases and dividends;
•repayment of outstanding short-term and long-term borrowings;
•contributions to our defined benefit pension and retiree health benefit plans;
•milestone and royalty payments; and
•potential business development activities, including acquisitions, strategic alliances, collaborations, investments, and licensing arrangements.
Our management continuously evaluates our liquidity and capital resources, including our access to external capital, to ensure we can adequately and efficiently finance our capital requirements. As of December 31, 2020, our material cash requirements primarily related to purchases of goods and services to produce our products and conduct our operations, capital equipment expenditures, dividends, repayment of outstanding borrowings, the remaining obligations for the one-time repatriation transition tax (also known as the 'Toll Tax') from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (2017 Tax Act), leases, unfunded commitments to invest in venture capital funds, and retirement benefits (see Notes 11, 14, 10, 7, and 15 to the consolidated financial statements). We anticipate our cash requirements related to ordinary course purchases of goods and services and capital equipment expenditures will be consistent with our past levels relative to revenues.
Cash and cash equivalents increased to $3.66 billion as of December 31, 2020, compared with $2.34 billion at December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by operating activities was $6.50 billion in 2020, compared with $4.84 billion in 2019. Net cash provided by operating activities in 2019 included approximately $360 million of cash paid to settle the accelerated vesting of Loxo employee equity awards (see Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements). Refer to the consolidated statements of cash flows for additional details on the significant sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
In addition to our cash and cash equivalents, we held total investments of $2.99 billion and $2.06 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for additional details.
In February 2020, we completed our acquisition of Dermira for $18.75 per share, or approximately $1.1 billion, which was funded through cash on hand and the issuance of commercial paper. In February 2019, we completed our acquisition of Loxo for $235 per share or approximately $6.9 billion, which was funded through a mixture of cash and debt. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
As of December 31, 2020, total debt was $16.60 billion, an increase of $1.28 billion compared with $15.32 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase primarily related to the net proceeds from the issuance of $1.00 billion of 2.25 percent fixed-rate notes in May 2020, as well as the net proceeds from the issuance of an additional $250.0 million of 2.25 percent fixed-rate notes and the issuance of $850.0 million of 2.50 percent fixed-rate notes in August 2020. We used the net proceeds from the sale of these notes for general corporate purposes, which included the repayment of outstanding commercial paper used to fund a portion of the purchase price for our acquisition of Dermira. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
As of December 31, 2020, we had a total of $5.24 billion of unused committed bank credit facilities, $5.00 billion of which is available to support our commercial paper program. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional details. We believe that amounts accessible through existing commercial paper markets should be adequate to fund any short-term borrowing needs.
For the 135th consecutive year, we distributed dividends to our shareholders. Dividends of $2.96 per share and $2.58 per share were paid in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In the fourth quarter of 2020, effective for the dividend to be paid in the first quarter of 2021, the quarterly dividend was increased to $0.85 per share, resulting in an indicated annual rate for 2021 of $3.40 per share.
Capital expenditures of $1.39 billion during 2020, compared to $1.03 billion in 2019.
In 2020, we repurchased $500.0 million of shares under our $8.00 billion share repurchase program authorized in June 2018. As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.00 billion remaining under this program. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for additional details.
On March 11, 2019, we completed the disposition of our remaining 80.2 percent ownership of Elanco common stock through a tax-free exchange offer, which resulted in a reduction in shares of our common stock outstanding by approximately 65 million as of that date.
In January 2021, we completed our acquisition of Prevail for $22.50 per share, or approximately $880 million in cash, plus one non-tradable CVR that entitles Prevail stockholders to up to an additional $4.00 per share in cash (or an aggregate of approximately $160 million) payable, subject to certain terms and conditions. This acquisition was funded primarily through cash on hand and the issuance of commercial paper. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
See "Results of Operations - Executive Overview - Other Matters - Patent Matters" for information regarding recent and upcoming losses of patent protection.
Both domestically and abroad, we continue to monitor the potential impacts of the economic environment; the creditworthiness of our wholesalers and other customers, including foreign government-backed agencies and suppliers; the uncertain impact of health care legislation; and various international government funding levels.
In the normal course of business, our operations are exposed to fluctuations in interest rates, currency values, and fair values of equity securities. These fluctuations can vary the costs of financing, investing, and operating. We seek to address a portion of these risks through a controlled program of risk management that includes the use of derivative financial instruments. The objective of this risk management program is to limit the impact on earnings of fluctuations in interest and currency exchange rates. All derivative activities are for purposes other than trading.
Our primary interest rate risk exposure results from changes in short-term U.S. dollar interest rates. In an effort to manage interest rate exposures, we strive to achieve an acceptable balance between fixed and floating rate debt positions and may enter into interest rate derivatives to help maintain that balance. Based on our overall interest rate exposure at December 31, 2020 and 2019, including derivatives and other interest rate risk-sensitive instruments, a hypothetical 10 percent change in interest rates applied to the fair value of the instruments as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, would not have a material impact on earnings, cash flows, or fair values of interest rate risk-sensitive instruments over a one-year period.
Our foreign currency risk exposure results from fluctuating currency exchange rates, primarily the U.S. dollar against the euro and Japanese yen. We face foreign currency exchange exposures when we enter into transactions arising from subsidiary trade and loan payables and receivables denominated in foreign currencies. We also face currency exposure that arises from translating the results of our global operations to the U.S. dollar at exchange rates that have fluctuated from the beginning of the period. We may enter into foreign currency forward or option derivative contracts to reduce the effect of fluctuating currency exchange rates (principally the euro and the Japanese yen). Our corporate risk-management policy outlines the minimum and maximum hedge coverage of such exposures. Gains and losses on these derivative contracts offset, in part, the impact of currency fluctuations on the existing assets and liabilities. We periodically analyze the fair values of the outstanding foreign currency derivative contracts to determine their sensitivity to changes in foreign exchange rates. A hypothetical 10 percent change in exchange rates (primarily against the U.S. dollar) applied to the fair values of our outstanding foreign currency derivative contracts as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, would not have a material impact on earnings, cash flows, or financial position over a one-year period. This sensitivity analysis does not consider the impact that hypothetical changes in exchange rates would have on the underlying foreign currency denominated transactions.
Our fair value risk exposure relates primarily to our public equity investments and to equity investments that do not have readily determinable fair values. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our carrying values of these investments were $2.04 billion and $1.12 billion, respectively. A hypothetical 20 percent change in fair value of the equity instruments would have impacted other-net, (income) expense by $407.6 million and $224.7 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have a material current effect or that are reasonably likely to have a material future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources. We acquire and collaborate on potential products still in development and enter into research and development arrangements with third parties that often require milestone and royalty payments to the third party contingent upon the occurrence of certain future events linked to the success of the asset in development. Milestone payments may be required contingent upon the successful achievement of an important point in the development life cycle of the pharmaceutical product (e.g., approval for marketing by the appropriate regulatory agency or upon the achievement of certain sales levels). If required by the arrangement, we may make royalty payments based upon a percentage of the sales of the product in the event that regulatory approval for marketing is obtained.
Individually, these arrangements are generally not material in any one annual reporting period. However, if milestones for multiple products covered by these arrangements were reached in the same reporting period, the aggregate expense or aggregate milestone payments made could be material to our results of operations or cash flows, respectively, in that period. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements for additional details. These arrangements often give us the discretion to unilaterally terminate development of the product, which would allow us to avoid making the contingent payments; however, we are unlikely to cease development if the compound successfully achieves milestone objectives. We also note that, from a business perspective, we view these payments as positive because they signify that the product is successfully moving through development and is now generating or is more likely to generate cash flows from sales of products.
APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
In preparing our financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (GAAP), we must often make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and related disclosures. Some of those judgments can be subjective and complex, and consequently actual results could differ from those estimates. For any given individual estimate or assumption we make, it is possible that other people applying reasonable judgment to the same facts and circumstances could develop different estimates. We believe that, given current facts and circumstances, it is unlikely that applying any such other reasonable judgment would cause a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations, financial position, or liquidity for the periods presented in this report. Our most critical accounting estimates have been discussed with our audit committee and are described below.
Revenue Recognition and Sales Return, Rebate, and Discount Accruals
We recognize revenue primarily from two different types of contracts, product sales to customers (net product revenue) and collaborations and other arrangements. For product sales to customers, provisions for returns, rebates and discounts are established in the same period the related product sales are recognized. To determine the appropriate transaction price for our product sales at the time we recognize a sale to a direct customer, we estimate any rebates or discounts that ultimately will be due to the direct customer and other customers in the distribution chain under the terms of our contracts. Significant judgments are required in making these estimates. The largest of our sales rebate and discount amounts are rebates associated with sales covered by managed care, Medicare, Medicaid, and chargeback contracts in the U.S. In determining the appropriate accrual amount, we consider our historical rebate payments for these programs by product as a percentage of our historical sales as well as any significant changes in sales trends (e.g., patent expiries and product launches), an evaluation of the current contracts for these programs, the percentage of our products that are sold via these programs, and our product pricing.
Refer to Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for further information on revenue recognition and sales return, rebate, and discount accruals.
Revenue recognized from collaborations and other arrangements will include our share of profits from the collaboration, as well as royalties, upfront and milestone payments we receive under these types of contracts.
Financial Statement Impact
We believe that our accruals for sales returns, rebates, and discounts are reasonable and appropriate based on current facts and circumstances. Our global rebate and discount liabilities are included in sales rebates and discounts on our consolidated balance sheet. Our global sales return liability is included in other current liabilities and other noncurrent liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet. As of December 31, 2020, a 5 percent change in our global sales return, rebate, and discount liability would have led to an approximate $313 million effect on our income before income taxes.
The portion of our global sales return, rebate, and discount liability resulting from sales of our products in the U.S. was approximately 90 percent as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following represents a roll-forward of our most significant U.S. sales return, rebate, and discount liability balances, including managed care, Medicare, Medicaid, chargebacks, and patient assistance programs:
(1) Adjustments of the estimates for these returns, rebates, and discounts to actual results were less than 2 percent of consolidated net sales for each of the years presented.
Product Litigation Liabilities and Other Contingencies
Background and Uncertainties
Product litigation liabilities and other contingencies are, by their nature, uncertain and based upon complex judgments and probabilities. The factors we consider in developing our product litigation liability reserves and other contingent liability amounts include the merits and jurisdiction of the litigation, the nature and the number of other similar current and past matters, the nature of the product and the current assessment of the science subject to the litigation, and the likelihood of settlement and current state of settlement discussions, if any. In addition, we accrue for certain product liability claims incurred, but not filed, to the extent we can formulate a reasonable estimate of their costs based primarily on historical claims experience and data regarding product usage. We accrue legal defense costs expected to be incurred in connection with significant product liability contingencies when both probable and reasonably estimable.
We also consider the insurance coverage we have to diminish the exposure for periods covered by insurance. In assessing our insurance coverage, we consider the policy coverage limits and exclusions, the potential for denial of coverage by the insurance company, the financial condition of the insurers, and the possibility of and length of time for collection. Due to a very restrictive market for product liability insurance, we are self-insured for product liability losses for all our currently marketed products. In addition to insurance coverage, we consider any third-party indemnification to which we are entitled or under which we are obligated. With respect to our third-party indemnification rights, these considerations include the nature of the indemnification, the financial condition of the indemnifying party, and the possibility of and length of time for collection.
The litigation accruals and environmental liabilities and the related estimated insurance recoverables have been reflected on a gross basis as liabilities and assets, respectively, on our consolidated balance sheets.
Acquisitions
Background and Uncertainties
To determine whether acquisitions or licensing transactions should be accounted for as a business combination or as an asset acquisition, we make certain judgments, which include assessing whether the acquired set of activities and assets would meet the definition of a business under the relevant accounting rules.
If the acquired set of activities and assets meets the definition of a business, assets acquired and liabilities assumed are required to be recorded at their respective fair values as of the acquisition date. The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the acquired net assets, where applicable, is recorded as goodwill. If the acquired set of activities and assets does not meet the definition of a business, the transaction is recorded as an acquisition of assets and, therefore, any acquired IPR&D that does not have an alternative future use is charged to expense at the acquisition date, and goodwill is not recorded. Refer to Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
The judgments made in determining estimated fair values assigned to assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination, as well as estimated asset lives, can materially affect our consolidated results of operations. The fair values of intangible assets, including acquired IPR&D, are determined using information available near the acquisition date based on estimates and assumptions that are deemed reasonable by management. Significant estimates and assumptions include, but are not limited to, probability of technical success, revenue growth and discount rate. Depending on the facts and circumstances, we may deem it necessary to engage an independent valuation expert to assist in valuing significant assets and liabilities.
The fair values of identifiable intangible assets are primarily determined using an "income method," as described in Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of Indefinite-Lived and Long-Lived Assets
Background and Uncertainties
We review the carrying value of long-lived assets (both intangible and tangible) for potential impairment on a periodic basis and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset (or asset group) may not be recoverable. We identify impairment by comparing the projected undiscounted cash flows to be generated by the asset (or asset group) to its carrying value. If an impairment is identified, a loss is recorded equal to the excess of the asset’s net book value over its fair value, and the cost basis is adjusted.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if impairment indicators are present, by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the intangible asset is less than its carrying amount. If we conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than the carrying amount, a quantitative test that compares the fair value of the intangible asset to its carrying value is performed to determine the amount of any impairment.
Several methods may be used to determine the estimated fair value of acquired IPR&D, all of which require multiple assumptions. We utilize the “income method,” as described in Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements.
For acquired IPR&D assets, the risk of failure has been factored into the fair value measure and there can be no certainty that these assets ultimately will yield a successful product, as discussed previously in “Results of Operations - Executive Overview - Late-Stage Pipeline." The nature of the pharmaceutical business is high-risk and requires that we invest in a large number of projects to maintain a successful portfolio of approved products. As such, it is likely that some acquired IPR&D assets will become impaired in the future.
Estimates of future cash flows, based on what we believe to be reasonable and supportable assumptions and projections, require management’s judgment. Actual results could vary materially from these estimates.
Retirement Benefits Assumptions
Background and Uncertainties
Defined benefit pension plan and retiree health benefit plan costs include assumptions for the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, and retirement age. These assumptions have a significant effect on the amounts reported. In addition to the analysis below, see Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our retirement benefits.
Annually, we evaluate the discount rate and the expected return on plan assets in our defined benefit pension and retiree health benefit plans. We use an actuarially determined, plan-specific yield curve of high quality, fixed income debt instruments to determine the discount rates. In evaluating the expected return on plan assets, we consider many factors, with a primary analysis of current and projected market conditions, asset returns and asset allocations (approximately 65 percent of which are growth investments); and the views of leading financial advisers and economists. We may also review our historical assumptions compared with actual results, as well as the discount rates and expected return on plan assets of other companies, where applicable. In evaluating our expected retirement age assumption, we consider the retirement ages of our past employees eligible for pension and medical benefits together with our expectations of future retirement ages.
Annually, we determine the fair value of the plan assets in our defined benefit pension and retiree health benefit plans. Approximately 35 percent of our plan assets are in hedge funds and private equity-like investment funds (collectively, alternative assets). We value these alternative investments using significant unobservable inputs or using the net asset value reported by the counterparty, adjusted as necessary. Inputs include underlying net asset values, discounted cash flows valuations, comparable market valuations, and adjustments for currency, credit, liquidity and other risks.
Financial Statement Impact
If the 2020 discount rate for the U.S. defined benefit pension and retiree health benefit plans (U.S. plans) were to change by a quarter percentage point, income before income taxes would change by $21.6 million. If the 2020 expected return on plan assets for U.S. plans were to change by a quarter percentage point, income before income taxes would change by $28.8 million. If our assumption regarding the 2020 expected age of future retirees for U.S. plans were adjusted by one year, our income before income taxes would be affected by $52.0 million. The U.S. plans, including Puerto Rico, represent approximately 75 percent and 80 percent of the total projected benefit obligation and total plan assets, respectively, at December 31, 2020.
Adjustments to the fair value of plan assets are not recognized in pension and retiree health benefit expense in the year that the adjustments occur. Such changes are deferred, along with other actuarial gains and losses, and are amortized into expense over the expected remaining service life of employees.
Income Taxes
Background and Uncertainties
We prepare and file tax returns based upon our interpretation of tax laws and regulations, and we record estimates based upon these interpretations. Our tax returns are routinely subject to examination by various taxing authorities, which could result in future tax, interest, and penalty assessments. Inherent uncertainties exist in estimates of many tax positions due to changes in tax law resulting from legislation and regulation as concluded through the various jurisdictions’ tax court systems. We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. The amount of unrecognized tax benefits is adjusted for changes in facts and circumstances. For example, adjustments could result from changes to existing tax law, the issuance of regulations by the taxing authorities, new information obtained during a tax examination, or resolution of a tax examination. We believe our estimates for uncertain tax positions are appropriate and sufficient to pay assessments that may result from examinations of our tax returns. We recognize both accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
We have recorded valuation allowances against certain of our deferred tax assets, primarily those that have been generated from net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards in certain taxing jurisdictions. In evaluating whether we would more likely than not recover these deferred tax assets, we have not assumed future taxable income in the jurisdictions associated with these carryforwards where history does not support such an assumption. Implementation of tax planning strategies to recover these deferred tax assets or to generate future taxable income in these jurisdictions could lead to the reversal of all or a portion of these valuation allowances and a reduction of income tax expense.
Financial Statement Impact
As of December 31, 2020, a 5 percent change in the amount of uncertain tax positions and the valuation allowance would result in a change in net income of $83.4 million and $40.8 million, respectively.
LEGAL AND REGULATORY MATTERS
Information relating to certain legal proceedings can be found in Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements and is incorporated here by reference.
FINANCIAL EXPECTATIONS FOR 2021
For the full year of 2021, we expect EPS to be in the range of $7.10 to $7.75, which excludes estimated acquisition and integration costs related to the acquisition of Prevail. We anticipate total revenue between $26.5 billion and $28.0 billion, including an estimated $1 billion to $2 billion of revenue from COVID-19 therapies. Revenue growth is expected to be driven by volume from Trulicity, Taltz, Verzenio, Jardiance, Olumiant, Cyramza, Emgality, Tyvyt, and Retevmo, as well as by COVID-19 therapies. Revenue growth is expected to be partially offset by lower revenue for products that have lost patent exclusivity. We expect mid-single digit net price declines globally in 2021. In the U.S., we expect low-to-mid-single digit net price declines, driven primarily by increased rebates to maintain broad commercial access and segment mix, partially offset by lower utilization in the 340B segment. Outside the U.S., we expect net price declines in China, Japan, and Europe.
We anticipate that gross margin as a percent of revenue will be approximately 77 percent in 2021. Research and development expenses are expected to be in the range of $6.5 billion to $6.7 billion, including approximately $300 million to $400 million of continued investment in COVID-19 therapies. Marketing, selling, and administrative expenses are expected to be in the range of $6.2 billion to $6.4 billion. Other-net, (income) expense is expected to be expense in the range of $200 million to $300 million. The 2021 effective tax rate is expected to be approximately 15 percent.