Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and in our other Securities and Exchange Commission filings. The following discussion may contain predictions, estimates, and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These risks could cause our actual results to differ materially from any future performance suggested below.
The principal objectives of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are to enhance our overall financial disclosures by providing explanation and analysis of the Company’s financial results and condition, as viewed by our management.
Overview
We are a medical device company that develops, manufactures, and markets medical devices and implants largely used in the treatment of peripheral vascular disease. To a lesser extent, our devices are also used to treat diabetes and cardiovascular disease, and are used in neurosurgery applications. We also provide processing and cryopreservation services of peripheral vascular human tissue for implantation into patients. Our principal product offerings are sold throughout the world, primarily in the United States, Europe, the U.K., Canada and Asia/Pacific Rim. We estimate that the annual worldwide market for all of our devices exceeds $5 billion, within which our core product lines address roughly $750 million. We have grown our business using a three-pronged strategy: 1) pursuing a focused call point, 2) competing for sales of low-rivalry niche products, and 3) expanding our worldwide direct sales force while acquiring and developing complementary devices. We have used acquisitions as a primary means of further penetrating the peripheral vascular device market, and we expect to continue to pursue this strategy in the future. We currently manufacture most of our products in our Burlington, Massachusetts headquarters.
Our products are used primarily by vascular surgeons who treat peripheral vascular disease through both open surgery and endovascular techniques. In contrast to interventional cardiologists and interventional radiologists, vascular surgeons can perform both open surgery and minimally invasive endovascular procedures, and are therefore uniquely positioned to provide a wide range of treatment options to patients.
Our principal product lines include the following: valvulotomes, biologic vascular patches, biologic vascular grafts, carotid shunts, embolectomy catheters, anastomotic clips, radiopaque marking tape, powered phlebectomy devices, synthetic vascular grafts and surgical glue. Through our RestoreFlow allografts business we also provide services related to the processing and cryopreservation of human vascular and cardiac tissue.
To assist us in evaluating our business strategies, we monitor long-term technology trends in peripheral vascular and other device markets. Additionally, we consider the information obtained from discussions with the medical community in connection with the demand for our products, including potential new product launches.
Historically we have experienced success in lower-rivalry niche segments, for example the markets for valvulotomes and carotid shunts. In the valvulotome market, our highly differentiated devices have historically allowed us to increase our selling prices while maintaining our unit share. In contrast, we have experienced less success in highly competitive markets such as our AlboGraft vascular graft product line, where we face strong competition from larger companies with greater resources. While we believe that these challenging market dynamics can be mitigated by our relationships with vascular surgeons, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in these highly competitive markets.
In recent years we have also experienced success in international markets, such as Europe, where we sometimes offer comparatively lower average selling prices. If we continue to seek growth opportunities outside of North America, we may experience downward pressure on our gross margin.
Our business opportunities include the following:
• the long-term growth of our direct sales force in North America, Europe and Asia/Pacific Rim;
• the addition of complementary products through acquisitions;
• the introduction of our products in new territories upon receipt of regulatory approvals or registrations in these territories;
• the updating of existing products and introduction of new products through research and development; and
• the consolidation of manufacturing into our Burlington, Massachusetts corporate headquarters.
We sell our products and services primarily through a direct sales force. As of December 31, 2020 our sales force was comprised of 80 sales representatives in North America, Europe and Asia/Pacific Rim, including two export managers. Our worldwide headquarters is located in Burlington, Massachusetts, and we also have North American sales offices in Chandler, Arizona and Vaughan, Canada. Our European headquarters is located in Sulzbach, Germany, and we also have sales offices in Milan, Italy; Madrid, Spain; and Hereford, England. Our Asia/Pacific Rim headquarters is located in Singapore, and we have sales offices in Tokyo, Japan; Shanghai, China; and Kensington, Australia. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, approximately 95% and 94%, respectively, of our net sales were generated in territories in which we employ direct sales representatives. We also sell our products in other countries, including South Korea, Russia and Brazil, through distributors.
Because we believe that direct-to-hospital sales engender closer customer relationships, and allow for higher selling prices and gross margins, we periodically enter into transactions with our distributors to transition their sales of our medical devices into our direct sales organization:
•
In March 2018, we terminated our master distribution agreement with Sinopharm United Medical Device Co., Ltd. (Sinopharm), under which we sold our TRIVEX devices for distribution in China. In April 2018, we began selling these products to sub-distributors in China. In June 2019, we agreed to purchase at a discount all of Sinopharm’s remaining inventory of our powered phlebectomy devices in settlement of a lawsuit they filed against us in China.
•
During 2018, we entered into definitive agreements with several former Applied Medical and Cardial distributors in Europe and Asia in order to terminate their distribution of our recently-acquired embolectomy catheter, polyester graft and valve cutter products, and we began selling direct-to-hospitals in those geographies. The termination fees totaled approximately $0.1 million.
•
During 2020, we entered into definitive agreements with, or participated with Anteris in concluding agreements with, several former Anteris distributors in Europe and Canada, in order to terminate their distribution of our recently-acquired bovine cardiac and vascular patch products, and we began selling direct-to-hospitals in those geographies. The termination fees totaled approximately $0.1 million.
•
During 2020, we participated with Artegraft in concluding agreements with several of their former U.S. distributors in order to terminate their distribution of our bovine graft products. We now sell Artegraft products direct-to-hospitals throughout the U.S.
Our strategy for growing our business includes the acquisition of complementary product lines and companies and occasionally the discontinuance or divestiture of products or activities that are no longer complementary:
•
In April 2018, we divested our Reddick cholangiogram catheter and Reddick-Saye screw product lines to Specialty Surgical Instrumentation for $7.4 million.
•
In September 2018, we acquired the assets of the Syntel embolectomy catheter business from Applied Medical for $14.2 million.
•
In October 2018, we acquired the assets of Cardial, a subsidiary of Becton, Dickinson, located in Saint-Etienne, France, for €2.0 million. Cardial’s product lines include polyester vascular grafts, valve cutters and surgical glue.
•
In July 2019, we entered into an agreement with UreSil, LLC to purchase the remaining assets of their Eze-Sit valve cutter business, including U.S. distribution rights, for $8.0 million.
•
In October 2019, we entered into an agreement with Anteris to purchase the assets of their CardioCel biologic patch business for $15.5 million plus additional payments of up to $7.8 million, depending upon the satisfaction of certain contingencies.
•
In June 2020, we entered into an agreement with Artegraft to purchase the assets of their bovine graft business for $72.5 million plus additional payments of up to $17.5 million, depending upon 2021 - 2023 unit sales.
In addition to relying upon acquisitions for growth, we also rely on internal product development efforts to bring differentiated technology and next-generation products to market:
•
In 2018, we expanded the U.S. indications for our Anastoclip GC to include dura tissue repair.
•
In 2019, we launched XenoSure Plus aimed at a segment of the market that prefers a thicker biologic patch
•
In 2019, we also launched DuraSure, a biologic patch indicated for closing or repairing dural defects during open neurosurgical procedures.
•
In 2020, we launched RestoreFlow cardiac allografts for use in cardiac repair and restoration.
In addition to our sales growth strategies, we have also executed several operational initiatives designed to consolidate manufacturing into our Burlington facilities. We expect these plant consolidations will result in improved control over production quality as well as reduced costs. Our most recent manufacturing transfers included:
•
In September 2018, we acquired the embolectomy catheter business from Applied Medical. We initiated a project to transfer production to our Burlington facilities. This transfer is now complete.
•
In late 2018 and into 2019, we expanded our Burlington biologic clean room in order to transfer the production of our Omniflow II vascular graft from our North Melbourne, Australia facility to Burlington. This transfer is now complete.
•
In October 2019, we acquired the biologic patch business assets from Anteris. In July 2020, we initiated a project to transfer production to our Burlington facilities. We expect this transfer to be complete in 2022 or 2023
Our execution of these transfers may affect the comparability of our financial results from period to period and may cause fluctuations as we incur process engineering and other charges.
Fluctuations in the exchange rates between the U.S. dollar and foreign currencies, primarily the Euro, affect our financial results. For the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately 42% of our sales took place outside the U.S., largely in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. We expect foreign currencies will represent a significant percentage of future sales. Selling, marketing, and administrative costs related to these sales are also denominated in foreign currencies, thereby partially mitigating our bottom-line exposure to exchange rate fluctuations. However, if there is an increase in the rate at which a foreign currency is exchanged for U.S. dollars, it will require more of the foreign currency to equal a specified amount of U.S. dollars than before the rate increase. In such cases we will record less revenue in U.S. dollars than we did before the exchange rate changed. For 2020, we estimate that the effects of changes in foreign exchange rates increased our reported sales by approximately $0.8 million, as compared to rates in effect for 2019.
Net Sales and Expense Components
The following is a description of the primary components of our net sales and expenses:
Net sales. We derive our net sales from the sale of our products and services, less discounts and returns. Net sales include the shipping and handling fees paid for by our customers. Most of our sales are generated by our direct sales force and are shipped and billed to hospitals or clinics throughout the world. In countries where we do not have a direct sales force, sales are primarily to distributors, who sell on to hospitals and clinics. In certain cases our products are consigned to a hospital or clinic prior to purchase; in those instances we recognize revenue at the time the product is used in surgery rather than at shipment.
Cost of sales. We manufacture the majority of the products that we sell. Our cost of sales consists primarily of manufacturing personnel, raw materials and components, depreciation of property and equipment, and other allocated manufacturing overhead, as well as freight expense we pay to ship products to customers.
Sales and marketing. Our sales and marketing expense consists primarily of salaries, commissions, stock-based compensation, travel and entertainment, attendance at vascular congresses, training programs, advertising and product promotions, direct mail and other marketing costs.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of executive, finance and human resource salaries, stock-based compensation, legal and accounting fees, information technology expense, intangible asset amortization expense and insurance expense.
Research and development. Research and development expense includes costs associated with the design, development, testing, enhancement and regulatory approval of our products, principally salaries, laboratory testing and supply costs. It also includes costs associated with design and execution of clinical studies, regulatory submissions and costs to register, maintain, and defend our intellectual property, and royalty payments associated with licensed and acquired intellectual property.
Other income (expense). Other income (expense) primarily includes interest income and expense, foreign currency gains (losses), and other miscellaneous gains (losses).
Income tax expense. We are subject to federal and state income taxes for earnings generated in the U.S., which include operating losses or profits in certain foreign jurisdictions for certain years depending on tax elections made, and foreign taxes on earnings of our wholly-owned foreign subsidiaries. Our consolidated tax expense is affected by the mix of our taxable income (loss) in the U.S. and foreign subsidiaries, permanent items, discrete items, unrecognized tax benefits, and amortization of goodwill for U.S. tax reporting purposes.
Results of Operations
In March 2020, we began to experience negative effects on our revenues and operations as a result of the COVID-19 global pandemic. Our revenues increased 7% during the quarter ended March 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year quarter, but for the quarter ended June 30, 2020, sales decreased 16% versus the prior year quarter, with the largest sales impacts in the U.S., Germany, Italy and France. Some of our sales offices were closed during the second quarter of 2020, and in many cases our employees are still working remotely.
During the quarter ended September 30, 2020 revenues increased by $7.3 million, or 25%, compared to the quarter ended September 30, 2019; however, of that increase, $5.4 million was from our recently acquired Artegraft product line, and we estimate that approximately $0.5 million was from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. For the full year 2020 our sales were higher by 10%, or $12.1 million, as compared to 2019, with a substantial portion ($11.1 million) attributable to the Artegraft acquisition. We currently expect to see a continued negative impact from COVID-19 on our revenues, gross profit and gross margin in 2021, but it is difficult to estimate by how much, due to the uncertain duration and severity of the pandemic.
In April 2020, we initiated a plan to reduce our global workforce by approximately 13%, and to temporarily reduce base salaries for certain employees. The salary reduction program applied to all employees earning more than $40,000 per year and was applied outside of the U.S. to the extent permissible under applicable local laws and regulations. These salary reductions remained in place until August 31, 2020, at which point full base salaries were restored. In addition, we have subsequently begun to hire employees into many of the areas previously reduced, and we expect to add personnel in 2021. Annual salary and bonus increases for 2021, which normally occur in January of each year, were brought forward to November 2020.
For reasons described above, we expect that results will continue to be impacted in the near term. These financial statements and management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in that context.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019
The following tables set forth, for the periods indicated, our results of operations and the change between the specified periods expressed as a percentage increase or decrease:
Net sales. Net sales increased 10% or $12.1 million to $129.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $117.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was largely from recently acquired products including Artegraft bovine grafts of $10.8 million and CardioCel bovine cardiac patches of $5.3 million. We also had higher valvulotome sales of $3.9 million, including sales of Eze-Sit in the U.S., which we acquired in July 2019. These sales increases were partly offset by lower OEM sales of $2.2 million, lower sales of carotid shunts of $1.8 million, lower XenoSure bovine carotid patch sales of $1.1 million, lower TRIVEX sales of $1.0 million and lower AnastoClip sales of $0.8 million. All other products decreased on a net basis by $2.0 million. We estimate that changes in foreign exchange rates during the year ended December 31, 2020 increased net sales by $0.8 million.
Direct-to-hospital net sales were 95% of total sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 94% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net sales by geography. Net sales in the Americas increased $12.1 million or 17% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven mainly by recently acquired products including Artegraft of $10.8 million and CardioCel of $3.5 million. We also had higher valvulotome sales of $2.8 million. These increases were partly offset by decreases across most product lines which, with the exception of OEM sales, we believe were due primarily to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Product lines with the largest decreases included carotid shunts and OEM sales, each decreasing by $1.5 million, bovine carotid patches which decreased $0.7 million and vessel closure systems which decreased by $0.9 million. All other products combined decreased by $0.4 million.
Europe, Middle East and Africa net sales were relatively unchanged year-over-year, at $39.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $39.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Sales of CardioCel cardiac patches increased by $1.4 million and valvulotomes increased by $1.0 million, offset by declines in most other product lines. Products with larger decreases included Omniflow II grafts and OEM sales, which each decreased by $0.7 million, and bovine carotid patches, which decreased by $0.6 million. As discussed under Item 1A. Risk Factors, we have experienced a lapse in CE mark certifications for some products due to one of our Notified Bodies abandoning CE mark certifications services. This caused certain of our products to go on backorder starting in the quarter ended June 30, 2020, including bovine carotid patches and polyester grafts. We received temporary approvals in most European countries, which allowed us to resume sales of those products for a limited time period, pending recertification.
Asia/Pacific Rim net sales increased $0.4 million or 4% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Increased sales of CardioCel cardiac patches of $0.5 million, bovine carotid patches of $0.2 million and embolectomy catheters of $0.2 million were offset in part by declines in sales of TRIVEX of $0.6 million.
* Not applicable
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased $4.8 million to $84.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, while gross margin decreased by 270 basis points to 65.4% in the period. The decrease in the gross margin was driven primarily by the impact of purchase accounting from the Artegraft acquisition and to a lesser extent by manufacturing inefficiencies, as well as a slightly less favorable product mix, including higher sales of CardioCel cardiac patches and embolectomy catheters.
Operating Expenses.
* Not a meaningful percentage.
Sales and marketing. For the year ended December 31, 2020, sales and marketing expense decreased $6.6 million, or 22%, to $23.7 million. The decrease was driven mainly by expense reduction programs implemented in response to the COVID-19 global pandemic, including a reduction in force and temporary base salary cuts in place until August 31. The major components of the sales and marketing expense reduction were salaries and related expenses of $2.3 million, travel and related expenses of $1.9 million, and commission expense of $1.6 million. As a percentage of net sales, sales and marketing expense decreased to 22% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 26% in the prior period.
General and administrative. For the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expense increased $3.5 million, or 18%, to $22.5 million. Higher acquisition-related costs including consulting and other transaction costs of approximately $1.2 million and increased amortization expense of $2.6 million were partly offset by lower compensation-related costs from our reduction in force and temporary wage cuts of $0.6 million. Other expense categories increased by an additional $0.3 million on a net basis. As a percentage of net sales, general and administrative expense was 17% for 2020 and 16% for 2019.
Research and development. For the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development expense increased $0.8 million, or 9%, to $10.1 million. Product development and process engineering expenses decreased $1.2 million or 22% on a combined basis, in large part due to completion of the manufacturing transfer of certain acquired products to our Burlington facilities. Clinical and regulatory expenses increased $2.3 million or 67%, as a result of consulting and other costs incurred in connection with reinstating or maintaining regulatory approvals, especially in Europe, as well as regulatory submissions for our products in geographies such as China and Japan, and testing related to our biologic products. Royalty expense decreased $0.3 million due to the expiration of underlying royalty agreements. As a percentage of sales, research and development expense were 8% for both 2020 and 2019.
Gain on sale of building. During the first quarter of 2020, in connection with our planned manufacturing transfer of Omniflow II to Burlington, we executed an agreement to sell our land and building in North Melbourne, Australia for A$2.9 million ($2.0 million). The sale closed in September 2020. The building had a net book value of A$1.9 million ($1.4 million). We recognized a $0.5 million gain on the sale, net of applicable sales taxes and administrative costs.
Other income (expense). Other income (expense) primarily includes interest income and expense, foreign currency gains (losses), and other miscellaneous gains (losses). Interest income was $0.2 million and $0.7 million, respectively for 2020 and 2019. The decrease was due to the liquidation of most of our interest-bearing investments to acquire Artegraft. We also incurred debt of $65.0 million in order to complete the acquisition, which generated $1.3 million of interest expense in 2020. Foreign exchange losses on settlements or remeasurement of receivables and payables denominated in foreign currencies were $0.3 million and $0.2 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Income tax expense. We recorded a provision for taxes of $6.1 million on pre-tax income of $27.4 million in 2020 as compared to $3.7 million on pre-tax income of $21.7 million in 2019. The 2020 provision was comprised of a U.S. federal tax provision of $4.2 million, a state tax provision of $0.7 million, and a foreign tax provision of $1.2 million. The 2019 provision was comprised of a U.S. federal tax provision of $2.0 million, a state tax provision of $0.4 million, and a foreign tax provision of $1.3 million. Our effective tax rate differed from the U.S. statutory tax rate in 2020 principally because of stock option exercises, taxes on foreign earnings, valuation allowances, and certain permanent differences. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or timing of the resolution of any particular tax matter, we believe that our tax reserves reflect the probable outcome of known contingencies.
We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be realized through future taxable income and record a valuation allowance to reduce gross deferred tax assets to an amount we believe is more likely than not to be realized. As of December 31, 2020, we have provided a valuation allowance of $1.8 million for deferred tax assets primarily related to Australian net operating loss and capital loss carry forwards and Massachusetts tax credit carry forwards that are not expected to be realized.
Refer to Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information about income tax expense (benefit) including information related to U.S. tax reform legislation.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2018
The following tables set forth, for the periods indicated, our results of operations and the change between the specified periods expressed as a percentage increase or decrease:
Net sales. Net sales increased 11% or $11.7 million to $117.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $105.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Sales increases were primarily driven by increased sales of our embolectomy catheters of $4.3 million, of which $3.4 million was from our 2018 acquisition of Syntel embolectomy catheters; valvulotomes of $1.6 million, of which $1.2 million was from our Eze-Sit and Chevalier acquisitions in 2019 and 2018, respectively; and polyester grafts of $1.5 million, of which $0.4 million was from our Cardial acquisition. We also had an increase in human tissue cryopreservation service revenues from our RestoreFlow allograft business of $1.4 million. Our recently acquired CardioCel and VascuCel products contributed combined sales of $1.2 million in 2019. These and other product line increases were partially offset by decreased sales of TRIVEX of $0.8 million.
Direct-to-hospital net sales were 94% for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 95% for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Net sales by geography. Net sales in the Americas increased $5.7 million or 9% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increased sales of embolectomy catheters of $2.6 million, in part due to our acquisition of the Syntel embolectomy catheters, and increased human tissue cryopreservation services of $1.4 million. We also increased sales of valvulotomes by $1.1 million, and our recently acquired CardioCel and VascuCel products contributed sales of $0.9 million in the Americas in 2019. These increases were partially offset by decreased sales of TRIVEX of $0.8 million.
Europe, Middle East and Africa net sales increased $4.2 million or 12% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increased sales of polyester grafts of $1.3 million, embolectomy catheters of $0.8 million, OEM sales of $0.7 million, valvulotomes of $0.6 million and Omniflow II grafts of $0.4 million.
Asia/Pacific Rim net sales increased $1.8 million or 27% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by increased sales of embolectomy catheters of $0.9 million, AnastoClips of $0.3 million, occlusion catheters of $0.2 million and biologic vascular patches of $0.2 million. These and other increases were offset in part by decreased valvulotome sales of $0.1 million.
* Not applicable
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased $5.9 million to $79.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, while gross margin decreased by 190 basis points to 68.1% in the period. The gross margin was favorably impacted by higher average selling prices across most product lines, as well manufacturing efficiencies. These increases were more than offset, however, by an unfavorable product mix, including recently acquired products which typically have a lower gross margin prior to being integrated into our Burlington manufacturing operations. Foreign exchange rate changes also had an unfavorable impact in 2019.
* Not a meaningful percentage.
Sales and marketing. For the year ended December 31, 2019, sales and marketing expense increased $3.0 million, or 11%, to $30.3 million. The increase was primarily driven by higher personnel costs, including compensation, commissions and travel expenses associated with expanding our sales force. We also had higher costs due to the implementation of customer relationship management software. As a percentage of net sales, sales and marketing expense was 26% in both 2019 and 2018.
General and administrative. For the year ended December 31, 2019, general and administrative expense increased $1.4 million, or 8%, to $19.1 million. General and administrative expense increases were primarily related to acquisition-related costs including amortization of intangible assets, professional fees, bank and credit card fees, bad debt expense and facilities costs. As a percentage of net sales, general and administrative expense was 16% for 2019 and 17% for 2018.
Research and development. For the year ended December 31, 2019, research and development expense increased $1.1 million, or 13%, to $9.3 million. Product development and process engineering increased $0.8 million on a combined basis, in large part due to transitioning certain acquired products to our Burlington manufacturing operations. Clinical and regulatory expenses increased $0.3 million, related to regulatory submissions for new products in geographies such as China and Japan, and testing related to our biologic products.
Gain on divestitures and acquisitions. The 2018 gains on divestitures and acquisitions relate to the sale of our Reddick cholangiogram catheter and Reddick-Saye screw product lines to Symmetry Surgical, which resulted in a gain of $5.9 million, and also to our purchase of the Cardial assets from Becton Dickinson, which resulted in a bargain purchase gain of $1.6 million.
Other income (expense). Interest income was $0.7 million and $0.6 million, respectively for 2019 and 2018. Foreign exchange losses on settlements or remeasurement of receivables and payables denominated in foreign currencies were $0.2 million and $0.4 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Income tax expense. We recorded a provision for taxes of $3.7 million on pre-tax income of $21.7 million in 2019 as compared to $5.5 million on pre-tax income of $28.4 million in 2018. The 2019 provision was comprised of a U.S. federal tax provision of $2.0 million, a state tax provision of $0.4 million, and a foreign tax provision of $1.3 million. The 2018 provision was comprised of a U.S. federal tax provision of $2.8 million, a state tax provision of $0.5 million and a foreign tax provision of $2.2 million. Our effective tax rate differed from the U.S. statutory tax rate in 2019 principally because of stock option exercises, taxes on foreign earnings, valuation allowances, and certain permanent differences. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or timing of the resolution of any particular tax matter, we believe that our tax reserves reflect the probable outcome of known contingencies.
We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be realized through future taxable income and record a valuation allowance to reduce gross deferred tax assets to an amount we believe is more likely than not to be realized. As of December 31, 2019, we had provided a valuation allowance of $1.4 million for deferred tax assets primarily related to Australian net operating loss and capital loss carry forwards and Massachusetts tax credit carry forwards that are not expected to be realized.
Refer to Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information about income tax expense (benefit) including information related to U.S. tax reform legislation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we held $26.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and $0.2 million in a short-term managed income mutual fund investment, as compared to $11.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and $20.9 million in the mutual fund investment at December 31, 2019. Our cash and cash equivalents are highly liquid investments with maturities of 90 days or less at the date of purchase, consist of money market funds, and are stated at cost, which approximates fair value. Our short-term marketable securities consist of a managed income mutual fund investing mainly in short-term investment grade, U.S.-dollar denominated fixed and floating-rate debt. All of our cash held outside of the U.S. is available for corporate use, with the exception of $2.6 million held by subsidiaries in jurisdictions for which earnings are planned to be permanently reinvested.
On February 23, 2021, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $15.0 million of the Company’s common stock through transactions on the open market, in privately negotiated purchases or otherwise until February 22, 2022. The repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time. To date we have not made any repurchases under this program.
In June 2020, in connection with the Artegraft acquisition, we incurred debt of $65 million including a five-year revolving line of credit of $25 million and a five-year term loan of $40 million. The loans bear interest at either the Base Rate as defined in the agreement plus an applicable margin of 1.25% to 1.75% depending on our consolidated leverage ratio, or the Eurodollar Rate plus an applicable margin of 2.25% to 2.75% depending on our consolidated leverage ratio. At December 31, 2020 all outstanding borrowings or $39.0 million were designated as Eurodollar loans and had an interest rate of 3.5%.
The term of the revolving line of credit is five years and allows re-borrowing up to $25 million during the term, with all outstanding amounts due on June 22, 2025. The term loan is repayable in increasing quarterly installments of from $0.5 million to $1.0 million commencing September 30, 2020 through March 31, 2025, with the remaining outstanding balance due on June 22, 2025. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we made scheduled principal payments on the term loan of $1.0 million and repaid the revolving line of credit in full.
Operating and Capital Expenditure Requirements
We require cash to pay our operating expenses, make capital expenditures, and pay our long-term liabilities. Since our inception, we have funded our operations through public offerings and private placements of equity securities, short-term and long-term borrowings, and funds generated from our operations.
We recognized operating income of $28.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, $21.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and $28.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. We expect to fund any increased costs and expenditures from our existing cash and cash equivalents, though our future capital requirements depend on numerous factors. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following:
•
the revenues generated by product sales;
•
payments associated with potential future quarterly cash dividends to our common stockholders;
•
payments associated with our stock repurchase program;
•
future acquisition-related payments;
•
payments associated with U.S income and other taxes;
•
the costs associated with expanding our manufacturing, marketing, sales, and distribution efforts;
•
the costs associated with our initiatives to sell direct-to-hospital in new countries;
•
the costs of obtaining and maintaining FDA, CE mark and other regulatory clearances of our existing and future products; and
•
the number, timing, and nature of acquisitions and other strategic transactions.
Our cash balances may decrease as we continue to use cash to fund our operations, make acquisitions, repay outstanding debt, pay dividends, repurchase shares of our common stock and make deferred payments related to prior acquisitions. We believe that our cash, cash equivalents, investments and the interest we earn on these balances will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next twelve months. If these sources of cash are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements beyond the next twelve months, we may seek to sell additional equity or debt securities, or access our available revolving credit facility. The sale of additional equity and debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt securities, such securities could have rights senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations and possibly our ability to pay dividends. We may require additional capital beyond our currently forecasted amounts. Any such required additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all.
Cash Flows
Net cash provided by operating activities. Net cash provided by operating activities was $34.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and consisted of $21.2 million net income, adjusted for non-cash items of $12.7 million (including primarily depreciation and amortization of $8.4 million, stock-based compensation of $3.0 million, provisions for inventory write-offs and doubtful accounts of $1.8 million, and fair value adjustments on contingent consideration for acquisitions of $0.2 million, offset by a benefit from deferred taxes of $0.3 million, and a gain on the sale of a building of $0.5 million) as well as cash from working capital of $0.9 million. The net cash generated from working capital was driven by increases in accounts payable and other liabilities of $4.3 million, offset by increases in inventory and other deferred costs of $2.6 million and accounts receivable of $0.9 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $14.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and consisted of $17.9 million net income, adjusted for non-cash items of $10.1 million (including primarily depreciation and amortization of $5.4 million, stock-based compensation of $2.6 million, provisions for inventory write-offs and doubtful accounts of $1.1 million, a provision for deferred taxes of $0.8 million and fair value adjustments on contingent consideration for acquisitions of $0.2 million), as well as working capital uses of $13.6 million. The net cash used for working capital was driven by increases in inventory of $11.3 million, accounts receivable of $1.3 million, and other current assets of $0.7 million, as well as a decrease in accounts payable and other liabilities of $0.3 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $19.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, and consisted of $22.9 million net income, adjusted for non-cash items of $1.7 million (including primarily depreciation and amortization of $4.3 million, stock-based compensation of $2.3 million, and provisions for inventory write-offs and doubtful accounts of $1.0 million, offset by a benefit for deferred taxes of $2.2 million and gains on acquisitions and divestitures of $7.5 million), as well as working capital uses of $1.7 million. The net cash used for working capital was driven by increases in accounts receivable of $1.3 million, inventory of $4.3 million and other current assets of $0.4 million, offset by an increase in accounts payable and other liabilities of $4.3 million.
Net cash used in investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $52.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, including acquisition-related payments of $72.6 million primarily associated with the purchase of Artegraft and expenditures on property, equipment and technology of $3.0 million, offset by net sales and purchases of marketable securities of $20.7 million and proceeds from the sale of the North Melbourne, Australia building of $2.0 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $24.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by cash paid for acquisitions of $21.0 million, as well as purchases of property and equipment of $3.8 million primarily associated with biologic clean room build-outs in Burlington. These investments were in part offset by net sales of short-term investments of $0.9 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, driven by cash paid for acquisitions of $12.3 million, as well as purchases of property and equipment of $3.1 million primarily associated with clean room build-outs in Burlington. These investments were in part offset by proceeds from the Reddick divestiture of $7.4 million and net sales of short-term investments of $0.9 million.
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $32.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting primarily of borrowings of $63.2 million net of debt issuance costs and stock option exercises proceeds of $5.4 million, net of shares repurchased to cover employee payroll taxes. These increases to cash were partly offset by dividend payments of $7.7 million, debt payments of $26.0 million and deferred payments for acquisitions of $2.8 million.
Net cash used in financing activities was $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, driven primarily by dividend payments of $6.7 million and payments related to prior acquisitions of $2.3 million. We had proceeds from stock option exercises of $4.9 million, offset by the acquisition of $0.7 million of treasury shares to cover minimum withholding taxes on restricted stock unit vestings.
Net cash used in financing activities was $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, driven primarily by dividend payments of $5.4 million and payments related to prior acquisitions of $1.2 million. We had proceeds from stock option exercises of $3.0 million, offset by the acquisition of $0.7 million of treasury shares to cover minimum withholding taxes on restricted stock unit vestings.
Dividends. In February 2011, our Board of Directors approved a policy for the payment of quarterly cash dividends on our common stock. Future declarations of quarterly dividends and the establishment of future record and payment dates are subject to approval by our Board of Directors on a quarterly basis. The dividend activity for the periods presented is as follows:
On February 23, 2021, our Board of Directors approved a quarterly cash dividend on our common stock of $0.11 per share payable on March 25, 2021, to stockholders of record at the close of business on March 9, 2021, which will total approximately $2.2 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have adopted various accounting policies to prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Our most significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Our estimates and assumptions, including those related to revenue recognition, inventories, intangible assets, and income taxes are reviewed on an ongoing basis and updated as appropriate. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Certain of our more critical accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. These judgments are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, and observance of trends in the industry, as appropriate. Different, reasonable estimates could have been used in the current period. Additionally, changes in accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Both of these factors could have a material impact on the presentation of our financial condition, changes in financial condition, or results of operations.
We believe that the following financial estimates and related accounting policies are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require subjective or complex judgments. Further, we believe that the items discussed below are properly recorded in our consolidated financial statements for all periods presented. Management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of our most critical financial estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors and our independent registered public accounting firm. The judgments about those financial estimates are based on information available as of the date of our consolidated financial statements. Those financial estimates and related policies include:
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is derived primarily from the sale of disposable or implantable devices used during vascular surgery. We sell primarily directly to hospitals, and to a lesser extent to distributors. We also occasionally enter into consigned inventory arrangements with either hospitals or distributors on a limited basis. Following our acquisition of the RestoreFlow allograft business, we also derive revenues from human tissue cryopreservation services. These service revenues are recognized when services have been provided and the tissue has been shipped to the customer, provided all other revenue recognition criteria discussed below have been met.
We recognize revenue under the provisions of ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). The core principle of Topic 606 is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The standard explains that to achieve the core principle, an entity should take the following actions:
Step 1: Identify the contract with a customer
Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract
Step 3: Determine the transaction price
Step 4: Allocate the transaction price
Step 5: Recognize revenue when or as the entity satisfies a performance obligation
Revenue is recognized when or as a company satisfies a performance obligation by transferring a promised good or service to a customer (which is when the customer obtains control of that good or service). In instances in which shipping and handling activities are performed after a customer takes control of the goods (such as when title passes upon shipment from our dock), we have made the policy election allowed under Topic 606 to account for these activities as fulfillment costs and not as performance obligations.
We generally reference customer purchase orders to determine the existence of a contract. Orders that are not accompanied by a purchase order are confirmed with the customer in writing or verbally. The purchase orders or similar correspondence, once accepted, identify the performance obligations as well as the transaction price, and otherwise outline the rights and obligations of each party. We allocate the transaction price of each contract among the performance obligations in accordance with the pricing of each item specified on the purchase order, which is in turn based on standalone selling prices per our published price lists. In cases where we discount products or provide certain items free of charge, we allocate the discount proportionately to all performance obligations, unless it can be demonstrated that the discount should be allocated entirely to one or more, but not all, of the performance obligations.
We record revenue, net of allowances for returns and discounts, fees paid to group purchasing organizations, and any sales and value added taxes required to be invoiced, which we have elected to exclude from the measurement of the transaction price as allowed by the standard, at the time of shipment (taking into consideration contractual shipping terms), or in the case of consigned inventory, when it is consumed. Shipment is the point at which control of the product and title passes to our customers, and at which LeMaitre has a present right to receive payment for the goods.
We do not carry any contract assets or contract liabilities, as there are generally no unbilled amounts due from customers under contracts for which we have partially satisfied performance obligations, or amounts received from customers for which we have not satisfied performance obligations. We satisfy our performance obligations under revenue contracts within a short time period from receipt of the orders, and payments from customers are typically received within 30 to 60 days of fulfillment of the orders, except in certain geographies such as Spain and Italy where the payment cycle is customarily longer. Accordingly, there is no significant financing component to our revenue contracts. Additionally, we have elected as a policy that incremental costs (such as commissions) incurred to obtain contracts are expensed as incurred, due to the short-term nature of the contracts.
Customers returning products may be entitled to full or partial credit based on the condition and timing of the return. To be accepted, a returned product must be unopened (if sterile), unadulterated, and undamaged, must have at least 18 months remaining prior to its expiration date, or twelve months for our hospital customers in Europe, and generally be returned within 30 days of shipment. These return policies apply to sales to both hospitals and distributors. The amount of products returned to us, either for exchange or credit, has not been material. Nevertheless, we provide for an allowance for future sales returns based on historical return experience, which requires judgment. Our cost of replacing defective products has not been material and is accounted for at the time of replacement.
Inventory and Other Deferred Costs
Inventory consists of finished products, work-in-process, and raw materials. We value inventory at the lower of cost or market value. Cost includes materials, labor, and manufacturing overhead and is determined using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method. On a quarterly basis, we review inventory quantities on hand and analyze the provision for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on product expiration dating and our estimated sales forecast, which is based on sales history and anticipated future demand. Our estimates of future product demand may not be accurate, and we may understate or overstate the provision required for excess and obsolete inventory. Accordingly, any significant unanticipated changes in demand could have a significant impact on the value of our inventory and results of operations.
In connection with our RestoreFlow allograft business, other deferred costs include costs incurred for the preservation of human vascular tissues available for shipment, tissues currently in active processing, and tissues held in quarantine pending release to implantable status. By U.S. federal law human tissues cannot be bought or sold. Therefore, the tissues we preserve are not held as inventory, and the costs we incur to procure and process human vascular tissues are instead accumulated and deferred.
Valuation of Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Intangible assets consist primarily of purchased developed technology, patents, customer relationships and trademarks, and are amortized over their estimated useful lives, ranging from 2 to 16 years. Goodwill represents the amount of consideration paid in connection with business acquisitions in excess of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. We generally calculate the fair value of our intangible assets as the present value of estimated future cash flows we expect to generate from the asset using a risk-adjusted discount rate. In determining our estimated future cash flows associated with our intangible assets, we use estimates and assumptions about future revenue contributions, cost structures, and remaining useful lives of the asset. These estimates and assumptions require significant judgment and actual results may differ from assumed or estimated amounts. Other intangible assets, net of accumulated amortization, were $58.9 million as of December 31, 2020 and $24.9 million as of December 31, 2019. Goodwill was $65.9 million as of December 31, 2020 and $40.0 million as of December 31, 2019.
Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we are subject to proceedings, lawsuits, and other claims and assessments for matters related to, among other things, business acquisitions, employment, commercial matters, intellectual property matters, product liability and product recalls. We assess the likelihood of any adverse judgments or outcomes to these matters as well as potential ranges of probable losses. A determination of the amount of reserves required, if any, for these contingencies is made after careful analysis of each individual issue. The required reserves may change in the future due to new developments in each matter or changes in approach such as a change in settlement strategy in dealing with these matters. We record charges for the costs we anticipate incurring in connection with litigation and claims against us when we determine a loss is probable and we can reasonably estimate these costs. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we were not subject to any material litigation, claims or assessments.
In connection with certain of our acquisitions, we may enter into agreements to pay additional future consideration upon the satisfaction of certain agreed-upon criteria. We record liabilities for these arrangements at estimated fair value reflecting management’s assumptions of the likelihood of achieving the specified criteria at the time of the closing, which may require significant judgment. These amount are remeasured each reporting period, with any adjustments recorded in income from operations.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under the asset and liability method, deferred taxes are determined based on the difference between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect in the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. The provision for income taxes includes taxes currently payable and deferred taxes resulting from the tax effects of temporary differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities. We maintain valuation allowances where it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. Changes in the valuation allowances are included in our tax provision in the period of change. In determining whether a valuation allowance is warranted, we evaluate factors such as prior earnings history, expected future earnings, carry-back and carry-forward periods and tax strategies that could potentially enhance the likelihood of the realization of a deferred tax asset.
We recognize, measure, present and disclose in our financial statements, uncertain tax positions that we have taken or expect to take on a tax return. We recognize in our financial statements the impact of tax positions that meet a “more likely than not” threshold, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
Our policy is to classify interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13 Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), which requires a financial asset (or group of financial assets) measured at amortized cost to be presented at the net amount expected to be collected. The allowance for credit losses is a valuation account that is deducted from the amortized cost basis of the financial asset(s) to present the net carrying value at the amount expected to be collected on the financial asset. The measurement of expected credit losses is based on relevant information about past events, including historical experience, current conditions and reasonable, supportable forecasts that affect the collectability of the reported amount, and requires judgment in determining relevant information and estimation methods. The new standard was effective for us beginning January 1, 2020. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our financial statements, as the only financial assets we have that are affected by the standard are trade receivables for which we have historically employed a collectability estimation technique.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13 Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820), which modifies the disclosure requirements for fair value measurements. The new standard was effective for us beginning January 1, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our financial statements.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-04 Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350), which, among other provisions, eliminates “step 2” from the goodwill impairment test. The annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test will be performed by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An impairment charge should be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. The new standard was effective for us beginning January 1, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12 Income Taxes (Topic 740), which simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 as well as clarifying and amending other areas of existing GAAP under Topic 740. The new standard is effective for us beginning January 1, 2021, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this standard is not expected to have a material impact on our financial statements.