Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from our management’s expectations. Factors that could cause such differences are discussed in “Forward-Looking Statements”, “Risk Factor Summary” and “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Overview
Limbach Holdings, Inc. (the “Company,” “Limbach,” “we”, “us” or “our”) is an integrated building systems solutions firm whose expertise is in the design, modular prefabrication, installation, management and maintenance of heating, ventilation, air-conditioning (“HVAC”), mechanical, electrical, plumbing and control systems for commercial, institutional and light industrial markets. Our customers are primarily located throughout Florida, California, Massachusetts, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Washington DC, Virginia, West Virginia, Ohio and Michigan. We operate in two segments, (i) Construction, in which we generally manage new construction or renovation projects that involve primarily HVAC, plumbing, or electrical services, and (ii) Service, in which we provide maintenance or services primarily on HVAC, plumbing, electrical systems, and building controls direct for building owners and direct contracting projects. Our market sectors primarily include the following:
•Healthcare, including research, acute care and inpatient hospitals, for regional and national hospital groups;
•Education, including both public and private colleges, universities, research centers and K-12 facilities;
•Sports and entertainment, including sports arenas, entertainment facilities (including casinos) and amusement rides;
•Infrastructure, including passenger terminals and maintenance facilities for rail and airports;
•Government, including various facilities for federal, state and local agencies facilities;
•Hospitality, including hotels and resorts;
•Commercial, including office buildings and other commercial structures;
•Multi-family apartments;
•Mission critical facilities, including data centers; and
•Industrial manufacturing facilities, including indoor grow farms.
The Limbach business was founded in 1901, and maintains an established brand within the industry. We believe we are viewed as a value added and trusted partner by our customers, which include building owners, general contractors (“GCs”) and construction managers (“CMs”).
We also construct new buildings, additions and provide renovations of existing buildings for owners, GCs and CMs. In addition, we provide services to building owners that are centered on HVAC, plumbing, and electrical building systems, which typically include ongoing maintenance, upgrades to existing building systems, energy retrofits and delivering general construction services.
Construction Segment
Our construction offerings for owners, GCs, and CMs include the following:
•Competitive lump sum bidding (including plan and specification bidding with select qualified competitors);
•Design/Assist services, for which we typically contract on a negotiated basis to maintain a project budget, and occasionally are contracted on a lump sum basis;
•Design/Build, which services are provided on either a negotiated basis or through competitive bidding; and
•Performance contracting, for which we assess a building owner’s facilities and offer a proposal to reduce energy and operating costs, and when successful, we often perform ongoing maintenance of the building systems.
Our specialty contracting is provided through either our special projects division or our Construction segment. Special projects typically range in value up to $1 million. Construction projects typically range in value up to $100 million. Actual contracts may be below or above these stated ranges depending upon the actual project requirements.
We possess the ability to provide design services in-house through our design center located in Orlando, Florida. We sell the majority of our services by leading with our engineered solutions, which we believe are highly valued by our select customer base and drive higher margin outcomes.
Service Segment
Our services within the Service segment primarily include the following categories:
•Maintenance of HVAC, plumbing and/or electrical systems;
•Service projects for system and equipment upgrades, including energy retrofits;
•Emergency service work, which we refer to as “Spot Work”;
•Automatic temperature controls (“ATC”);
•Specialty contracting, including the design and construction of HVAC, plumbing and/or electrical systems within commercial and institutional buildings; and
•Energy monitoring.
Typical maintenance agreements range in value up to approximately $200,000. Service projects typically range in value up to $500,000. Spot work varies in value and is typically billed at pre-approved billing rates. ATC projects vary in size up to $250,000. Specialty contracting, general contracting and performance contracting can range up to $100 million.
Outlook for 2021
For 2021, the Company has reviewed its operations and has determined that it is continuing to take steps to focus on the following key areas (i) increasing profitability, operating cash flows and actions oriented to maintaining sufficient liquidity, (ii) continuing to emphasize owner-direct construction and service work and (iii) targeting projects in its Construction segment and pursuing processes that avoid or reduce exposure to jobs that create potential financial challenges for the Company.
In focusing on profitability and cash flows, among other things, the Company will continue to aggressively pursue claims that it has asserted against project contractors, owners, engineers, consultants, subcontractors or others involved in projects where the Company has incurred additional costs exceeding the contract price or for amounts not included in the original contract price. Management believes that the resolution of such currently existing and possible future claims will be a significant part of the Company’s success related to profitability, liquidity and financial performance. Additionally, the 2019 Refinancing Agreement (as defined below) and the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement (as defined below) were both refinanced in February 2021 (as more fully described in Note 20 - Subsequent Events in the notes to consolidated financial statements). Management believes that this refinancing, along with the continued focus on claims recovery and on management’s ability to manage operating cash flows and liquidity will continue to be significant to the Company’s overall short and long-term success. However, as a specialty contractor providing HVAC, plumbing, electrical and building controls design, engineering, installation and maintenance services in commercial, institutional and light industrial markets, our operating cash flows are subject to variability, including variability associated with winning, performing and closing work and projects. Additionally, our operating cash flows are impacted by the timing related to the resolution of the uncertainties inherent in the complex nature of the work that we perform,
including claims and back charge settlements. Although we believe that we have adequate plans related to providing sufficient operating working capital and liquidity in the short-term, the complex nature of the work we perform, including related to claims and back charge settlements could prove those plans to be incorrect. If those plans prove to be incorrect, our financial position, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity could be materially and adversely impacted.
As it relates to focusing on owner-direct work and our focus on job selection and processes, we believe that it is appropriate in the current contracting environment to reduce risk and exposure to large, complex, non-owner direct projects where the trend has been for such jobs to provide risks that are difficult to mitigate. Currently, management believes the historical industry pricing and associated risks for this type of work does not align with the Company’s stakeholders’ expectations and therefore the Company is continuing to take steps to actively reduce these risks as it looks at future job selection and as it completes current jobs.
JOBS Act
We ceased to qualify as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the Jumpstart Our Business Act on December 31, 2019, at which time we reached the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of our initial public offering of common equity securities.
Industry Forecast
The construction industry in North America experienced significant growth from 2016 through 2019. Low interest rates, low inflation and other economic factors supported industry expectations that stable growth would continue through at least 2022. These same macro-economic trends promoted strong capital expenditures by facility owners, resulting in stable growth of retrofit and maintenance work. During this period, the industry also experienced labor constraints in certain markets, which, when paired with strong growth, created conditions that led to productivity losses, field execution challenges and project losses. Limbach experienced such conditions in certain locations in 2018 and 2019, and specifically in its Mid-Atlantic operation. During 2019, the Company undertook modifications to its business plan to de-emphasize large project construction in selected markets, and to reallocate sales, marketing and other resources to its more profitable Service segment.
In early 2020 the COVID-19 pandemic rippled through the economy, including construction markets and affecting facility owners. The immediate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Limbach and the construction industry was to temporarily delay certain projects in progress; to reduce productivity on active construction projects due to social distancing and other safety protocols; and to delay facility owners’ capital commitments for new construction and building infrastructure projects, including in some cases, routine maintenance and repair services. Like other specialty contractors with a regional or national footprint, Limbach experienced these impacts unequally across geographies and projects. Certain of the Company’s locations experienced substantial impacts to activity levels during the second quarter, while others operated largely in the ordinary course. Industry conditions continued to evolve during 2020, and generally stabilized and improved beginning in the third quarter of 2020, albeit unevenly throughout the year. The Company’s operations, likewise, stabilized quickly during the summer of 2020. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the construction industry was almost universally determined throughout the U.S. to be an essential service. As such, projects suspended in response to the pandemic restarted relatively quickly. Although construction work continued, ongoing and new projects that started during 2020 frequently experienced delays across much of industry due to shut down periods and due to COVID-19 protocols that affect labor productivity. Service and maintenance work was similarly deemed “essential” in most of the United States. Nonetheless, many facility owners abandoned preventative maintenance and other services that were not time-sensitive, as buildings became largely closed or shutdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic and remote work became the norm.
Significant uncertainty remains around the near-term impacts of COVID-19 on macro-economic growth and the industries we serve. However, the Company’s “essential,” multifaceted diversification across service offerings, end-markets, customers and projects helps reduce the impact of the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as regional economic cycles, a changing regulatory and political environment, and the capital deployment strategies of any single customer or facility owner. Our current operating platform provides exposure to large population centers along the Eastern Seaboard experiencing solid growth and infrastructure investment, in addition to a well-established presence in the energy and manufacturing-driven resurgent Midwest, as well as in Southern California. We are an industry leader in safety, advanced technology, human development and reliable execution. These nationally renowned strengths position us as a value-added partner for building owners, construction managers, general contractors and energy service companies, providing “essential” services that are resilient in the face of impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic. Our long-term business strategies provide additional protection, as we shift to generate a greater share of total revenue from the delivery of value-added solutions to building owners as compared to general contractors and construction managers. We describe this approach as the Owner-Direct strategy. We believe that revenues generated from the Owner-Direct strategy are more consistent and predictable; generate higher margins and greater cash flow; and lead to greater customer lifetime value.
However, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers and vendors continues to evolve and may continue to impact new sales opportunities, and make it difficult to obtain materials and equipment in future periods. While we believe our remaining performance obligations are firm, customers may also slow down decision-making, delay planned work or seek to
terminate existing agreements. In addition, the construction industry has begun to experience significant escalation of material prices, particularly for the purchase of typical commodities and raw materials. This price escalation is driven in large part by COVID-19 related impacts to the companies and industries that supply our business. Macroeconomic forecasting and prediction for the industries we serve are that inflation is also likely to be experienced in the near term, and potentially longer, which may curtail spending in the construction and service industries.
Therefore, it is the Company’s view that Limbach’s projects will continue to be impacted, despite the “essential,” nature of our services, due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and other national and world economic trends. Any of these events could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and/or results of operations.
Trends that could affect the Company’s business are discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K under the caption Item 1A.
Key Components of Consolidated Statements of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue principally from fixed-price construction contracts to deliver HVAC, plumbing, and electrical construction services to our customers. The duration of our contracts generally ranges from six months to two years. Revenue from fixed price contracts is recognized on the cost-to-cost method, measured by the relationship of total cost incurred to total estimated contract costs. Revenue from time and materials service contracts is recognized as services are performed. We believe that our extensive experience in HVAC, plumbing, and electrical projects, and our internal cost review procedures during the bidding process, enable us to reasonably estimate costs and mitigate the risk of cost overruns on fixed price contracts.
We generally invoice customers on a monthly basis, based on a schedule of values that breaks down the contract amount into discrete billing items. Costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings are recorded as a contract asset until billable under the contract terms. Billings in excess of costs and estimated earnings are recorded as a contract liability until the related revenue is recognizable.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue primarily consists of the labor, equipment, material, subcontract, and other job costs in connection with fulfilling the terms of our contracts. Labor costs consist of wages plus taxes, fringe benefits, and insurance. Equipment costs consist of the ownership and operating costs of company-owned assets, in addition to outside-rented equipment. If applicable, job costs include estimated contract losses to be incurred in future periods. Due to the varied nature of our services, and the risks associated therewith, contract costs as a percentage of contract revenue have historically fluctuated and we expect this fluctuation to continue in future periods.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our administrative, estimating, human resources, safety, information technology, legal, finance and accounting employees and executives. Also included are non-personnel costs, such as travel-related expenses, legal and other professional fees and other corporate expenses to support the growth of our business and to meet the compliance requirements associated with operating as a public company. Those costs include accounting, human resources, information technology, legal personnel, additional consulting, legal and audit fees, insurance costs, board of directors’ compensation and the costs of achieving and maintaining compliance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
Amortization of Intangibles
Amortization expense represents periodic non-cash charges that consist of amortization of various intangible assets primarily including favorable leasehold interests and certain customer relationships in the Service segment.
Other Income/Expense
Other income/expense consists primarily of interest expense incurred in connection with our debt, net of interest income, loss on debt extinguishment, gain on embedded derivative, gains on the sale of property and equipment, change in fair value of warrant liability and impairment of goodwill. Deferred financing costs are amortized to interest expense using the effective interest method.
Provision for Income Taxes
We are taxed as a C Corporation and our financial results include the effects of federal income taxes which will be paid at the parent level.
The Company’s provision for income taxes includes federal, state and local taxes. The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC Topic 740 - Income Taxes, which requires the use of the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities and income or expense is recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial statement carrying values and their respective tax bases, using enacted tax rates expected to be applicable in the years in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse. Changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded in the provision for income taxes.
Operating Segments
We manage and measure the performance of our business in two operating segments: Construction and Service. These segments are reflective of how the Company’s Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”) reviews operating results for the purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance. Our CODM is comprised of our Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer and Chief Operating Officer. The CODM evaluates performance and allocates resources based on operating income, which is profit or loss from operations before “other” corporate expenses, income tax provision (benefit) and dividends on redeemable convertible preferred stock, if any.
The accounting policies of the segments are the same as those described in the summary of significant accounting policies below in Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to consolidated financial statements. Our CODM evaluates performance based on income from operations of the respective branches after the allocation of corporate office operating expenses. In accordance with ASC Topic 280 - Segment Reporting, the Company has elected to aggregate all of the construction branches into one Construction reportable segment and all of the service branches into one Service reportable segment. All transactions between segments are eliminated in consolidation. Our Corporate departments provide general and administrative support services to our two operating segments. The majority of costs are allocated between segments for selling, general and administrative expenses and depreciation expense. See Note 12 - Operating Segments in the notes to consolidated financial statements.
We do not identify capital expenditures and total assets by segment in our internal financial reports due in part to the shared use of a centralized fleet of vehicles and specialized equipment. Interest expense is not allocated to segments because of the corporate management of debt service.
The Company had a single Construction segment customer that accounted for approximately 14% of consolidated total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 and a single Construction segment customer that accounted for approximately 10% of consolidated total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
The following table presents operating results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 in absolute terms and expressed as a percentage of respective revenue:
(1)As a percentage of Construction revenue.
(2)As a percentage of Service revenue.
(3)As a percentage of Total revenue.
Revenue
Construction revenue was primarily driven by growth in the Michigan, Ohio and New England regions partially offset by declines in the Florida, Eastern Pennsylvania and Western Pennsylvania regions and the planned decline in the Southern California region. The $12.1 million increase in Service revenue resulted primarily from the Company’s continuing focus on developing longer term customer relationships and sales of larger service owner-direct projects and contracts. The current year growth in Service segment revenues were primarily driven by the Florida, Mid-Atlantic and Western Pennsylvania regions and was partially offset by a decline in the Michigan region.
Gross Profit
The total gross profit percentage increased to 14.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 13.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019, mainly driven by the current year Service segment revenue growth that generates higher margins. The Construction segment gross profit percentage increased from 9.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 10.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to fewer project write downs in 2020 than in the prior year period as a result of improved project execution. The Service segment gross profit percentage increased from 24.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 28.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to increased Service project volume coupled with pricing.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded revisions in our contract estimates for certain Construction and Service projects. For individual projects with revisions having a material gross profit impact, this resulted in 2020 gross profit write downs totaling $10.4 million which included fifteen Construction projects, eight of which were in the Southern California region for a total of $6.9 million, three projects in the Mid-Atlantic region for $1.5 million and two projects in the New England region for $1.1 million. The Company is pursuing recovery remedies for costs incurred due to delays and disruptions, but is not currently in a position to recognize any potential recoveries in its financial statements. There were no significant gross profit write downs for Service projects during 2020. We also recorded revisions in 2020 gross profit write ups totaling $1.7 million on three Construction projects, including a gross profit write up of $1.3 million on two Ohio projects and $0.3 million on a single Mid-Atlantic region project.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded revisions having a material gross profit impact, that resulted in 2019 gross profit write downs totaling $12.4 million on sixteen Construction projects, twelve of which were in the Southern California region for a total of $9.9 million and $1.4 million on a single Western Pennsylvania project. We also recorded a $0.4 million gross profit write down on a single Southern California region Service project. We also recorded revisions in 2019 gross profit write ups totaling $4.7 million on ten Construction projects, including a gross profit write up of $0.4 million on a single Southern California Service project and $0.3 million on a single Mid-Atlantic Service project.
Selling, General and Administrative
Our most significant increases were $6.0 million in incentive compensation offset by a reduction of $2.1 million in travel and entertainment expenses, a decrease of $0.7 million in professional fees, $0.7 million in stock compensation expenses from the issuance of restricted stock units (“RSUs”) year over year, $0.4 million in recruiting expenses, $0.2 million less in rent related expenses, cost reductions for office supplies of $0.3 million, reduced pre-sales engineering costs of $0.7 million and $0.2 million less for employee recognition. In 2019, the Company did not accrue amounts for incentive compensation due to the Company's not meeting the performance criteria for that year.
Amortization of Intangibles
Total amortization expense for the amortizable intangible assets remained flat at $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Other Expenses
The mix of other income/expense items changed. Interest expense increased to $8.6 million, or 37.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $6.3 million in the prior year period, due to the Company's higher interest rate on the refinanced debt obligation including debt issuance and discount amortization, associated with the 2019 Refinancing Agreement that occurred on April 12, 2019 and the execution in the third quarter of 2019 of an amendment to its credit facility. Debt issuance costs totaling $0.5 million associated with the previous Credit Agreement were written off at the time of the refinancing transaction resulting in a loss on debt extinguishment. The Company also recorded other expenses of $1.6 million to reflect the loss on change in fair value of the CB Warrants liability during the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company also recorded other income of $0.6 million for the gain on change in fair value of the CB Warrants liability, $0.4 million for the embedded derivative liability due to the remediation of the Company's material weakness, and recognized a goodwill impairment loss within our Construction segment of $4.4 million. See also Note 9 - Debt in the notes to consolidated financial statements.
Provision for Income Taxes
The Company’s current income tax expense and deferred income tax benefit were $2.5 million and $(1.3) million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the Company’s current income tax expense and deferred income tax benefit of $0.3 million and $(0.6) million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company had net deferred tax assets of $6.1 million as of December 31, 2020 and $4.8 million as of December 31, 2019. There were no valuation allowances recorded as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
The increase in current income tax expenses is primarily attributable to the Company’s substantially higher operating income during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
See also Note 11 - Income Taxes in the notes to consolidated financial statements.
Construction and Service Backlog Information
We refer to our estimated revenue on uncompleted contracts, including the amount of revenue on contracts for which work has not begun, less the revenue we have recognized under such contracts, as “backlog.” Backlog includes unexercised contract options. Our backlog includes projects that have a written award, a letter of intent, a notice to proceed or an agreed upon work order to perform work on mutually accepted terms and conditions. Additionally, the difference between our backlog and remaining performance obligations is due to the portion of unexercised contract options that are excluded, under certain contract types, from our remaining performance obligations as these contracts can be canceled for convenience at any time by us or the customer without considerable cost incurred by the customer. Additional information related to our remaining performance obligations is provided in Note 17 - Remaining Performance Obligations in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements. See also “Item 1A. Risk Factors - Our contract backlog is subject to unexpected adjustments and cancellations and could be an uncertain indicator of our future earnings.”
Our Construction backlog was $393.5 million and $504.2 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Projects are brought into backlog once we have been provided a written confirmation of award and the contract value has been established. At any point in time, we have a substantial volume of projects that are specifically identified and advanced in negotiations and/or documentation, however those projects are not booked as backlog until we have received written confirmation from the owner or the GC/CM of their intention to award us the contract and they have directed us to begin engineering, designing, incurring construction labor costs or procuring needed equipment and material. Our construction projects tend to be built over a 12- to 24-month schedule depending upon scope and complexity. Most major projects have a preconstruction planning phase which may require months of planning before actual construction commences. We are occasionally employed to deliver a “fast-track” project, where construction commences as the preconstruction planning work continues. As work on each of our projects progresses, we increase or decrease backlog to take into account our estimate of the effects of changes in estimated quantities, changes in conditions, change orders and other variations from initially anticipated contract revenues, and the percentage of completion of our work on the projects. Based on historical trends, we estimate that approximately 65% of our construction backlog as of December 31, 2020 will be recognized as revenue during 2021. Additionally, the reduction in Construction backlog has been intentional as we look to focus on higher margin projects than historically, as well as our focus on smaller, higher margin owner direct projects.
Our Service backlog was $50.9 million and $57.0 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. These amounts reflect unrecognized revenue expected to be recognized over the remaining terms of our service contracts and projects. Based on historical trends, we estimate that approximately 95% of our service backlog as of December 31, 2020 will be recognized as revenue during 2021. Additionally, we believe our Service backlog decreased due to lower sales in this segment in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020 because of macroeconomic uncertainty related to COVID-19.
Seasonality, Cyclicality and Quarterly Trends
Severe weather can impact our operations. In the northern climates where we operate, and to a lesser extent the southern climates as well, severe winters can slow our productivity on construction projects, which shifts revenue and gross profit recognition to a later period. Our maintenance operations may also be impacted by mild or severe weather. Mild weather tends to reduce demand for our maintenance services, whereas severe weather may increase the demand for our maintenance and spot services. Our operations also experience mild cyclicality, as building owners typically work through maintenance and capital projects at an increased level during the third and fourth calendar quarters of each year.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
In response to the COVID-19 outbreak, national and local governments around the world instituted certain measures, including travel bans, restrictions on group events and gatherings, shutdowns of certain non-essential businesses, curfews, shelter-in-place orders and recommendations to practice social distancing. The various governmental actions have abated over time, but remain applicable to Limbach's operations in various ways, often varying by state. In some instances, these orders continued to affect certain projects in our Construction and Service segments into the fourth quarter of 2020. In limited instances, projects chose to shutdown work irrespective of the existence or applicability of government action. In most markets, construction is considered an essential business and Limbach continued to staff its projects and perform work during each of the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and most of the projects that were in progress at the time shutdowns commenced have restarted. Our branches are expecting building owners to maintain or retrofit current facilities in lieu of funding larger capital projects as the effects of the pandemic remain ongoing and uncertain.
During the first half of the year ended December 31, 2020, we took several actions to combat the COVID-19 outbreak induced downturn in our business including, but not limited to, the following:
•Identification of projects that have been shut down and methods for seeking to preserve any contractual entitlement that may exist to recover monetary and time impacts;
•Establishment of a task force to identify possible types and areas of impact from COVID-19 for both shutdown and continuing operations;
•Examination of the Company's productivity and potential impact on gross profit as a result of COVID-19;
•Implementation of the Company's pandemic response plan;
•Implemented our furlough and work schedule reduction plans, as well as permanent reductions in force;
•Temporarily suspended substantially all discretionary, non-essential expenditures, including but not limited to, auto allowances, deferral of rent ranging between 1 and 3 months; and
•A temporary 10% salary reduction for a select group of corporate and regional management, along with a 10% fee reduction in director compensation, and cost reduction opportunities identified by our external consultant.
During the month of July 2020, with the substantial restart and return of project and service work, we removed the 10% salary reduction for the select group of corporate and regional management, along with the fee reduction for director compensation, returned auto allowances, reinstated positions, removed schedule reduction plans and discontinued our hiring freeze.
In addition to the above actions, we continue to take steps to minimize the adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and to protect the safety of our employees, and we continue to emphasize wearing of masks, more frequent washing of hands and tools, social distancing, and work protocols. Limbach's COVID-19 policy is based on the best practices provided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) and OSHA for essential workers.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
Our liquidity needs relate primarily to the provision of working capital (defined as current assets less current liabilities) to support operations, funding of capital expenditures, and investment in strategic opportunities. Historically, liquidity has been provided by operating activities and borrowing from commercial banks and institutional lenders.
The following table presents summary cash flow information for the periods indicated:
Our cash flows are primarily impacted from period to period by fluctuations in working capital. Factors such as our contract mix, commercial terms, days sales outstanding (“DSO”), and delays in the start of projects may impact our working capital. In line with industry practice, we accumulate costs during a given month then bill those costs in the current month for many of our contracts. While labor costs associated with these contracts are paid weekly and salary costs associated with the contracts are paid bi-weekly, certain subcontractor costs are generally not paid until we receive payment from our customers (contractual “pay-if-paid” terms). We have not historically experienced a large volume of write-offs related to our accounts receivable and contract assets. We regularly assess our receivables for collectability and provide allowances for doubtful accounts where appropriate. We believe that our reserves for doubtful accounts are appropriate as of December 31, 2020, but adverse changes in the economic environment may impact certain of our customers’ ability to access capital and compensate us for our services, as well as impact project activity for the foreseeable future.
The Company's existing current backlog is projected to provide substantial coverage of forecasted construction revenue for one year from the date of the financial statement issuance. Based on our current cash balance, together with cash we expect to generate from future operations, our recent refinanced credit agreement executed on February 24, 2021, and access to financial markets, the Company believes it will be able to meet any working capital and future operating requirements, and capital investment forecast opportunities. See also Note 20 - Subsequent Events in the notes to consolidated financial statements.
The following table represents our summarized working capital information:
*Current ratio is calculated by dividing current assets by current liabilities.
Cash Flows Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities
Cash flows provided by (used in) operating activities were $39.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $(0.9) million for the year ended December 31, 2019. As compared to the prior year period, we experienced decreases of $19.2 million in our accounts receivable and $10.1 million in our contract assets, increases of $4.7 million in our accrued expenses and other current liabilities, $4.3 million in our contract liabilities, $3.8 million in other long-term liabilities and $1.7 million for accrued taxes payable offset by cash outflows of $(19.5) million in our accounts payable, including retainage and $4.3 million in operating lease liabilities.
Stock-based compensation expense from the issuance of RSUs was $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Non-cash charges for depreciation and amortization slightly decreased to $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 along with $4.0 million of noncash operating lease expense associated with the Company's operating lease right-of-use assets. The Company also amortized $2.2 million of its debt issuance costs and debt discount in conjunction with its Credit Agreement and 2019 Refinancing Agreement, recognized a $1.6 million loss on change in fair value of its CB Warrants (defined below), and recognized an increase in our deferred tax benefit of $1.3 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we experienced cash inflows of $0.7 million in our net receivables, $11.9 million in accounts payable offset by cash outflows of $13.4 million in our contract assets and $6.4 million in our contract liabilities. The decreases in other current assets of $30.1 million and accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $34.7 million are primarily attributable to the $30.0 million lawsuit settlement payment, covered by the Company's insurance carriers, made in February 2019. We also experienced an increase in our operating lease liabilities balance of $3.7 million due to the adoption of ASC Topic 842. Stock-based compensation expense from the issuance of RSUs was $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $4.4 million associated with its Construction reporting unit for the year ended December 31, 2019. Non-cash charges for depreciation and amortization were $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 along with $3.8 million of noncash operating lease expense associated with the Company's operating lease right-of-use assets due to the adoption of ASC Topic 842. The Company also amortized $1.4 million of its debt issuance costs and debt discount in conjunction with its Credit Agreement and 2019 Refinancing Agreement, incurred a loss on debt extinguishment totaling $0.5 million associated with the previous Credit Agreement that was written off at the time of the refinancing transaction and recognized a change in fair value of its CB Warrants liability and a gain on embedded derivative due to the successful remediation of the material weakness of $0.6 million and $0.4 million, respectively.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Cash flows used in investing activities were $(1.3) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $(2.5) million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $1.5 million represented cash outflows for capital additions pertaining to additional non-leased vehicles, tools and equipment, computer software and hardware purchases, office furniture and office related leasehold improvements, offset by $0.2 million in proceeds from the sale of property and equipment. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $2.7 million represented cash outflows for capital expenditures, offset by $0.2 million in proceeds from the sale of property and equipment.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we obtained the use of various assets through operating and finance leases, which reduced the level of capital expenditures that would have otherwise been necessary to operate our business.
Cash Flows Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
Cash flows (used in) provided by financing activities was $(4.7) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we both borrowed and repaid $7.3 million on the 2019 Revolving Credit Facility and made scheduled principal payments of $2.0 million on the 2019 Refinancing Term Loan. The Company also made finance lease payments of $2.7 million, and paid $0.2 million of taxes related to net-share settlement of equity awards offset by $0.2 million in proceeds from contributions related to the employee stock purchase plan.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we both borrowed and repaid a total of $17.5 million on the Credit Agreement Revolver, and borrowed and repaid another $32.5 million on the 2019 Revolving Credit Facility. The Company also borrowed $38.6 million, net of debt discount, in conjunction with the 2019 Refinancing Agreement Term Loan, which was used to repay, in its entirety, $14.3 million of the Credit Agreement Term Loan, $7.7 million of the Bridge Term Loan and $10.5 million of the Credit Agreement Revolver. In addition, the Company recorded fair values of the CB Warrants liability and the embedded derivative liability which approximated $1.0 million and $0.4 million, respectively, on the Refinancing Closing Date. The Company also made finance lease payments of $2.5 million, and paid $3.8 million of debt issuance costs associated with our outstanding debt instruments during 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company's bank overdrafts decreased by $1.3 million, representing decrease in the Company's short-term obligation to its bank. Bank overdrafts represent outstanding checks in excess of cash on hand with a specific financial institution as of any balance sheet date.
The following table reflects our available funding capacity as of December 31, 2020:
Cash Flow Summary
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by our $19.2 million decrease in accounts receivable (cash inflow) and $10.1 million decrease in contract assets (cash inflow) and $19.5 million decrease in accounts payable, including retainage (cash outflow) as compared to the same period ended December 31, 2019. The $19.2 million decrease in accounts receivable is due to better collection efforts and lower fourth quarter 2020 construction revenues than the same period in 2019; and, the $10.1 million decrease in contract assets were mostly attributable to unapproved change orders and claims of $33.6 million and $38.4 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Debt and Related Obligations
The Company refinanced its Credit Agreement Revolver on April 12, 2019 under the 2019 Refinancing Agreement, described below and therefore had no amounts outstanding under its Credit Agreement at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. The Company also refinanced its 2019 Refinancing Agreement on February 24, 2021. See Note 20 - Subsequent Events in the notes to consolidated statements.
Credit Agreement
Effective July 20, 2016, a subsidiary of the Company, Limbach Facility Services LLC (“LFS”) entered into the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement consisted of a $25.0 million revolving line of credit (“Credit Agreement Revolver”) and a $24.0 million term loan (“Credit Agreement Term Loan”), both with a maturity date of July 20, 2021. It was collateralized by substantially all of the assets of LFS and its subsidiaries. Principal payments of $750,000 on the term loan were due quarterly through June 30, 2018. Principal payments of $900,000 were due at the end of subsequent quarters through maturity of the loan, with any remaining amounts due at maturity. Outstanding borrowings on both the term loan and the revolving line of credit bore interest at either the Base Rate (as defined in the Credit Agreement) or LIBOR (as defined in the Credit Agreement), plus the applicable additional margin, payable monthly.
Mandatory prepayments were required upon the occurrence of certain events, including, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, equity issuances, changes of control of the Company, certain debt issuances, assets sales and excess cash flow. Commencing with the fiscal year ended December 31, 2017, the Company was required to remit an amount equal to 50% of the excess cash flow (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of the Company, which percentage was reduced based on the Senior Leverage Ratio (as defined therein). The Company could voluntarily prepay the loans at any time subject to the limitations set forth in the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement included restrictions on, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, the Company and its subsidiaries’ ability to incur additional indebtedness, pay dividends or make other distributions, redeem or purchase capital stock, make investments and loans and enter into certain transactions, including selling assets, engaging in mergers or acquisitions and entering into transactions with affiliates.
During 2018, the Company, LFS and LHLLC entered into several amendments and limited waivers to the Credit Agreement with the lenders party thereto and Fifth Third Bank, as administrative agent. The Second and Third Amendments and Limited Waivers to the Credit Agreement provided for a $10.0 million Bridge Term Loan and an increase in the amount that could be drawn against the Credit Agreement Revolver for issuances of letters of credit and modification of the EBITDA definition, respectively. The Fourth Amendment and Limited Waiver amended existing covenants to include additional information covenants and a fixed charge coverage ratio. The Fifth Amendment and Limited Waiver further amended the existing covenants of the Credit Agreement and required the Company to engage a consultant for the purposes of making recommendations as to methods of the Company's corporate and Mid-Atlantic's operations and controls and further changed the fixed charge coverage ratio. The Sixth Amendment to Credit Agreement and Limited Waiver provided a waiver of the Company's non-compliance with the senior leverage and fixed charge coverage ratio requirements under the Credit Agreement. In addition, it amended, among other things, (i) a reduction of the Lenders' $25.0 million commitment under the Company's Credit Agreement Revolver
to $22.5 million on December 31, 2019 and $20.0 million on January 31, 2019, (ii) acceleration of the maturity date for the Credit Agreement revolver and the Credit Agreement Term Loan facility from July 20, 2021 to March 31, 2020 and (iii) a requirement that certain actions be taken in connection with the refinancing of the Company's obligations under the Credit Agreement by certain scheduled dated.
Loans under the Credit Agreement bore interest, at the Borrower’s option, at either Adjusted LIBOR (“Eurodollar”) or a Base Rate, in each case, plus an applicable margin. From the 12-month anniversary of January 12, 2018 and all times thereafter, the applicable margin with respect to any Base Rate loan was 5.00% per annum and with respect to a Eurodollar loan was 6.00% per annum.
The borrower was required to make principal payments on the Bridge Term Loan in the amount of $250,000 on the last business day of March, June, September and December of each year, commencing on March 31, 2018. The Bridge Term Loan was to mature on April 12, 2019. However, the balance was refinanced under the 2019 Refinancing Agreements prior to maturity. The Bridge Term Loan was guaranteed by the same Guarantors and secured (on a pari passu basis) by the same Collateral as the loans under the Credit Agreement.
The equity interests of the Company’s subsidiaries were pledged as security for the obligations under the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement included customary events of default, including, among other items, payment defaults, cross-defaults to other indebtedness, a change of control default and events of default with respect to certain material agreements. Additionally, with respect to the Company, an event of default was deemed to have occurred if the Company’s securities ceased to be registered with the SEC pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Exchange Act. In case of an event of default, the administrative agent was entitled to, among other things, accelerated payment of amounts due under the Credit Agreement, foreclose on the equity of the Company’s subsidiaries, and exercise all rights of a secured creditor on behalf of the lenders.
Refinancing Agreements
2019 Refinancing Agreement
On April 12, 2019 (the “Refinancing Closing Date”), LFS entered into a financing agreement (the “2019 Refinancing Agreement”) with the lenders thereto and Cortland Capital Market Services LLC, as collateral agent and administrative agent and CB Agent Services LLC, as origination agent (“CB”). The 2019 Refinancing Agreement consists of (i) a $40.0 million term loan (the “2019 Refinancing Term Loan”) and (ii) a $25.0 million multi-draw delayed draw term loan (the “2019 Delayed Draw Term Loan” and, collectively with the 2019 Refinancing Term Loan, the “2019 Term Loans”). Proceeds of the 2019 Refinancing Term Loan were used to repay the then existing Credit Agreement, to pay related fees and expenses thereof and to fund working capital of the Borrowers (defined below). Proceeds of the 2019 Delayed Draw Term Loan will be used to fund permitted acquisitions under the 2019 Refinancing Agreement and related fees and expenses in connection therewith.
LFS, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, and each of its subsidiaries are borrowers (“Borrowers”) under the 2019 Refinancing Agreement. In addition, the 2019 Refinancing Agreement is guaranteed by the Company and LHLLC (each, a “Guarantor”, and together with the Borrowers, the “Loan Parties”).
The 2019 Refinancing Agreement is secured by a first-priority lien on the real property of the Loan Parties and a second-priority lien on substantially all other assets of the Loan Parties, behind the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement (defined below). The respective lien priorities of the 2019 Refinancing Agreement and the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement are governed by an intercreditor agreement.
2019 Refinancing Agreement - Interest Rates and Fees
The interest rate on borrowings under the 2019 Refinancing Agreement is, at the Borrowers’ option, either LIBOR (with a 2.00% floor) plus 11.00% or a base rate (with a 3.00% minimum) plus 10.00%. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the interest rate in effect on the 2019 Refinancing Term Loan was 13.00%.
2019 Refinancing Agreement - Other Terms and Conditions
The 2019 Refinancing Agreement matures on April 12, 2022 subject to adjustment as described therein. Required amortization is $1.0 million per quarter commencing with the fiscal quarter ending September 30, 2020. There is an unused line fee of 2.0% per annum on the undrawn portion of the 2019 Delayed Draw Term Loan, and there is a make-whole premium on prepayments made prior to the 19-month anniversary of the Refinancing Closing Date. This make-whole provision guarantees that the Company will pay no less than 18 months' applicable interest to the lenders under the 2019 Refinancing Agreement.
The 2019 Refinancing Agreement contains representations and warranties, and covenants which are customary for debt facilities of this type. Unless the Required Lenders otherwise consent in writing, the covenants limit the ability of the Company and its restricted subsidiaries to, among other things, to (i) incur additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock, (ii) pay dividends or make distributions to the Company’s stockholders, (iii) purchase or redeem the Company’s equity interests, (iv) make investments, (v) create liens on their assets, (vi) enter into transactions with the Company’s affiliates, (vii) sell assets and (viii) merge or consolidate with, or dispose of substantially all of the Company’s assets to, other companies.
In addition, the 2019 Refinancing Agreement includes customary events of default and other provisions that could require all amounts due thereunder to become immediately due and payable, either automatically or at the option of the lenders, if the Company fails to comply with the terms of the 2019 Refinancing Agreement or if other customary events occur.
Furthermore, the 2019 Refinancing Agreement also contains two financial maintenance covenants for the 2019 Refinancing Term Loan, including a requirement to have sufficient collateral coverage of the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the 2019 Term Loans and as of the last day of each month for the total leverage ratio of the Company and its Subsidiaries (the “Total Leverage Ratio”) not to exceed an amount beginning at 4.25 to 1.00 through June 30, 2019, and stepping down to 2.00 to 1.00 effective July 1, 2021. From July 1, 2019 through September 30, 2019, the Total Leverage Ratio may not exceed 4.00 to 1.00. As of August 31, 2019, the Company’s Total Leverage Ratio for the preceding twelve consecutive fiscal month period was 4.61 to 1.00, which did not meet the 4.00 to 1.00 requirement. The lender has waived the event of default arising from this noncompliance as of August 31, 2019, while reserving its rights with respect to covenant compliance in future months. In addition, the parties to the 2019 Refinancing Agreement entered into an amendment which, among other changes, revises the maximum permitted Total Leverage Ratio, starting at 3.30 to 1.00 on October 1, 2019 with a peak ratio of 4.25 during March 2020 along with varying monthly rates culminating in the lowest Total Leverage Ratio of 2.00 to 1.00 on April 1, 2021, through the term of such agreement. The 2019 Refinancing Agreement contains a post-closing covenant requiring the remediation of the Company’s material weakness that management determined in 2018 was in existence no later than December 31, 2020 and to provide updates as to the progress of such remediation, provided that, if such remediation has not been completed on or prior to December 31, 2019, (x) the Company shall be required to pay the post-closing fee pursuant to the terms of the Origination Agent Fee Letter and (y) the applicable margin shall be increased by 1.00% per annum for the period from January 1, 2020 until the date at which the material weakness is no longer disclosed or required to be disclosed in the Company’s SEC filings or audited financial statements of the Company or related auditor’s reports.
In connection with the 2019 Refinancing Amendment Number One and Waiver, the parties amended certain provisions of the 2019 Refinancing Agreement, including, among other changes to (i) require commencing October 1, 2019, a 3.00% increase in the interest rate on borrowings under the 2019 Refinancing Agreement; (ii) require the approval of CB and, generally, the lenders representing at least 50.1% of the aggregate undrawn term loan commitment or unpaid principal amount of the term loans, prior to effecting any permitted acquisition; (iii) revise the maximum permitted Total Leverage Ratio, starting at 3.30 to 1.00 on October 1, 2019 with a peak ratio of 4.25 during March 2020 along with varying monthly rates culminating in the lowest Total Leverage Ratio of 2.00 to 1.00 on April 1, 2021 and thereafter through the term of the 2019 Refinancing Agreement; and (iv) require the liquidity of the loan parties, which is generally calculated by adding (a) unrestricted cash on hand of the Loan Parties maintained in deposit accounts subject to control agreements granting control to the collateral agent for the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement, to (b) the difference between (1) the lesser of (x) $15.0 million, as adjusted from time to time, and (y) 75% of certain customer accounts resulting from the sale of goods or services in the ordinary course of business minus certain reserves established by the Administrative Agent and (2) the sum of (x) the outstanding principal balance of all revolving loans under the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement plus (y) the aggregate undrawn available amount of all letters of credit then outstanding plus the amount of any obligations that arise from any draw against any letter of credit that have not been reimbursed by the borrowers or funded with a revolving loan under the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement (the “Loan Parties Liquidity”), as of the last day of any fiscal month ending on or after November 30, 2019, of at least $10,000,000. As a condition to executing the 2019 Refinancing Amendment Number One and Waiver, the loan parties was required to pay a non-refundable waiver fee of $400,000 and a non-refundable amendment fee of $1,000,000 (the “PIK First Amendment Fee”, which was paid in kind by adding the PIK First Amendment Fee to the outstanding principal amount of the term loan under the 2019 Refinancing Agreement as additional principal obligations thereunder on and as of the effective date 2019 Refinancing Amendment Number One and Waiver).
As of November 30, 2019, the Company's Minimum Liquidity, as defined in the 2019 Refinancing Amendment Number One and Waiver, was $8.7 million which did not meet the Minimum Liquidity Covenant of at least $10.0 million. The lender has waived the event of default arising from this noncompliance as of November 30, 2019 while reserving its rights with respect to covenant compliance in future months. As of December 31, 2019, the Company was in compliance with all covenants under the 2019 Refinancing Agreement Amendment Number One and Waiver.
During December of 2020, the Company was not in compliance with the collateral coverage debt covenant as defined by the Term Loan financing agreement. The Company was required to maintain at all times a Collateral Coverage Amount (as defined in the Term Loan Financing Agreement) equal to or greater than the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the Term Loans. The Company calculated its Collateral Coverage amount at $37.9 million as of December 31, 2020; the aggregate outstanding principal amount of Terms Loans was $39.0 million as of that same date for an excess of debt over collateral of $1.1 million. On February 1, 2021, the Company, LFS and LHLLC entered into a Waiver - Collateral Coverage Amount (December 2020) ("December 2020 Waiver") with the lenders party thereto and Cortland Capital Market Services LLC, as collateral agent and administrative agent. The December 2020 Waiver includes a waiver of the Company's compliance with the Collateral Coverage Amount for the month ending December 31, 2020. The lender has waived the event of default arising from this noncompliance as of December 31, 2020, while reserving its rights with respect to covenant compliance in future months.
2019 Refinancing Agreement - CB Warrants
In connection with the 2019 Refinancing Agreement, on the Refinancing Closing Date, the Company issued to CB and the other lenders under the 2019 Refinancing Agreement warrants (the “CB Warrants”) to purchase up to a maximum of 263,314 shares of the Company's common stock at an exercise price of $7.63 per share subject to certain adjustments, including for stock dividends, stock splits or reclassifications. The actual number of shares of common stock into which the CB Warrants will be exercisable at any given time will be equal to: (i) the product of (x) the number of shares equal to 2% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares of common stock on the Refinancing Closing Date on a fully diluted basis and (y) the percentage of the total 2019 Delayed Draw Term Loan made as of the exercise date, minus (ii) the number of shares previously issued under the CB Warrants. As of the Refinancing Closing Date and December 31, 2020, no amounts had been drawn on the 2019 Delayed Draw Term Loan, so no portion of the CB Warrants were exercisable. The CB Warrants may be exercised for cash or on a “cashless basis,” subject to certain adjustments, at any time after the Refinancing Closing Date until the expiration of such warrant at 5:00 p.m., New York time, on the earlier of (i) the five (5) year anniversary of the Refinancing Closing Date, or (ii) the liquidation of the Company.
Accounting for the 2019 Term Loans and CB Warrants
The CB Warrants represent a freestanding financial instrument that is classified as a liability because the CB Warrants meet the definition of a derivative instrument that does not meet the equity scope exception (i.e., the CB Warrants are not indexed to the entity’s own equity). In addition, the material weakness penalty described above was evaluated as an embedded derivative liability and bifurcated from the 2019 Term Loans as it represents a non-credit related embedded feature that provides for net settlement. Both the CB Warrants liability and the embedded derivative liability are required to be initially and subsequently measured at fair value. The initial fair values of the CB Warrants liability and the embedded derivative liability approximated $0.9 million and $0.4 million, respectively, on the Refinancing Closing Date. As the Company remediated the material weakness associated with the embedded derivative as of December 31, 2019, the $0.4 million embedded derivative was fully reversed at that date and is included in the consolidated statements of operations as a gain on embedded derivative. The CB Warrants liability is included in other long-term liabilities. The Company estimated these fair values by using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model and a probability-weighted discounted cash flow approach, respectively.
The proceeds for the 2019 Term Loan were first allocated to the CB Warrants liability and embedded derivative liability based on their respective fair values with a corresponding amount of $1.3 million recorded as a debt discount to the 2019 Term Loans. In addition, the Company incurred approximately $3.9 million of debt issuance costs, including $1.4 million related to the first amendment, for the 2019 Term Loans that have also been recorded as a debt discount. The combined debt discount from the CB Warrants liability, embedded derivative liability and the debt issuance costs is being amortized into interest expense over the term of the 2019 Term Loans using the effective interest method. The Company recorded interest expense for the amortization of the CB Warrants liability and embedded derivative debt discounts of $0.5 million and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and recorded an additional $1.4 million and $0.7 million of interest expense for the amortization of the debt issuance costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company remeasured the fair value of the CB Warrants liability and embedded derivative liability as of December 31, 2020 and recorded any adjustments as other income (expense). The Company estimated these fair values by using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model and a probability-weighted discounted cash flow approach, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded other expense of $1.6 million to reflect the change in fair value of the CB Warrants liability. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded other income of $0.6 million and $0.4 million to reflect the change in fair values of the CB Warrants liability and the embedded derivative liability, respectively. At December 31, 2019, the embedded derivative liability was $0.0 million as the Company remediated the material weakness associated with the embedded derivative as of December 31, 2019, and the $0.4 million embedded derivative liability was fully reversed and recorded as other income at that date.
2019 ABL Credit Agreement
On the Refinancing Closing Date, LFS also entered into a financing agreement with the lenders thereto and Citizens Bank, N.A., as collateral agent, administrative agent and origination agent (the “2019 ABL Credit Agreement” and, together with the 2019 Refinancing Agreement, the “Refinancing Agreements”). The 2019 ABL Credit Agreement consists of a $15.0 million revolving credit facility (the “2019 Revolving Credit Facility”). Proceeds of the 2019 Revolving Credit Facility may be used for general corporate purposes. Upon the Refinancing Closing Date, the Company had nothing drawn on the ABL Credit Agreement and $14.0 million of available borrowing capacity thereunder (net of a $1.0 million reserve imposed by the lender)..
The Borrowers and Guarantors under the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement are the same as under the 2019 Refinancing Agreement.
The 2019 ABL Credit Agreement is secured by a second-priority lien on the real property of the Loan Parties (behind the 2019 Refinancing Agreement) and a first-priority lien on substantially all other assets of the Loan Parties.
2019 ABL Credit Agreement - Interest Rates and Fees
The interest rate on borrowings under the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement is, at the Borrowers’ option, either LIBOR (with a 2.0% floor) plus an applicable margin ranging from 3.00% to 3.50% or a base rate (with a 3.0% minimum) plus an applicable margin ranging from 2.00% to 2.50%.
2019 ABL Credit Agreement - Other Terms and Conditions
The 2019 ABL Credit Agreement matures on April 12, 2022. There is an unused line fee ranging from 0.250% to 0.375% per annum on undrawn amounts.
The 2019 ABL Credit Agreement contains representations and warranties, and covenants which are customary for debt facilities of this type. Unless the Required Lenders otherwise consent in writing, the covenants limit the ability of the Company and its restricted subsidiaries to, among other things, to (i) incur additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock, (ii) pay dividends or make distributions to the Company’s stockholders, (iii) purchase or redeem the Company’s equity interests, (iv) make investments, (v) create liens on their assets, (vi) enter into transactions with the Company’s affiliates, (vii) sell assets and (viii) merge or consolidate with, or dispose of substantially all of the Company’s assets to, other companies.
The 2019 ABL Credit Agreement includes customary events of default and other provisions that could require all amounts due thereunder to become immediately due and payable, either automatically or at the option of the lenders, if the Company fails to comply with the terms of the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement or if other customary events occur.
The 2019 ABL Credit Agreement also contains a financial maintenance covenant for the 2019 Revolving Credit Facility, which is a requirement for the Total Leverage Ratio of the Company and its Subsidiaries not to exceed an amount beginning at 4.00 to 1.00 through September 30, 2019, and stepping down to 1.75 to 1.00 effective July 1, 2021. As of August 31, 2019, the Company’s Total Leverage Ratio for the preceding twelve consecutive fiscal month period was 4.61 to 1.00, which did not meet the 4.00 to 1.00 requirement. As of September 30, 2019, the Company’s Total Leverage Ratio for the preceding twelve consecutive fiscal month period was 2.85 to 1.00, which was in compliance with the 4.00 to 1.00 requirement. The lender has waived the event of default arising from this noncompliance as of August 31, 2019, while reserving its rights with respect to covenant compliance in future months. In addition, the parties to the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement entered into an amendment which, among other changes revises the maximum permitted Total Leverage Ratio, starting at 3.30 to 1.00 on October 1, 2019 with a peak ratio of 4.25 during March 2020 along with varying monthly rates culminating in the lowest Total Leverage Ratio of 2.00 to 1.00 on April 1, 2021 through the term of such agreement.
In connection with the 2019 ABL Credit Amendment Number One and Waiver, the parties amended certain provisions of the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement, including, among other changes to (i) require the approval of the origination agent and, generally, the lenders representing at least 50.1% of the aggregate undrawn revolving loan commitment or unpaid principal amount of the term loans, prior to effecting any permitted acquisition; (ii) revise the maximum permitted Total Leverage Ratio, starting at 3.30 to 1.00 on October 1, 2019 with a peak ratio of 4.25 during March 2020 along with varying monthly rates culminating in the lowest Total Leverage Ratio of 2.00 to 1.00 on April 1, 2021 through the term of the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement; and (iii) require the Loan Parties Liquidity as of the last day of any fiscal month ending on or after November 30, 2019, of at least $10,000,000, as described above in the Amendment Number One to 2019 Refinancing Agreement and Waiver. As a condition to executing the 2019 ABL Credit Amendment Number One and Waiver, the loan parties were required to pay a non-refundable waiver fee of $7,500.
As of November 30, 2019, the Company's Minimum Liquidity, as defined in the 2019 ABL Credit Amendment Number One and Waiver, was $8.7 million which did not meet the Minimum Liquidity Covenant of at least $10.0 million. The lender has waived the event of default arising from this noncompliance as of November 30, 2019 and entered into the Amendment Number One to ABL Financing Agreement and Waiver (the “2019 ABL Credit Amendment Number One and Waiver”) with the lenders party thereto and Citizens Bank, N.A., as collateral agent and administrative agent. The 2019 ABL Credit Amendment Number One and Waiver includes a waiver of the Company’s compliance with the Total Leverage Ratio less than or equal to 4.00 to 1.00 for the twelve consecutive fiscal month period ending August 31, 2019. The lenders reserve its rights with respect to covenant compliance in future months.
As noted above in the section titled: 2019 Refinancing Agreement - Other Terms and Conditions, the Company was subject to cross-default under our 2019 Revolving Credit Facility as a result of our failure to satisfy the Collateral Coverage Amount as defined in the Term Loan Financing Agreement, which required the company to obtain a waiver. Accordingly, on February 1, 2021, the Company, LFS and LHLLC entered into a Waiver - Collateral Coverage Amount (December 2020) (“December 2020 Waiver”) with the lenders party thereto and Citizens Bank, N.A., as collateral agent and administrative agent. The December 2020 Waiver includes a waiver of the Company's compliance with the Collateral Coverage Amount for the month ending December 31, 2020. The lender has waived the event of default arising from this noncompliance as of December 31, 2020, while reserving its rights with respect to covenant compliance in future months.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had irrevocable letters of credit in the amount of $3.4 million and $3.3 million, respectively, with its lender to secure obligations under its self-insurance program.
Accounting for the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had nothing drawn on the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement. In addition, the Company incurred approximately $0.9 million of debt issuance costs for the 2019 ABL Credit Agreement that have been recorded as a non-current deferred asset. The deferred asset is being amortized into interest expense over the term of the 2019 Term ABL Credit Agreement using the effective interest method. The Company recorded interest expense of $0.3 million and $0.2 million or the amortization of debt issuance costs for the period ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
For further information on the Company’s obligations under the Refinancing Agreements, see also Note 9 - Debt and Note 20 - Subsequent Events in the notes to consolidated financial statements.
Surety Bonding
In connection with our business, we are occasionally required to provide various types of surety bonds that provide an additional measure of security to our customers for our performance under certain government and private sector contracts. Our ability to obtain surety bonds depends upon our capitalization, working capital, past performance, management expertise and external factors, including the capacity of the overall surety market. Surety companies consider such factors in light of the amount of our backlog that we have currently bonded and their current underwriting standards, which may change from time-to-time. The bonds, if any, we provide typically reflect the contract value. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had approximately $79.4 million and $116.0 million in surety bonds outstanding, respectively. We believe that our $700 million bonding capacity provides us with a significant competitive advantage relative to many of our competitors which have limited bonding capacity.
Insurance and Self-Insurance
We purchase workers’ compensation and general liability insurance under policies with per-incident deductibles of $250,000 per occurrence. Losses incurred over primary policy limits are covered by umbrella and excess policies up to specified limits with multiple excess insurers. We accrue for the unfunded portion of costs for both reported claims and claims incurred but not reported. The liability for unfunded reported claims and future claims is reflected on the consolidated balance sheets as current and non-current liabilities. The liability is determined by determining a reserve for each reported claim on a case-by-case basis based on the nature of the claim and historical loss experience for similar claims plus an allowance for the cost of incurred but not reported claims. The current portion of the liability is included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet. The non-current portion of the liability is included in other long-term liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet.
We are self-insured related to medical and dental claims under policies with annual per-claimant and annual aggregate stop-loss limits. We accrue for the unfunded portion of costs for both reported claims and claims incurred but not reported. The liability for unfunded reported claims and future claims is reflected on the consolidated balance sheets as a current liability in accrued expenses and other current liabilities.
The components of the self-insurance are reflected below as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively:
The restricted cash balance represents cash set aside for the funding of workers’ compensation and general liability insurance claims. This amount is replenished when depleted, or at the beginning of each month.
Multiemployer Plans
We participate in approximately 40 MEPPs that provide retirement benefits to certain union employees in accordance with various collective bargaining agreements (“CBAs”). As one of many participating employers in these MEPPs, we are responsible with the other participating employers for any plan underfunding. Our contributions to a particular MEPP are established by the applicable CBAs; however, required contributions may increase based on the funded status of an MEPP and legal requirements of the Pension Protection Act of 2006 (the “PPA”), which requires substantially underfunded MEPPs to implement a funding improvement plan (“FIP”) or a rehabilitation plan (“RP”) to improve their funded status. Factors that could impact funded status of an MEPP include, without limitation, investment performance, changes in the participant demographics, decline in the number of contributing employers, changes in actuarial assumptions and the utilization of extended amortization provisions. Assets contributed to the MEPPs by us may be used to provide benefits to employees of other participating employers. If a participating employer stops contributing to an MEPP, the unfunded obligations of the MEPP may be borne by the remaining participating employers.
An FIP or RP requires a particular MEPP to adopt measures to correct its underfunding status. These measures may include, but are not limited to an increase in a company’s contribution rate as a signatory to the applicable CBA, or changes to the benefits paid to retirees. In addition, the PPA requires that a 5.0% surcharge be levied on employer contributions for the first year commencing shortly after the date the employer receives notice that the MEPP is in critical status and a 10.0% surcharge on each succeeding year until a CBA is in place with terms and conditions consistent with the RP.
We could also be obligated to make payments to MEPPs if we either cease to have an obligation to contribute to the MEPP or significantly reduce our contributions to the MEPP because we reduce the number of employees who are covered by the relevant MEPP for various reasons, including, but not limited to, layoffs or closure of a subsidiary assuming the MEPP has unfunded vested benefits. The amount of such payments (known as a complete or partial withdrawal liability) would equal our proportionate share of the MEPPs’ unfunded vested benefits. We believe that certain of the MEPPs in which we participate may have unfunded vested benefits. Due to uncertainty regarding future factors that could trigger withdrawal liability, we are unable to determine (a) the amount and timing of any future withdrawal liability, if any, and (b) whether our participation in these MEPPs could have a material adverse impact on our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We review new accounting standards to determine the expected financial impact, if any, that the adoption of such standards will have on our financial position and/or results of operations. See Note 3 - Accounting Standards in the notes to consolidated financial statements for further information regarding new accounting standards, including the anticipated dates of adoption and the effects on our consolidated financial position, results of operations, or liquidity.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our critical accounting policies are based upon the significance of the accounting policy to our overall financial statement presentation, as well as the complexity of the accounting policy and our use of estimates and subjective assessments. Our most critical accounting policy is revenue recognition. As discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our business has two operating segments: (1) Construction, for which we account for using the cost-to-cost method and (2) Service, for which revenue is recognized as services are provided. In addition, we believe that some of the more critical judgment areas in the application of accounting policies that affect our financial condition and results of operations are the impact of changes in the estimates and judgments pertaining to: (a) collectability or valuation of accounts receivable; (b) the recording of our self-insurance liabilities; (c) valuation of deferred tax assets; and (d) recoverability of goodwill and identifiable intangible assets.
These accounting policies, as well as others, are described in Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to consolidated financial statements.
Revenue and Cost Recognition
We believe our most significant accounting policy is revenue recognition from long-term construction contracts for which we use the cost-to-cost method of accounting. Under the cost-to-cost method, contract revenue recognizable at any time during the life of a contract is determined by multiplying expected total contract revenue by the percentage of contract costs incurred to total estimated contract costs. Revenue from fixed price and modified fixed price contracts are recognized on the cost-to-cost method, measured by the relationship of total cost incurred to total estimated contract costs.
Contract costs include direct labor, material, and subcontractor costs, and those indirect costs related to contract performance, such as indirect labor, supplies, tools, repairs, depreciation, and insurance. These contract costs are included in our results of operations under the caption “Cost of revenue.” Then, as we perform under those contracts, we measure costs incurred, compare them to total estimated costs to complete the contract, and recognize a corresponding proportion of contract revenue. Labor costs are considered to be incurred as the work is performed. Subcontractor labor is recognized as the work is performed, but is generally subjected to approval as to milestones or other evidence of completion. Non-labor project costs consist of purchased equipment, prefabricated materials and other materials. Purchased equipment on our projects is substantially produced to job specifications and is a value added element to our work. The costs are considered to be incurred when title is transferred to us, which typically is upon delivery to the worksite. Prefabricated materials, such as ductwork and piping, are generally performed at our shops and recognized as contract costs when fabricated for the unique specifications of the job. Other materials costs are not significant and are generally recorded when delivered to the worksite. This measurement and comparison process requires updates to the estimate of total costs to complete the contract, and these updates may include subjective assessments.
We generally do not incur significant costs prior to receiving a contract, and therefore, these costs are expensed as incurred. Upon receiving the contract, these costs are included in contract costs. Selling, general, and administrative costs are charged to expense as incurred. Bidding and proposal costs are also recognized as an expense in the period in which such amounts are incurred. Total estimated contract costs are based upon management’s current estimate of total costs at completion. As changes in estimates of contract costs at completion and/or estimated total losses on projects are identified, appropriate earnings adjustments are recorded during the period that the change or loss is identified. Contract revenue for long-term construction contracts is based upon management’s estimate of contract prices at completion, including revenue for additional work on which contract pricing has not been finalized (claims). Changes in job performance, job conditions, and estimated profitability, including those arising from contract penalty provisions and final contract settlements, may result in revisions to estimated costs and income, and are recognized in the period in which the revisions are determined. Provisions for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts are recognized in the period in which such losses are determined.
With respect to the Company’s Service segment, there are two basic types of service contracts: fixed price service contracts which are signed in advance for maintenance, repair, and retrofit work over a period, typically of one year, and service contracts not signed in advance for similar maintenance, repair, and retrofit work on an as-needed basis. Fixed price service contracts are generally performed evenly over the contract period, and accordingly, revenue is recognized on a pro rata basis over the life of the contract. Revenue derived from other service contracts are recognized when the services are performed. Expenses related to all service contracts are recognized as services are provided.
Project contracts typically provide for a schedule of billings or invoices to the customer based on reaching agreed upon milestones or as we incur costs. The schedules for such billings usually do not precisely match the schedule on which costs are incurred. As a result, contract revenue recognized in the statement of operations can and usually does differ from amounts that can be billed or invoiced to the customer at any point during the contract. Amounts by which cumulative contract revenue recognized on a contract as of a given date exceed cumulative billings to the customer under the contract are reflected as a current asset in our balance sheet under the caption “contract assets”. Amounts by which cumulative billings to the customer under a contract as of a given date exceed cumulative contract revenue recognized on the contract are reflected as a current liability in our balance sheet under the caption “contract liabilities”.
The cost-to-cost method of accounting is also affected by changes in job performance, job conditions, and final contract settlements. These factors may result in revisions to estimated costs and, therefore, revenue. Such revisions are frequently based on further estimates and subjective assessments. The effects of these revisions are recognized in the period in which revisions are determined. When such revisions lead to a conclusion that a loss will be recognized on a contract, the full amount of the estimated ultimate loss is recognized in the period such conclusion is reached, regardless of the percent complete of the contract.
Revisions to project costs and conditions can give rise to change orders under which the customer agrees to pay additional contract price. Revisions can also result in claims we might make against the customer to recover project variances that have not been satisfactorily addressed through change orders with the customer. Claims and unapproved change orders are recorded at estimated net realizable value when realization is probable and can be reasonably estimated. No profit is recognized on the construction costs incurred in connection with claim amounts. See Note 5 - Contract Assets and Liabilities in the notes to consolidated financial statements for information related to unresolved change orders and claims.
Variations from estimated project costs could have a significant impact on our operating results, depending on project size, and the recoverability of the variation via additional customer payments.
In accordance with industry practice, we classify as current all assets and liabilities relating to the performance of long-term contracts. The term of our contracts generally ranges from one month to two years and, accordingly, collection or payment of amounts relating to these contracts may extend beyond one year.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We are required to estimate the collectability of accounts receivable and provide an allowance for doubtful accounts for receivable amounts we believe we will not ultimately collect. This requires us to make certain judgments and estimates involving, among others, the creditworthiness of our customers, prior collection history with our customers, ongoing relationships with our customers, the aging of past due balances, our lien rights, if any, in the property where we performed the work, and the availability, if any, of payment bonds applicable to the contract. These estimates are evaluated and adjusted as needed when additional information is received.
Self-insurance Liabilities
We are substantially self-insured for workers’ compensation, employer’s liability, auto liability, general liability and employee group health claims in view of the relatively high per-incident deductibles we absorb under our insurance arrangements for these risks. Losses are estimated and accrued based upon known facts, historical trends and industry averages. Estimated losses in excess of our deductible, which have not already been paid, are included in our accrual with a corresponding receivable from our insurance carrier.
We believe the liabilities recognized on our balance sheets for these obligations are adequate. However, insurance liabilities are difficult to estimate due to unknown factors, including the severity of any injury, the determination of our liability in proportion to other parties, timely reporting of occurrences, ongoing treatment or loss mitigation, general trends in litigation recovery outcomes and the effectiveness of safety and risk management programs. Therefore, if actual experience differs from the assumptions and estimates used for recording the liabilities, adjustments may be required and would be recorded in the period that such experience becomes known.
Deferred Tax Assets
We regularly evaluate the need for valuation allowances related to deferred tax assets for which future realization is uncertain. We perform this evaluation quarterly. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, we must consider whether it is more likely than not some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, in determining whether a valuation allowance is required. Such evidence includes the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, taxable income in prior carryback years and tax planning strategies in making this assessment, and judgment is required in considering the relative weight of negative and positive evidence.
Goodwill and Identifiable Intangible Assets
Goodwill is the excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net assets of acquired businesses. We assess goodwill for impairment each year, and more frequently if circumstances suggest an impairment may have occurred. When the carrying value of a given reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recorded to the extent that the implied fair value of the goodwill of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If other reporting units have had increases in fair value, such increases may not be recorded. Accordingly, such increases may not be netted against impairments at other reporting units. The requirements for assessing whether goodwill has been impaired involve market-based information. This information, and its use in assessing goodwill, entails some degree of subjective assessment.
We perform our annual impairment testing as of October 1 and any impairment charges resulting from this process are reported in the fourth quarter. We segregate our operations into reporting units based on the degree of operating and financial independence of each unit and our related management of them. We perform our annual goodwill impairment analysis at the
reporting unit level. Each of our operating units represents an operating segment, and our operating segments are our reporting units.
We also review intangible assets with definite lives subject to amortization whenever events or circumstances indicate that a carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Events or circumstances that might require impairment testing include the identification of other impaired assets within a reporting unit, loss of key personnel, the disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit, a significant decline in stock price or a significant adverse change in business climate or regulations. Changes in strategy and/or market condition, may also result in adjustments to recorded intangible asset balances or their useful lives.
Off-Balance Sheet and Other Arrangements
Aside from the $3.4 million and $3.3 million in irrevocable letters of credit outstanding in connection with the Company’s self-insurance program, at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, we did not have any relationships with any entities or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other purposes.