ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
The following discussion and analysis presents management’s view of our business, financial condition and overall performance and should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes. This information is intended to provide investors with an understanding of our past performance, current financial condition and outlook for the future. Our discussion and analysis includes the following subjects:
•Overview of Business
•Overview of Significant Events
•Impact of COVID-19 and Market Environment
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Contractual Obligations
•Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
•Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates
•Recent Accounting Standards
Overview of Business
Cheniere, a Delaware corporation, is a Houston-based energy infrastructure company primarily engaged in LNG-related businesses. We provide clean, secure and affordable LNG to integrated energy companies, utilities and energy trading companies around the world. We aspire to conduct our business in a safe and responsible manner, delivering a reliable, competitive and integrated source of LNG to our customers. We own and operate the Sabine Pass LNG terminal in Louisiana, one of the largest LNG production facilities in the world, through our ownership interest in and management agreements with Cheniere Partners, which is a publicly traded limited partnership that we created in 2007. As of December 31, 2020, we owned 100% of the general partner interest and 48.6% of the limited partner interest in Cheniere Partners. We also own and operate the Corpus Christi LNG terminal in Texas, which is wholly owned by us.
The Sabine Pass LNG terminal is located in Cameron Parish, Louisiana, on the Sabine-Neches Waterway less than four miles from the Gulf Coast. Cheniere Partners, through its subsidiary SPL, is currently operating five natural gas liquefaction Trains and is constructing one additional Train that is expected to be substantially completed in the second half of 2022, for a total production capacity of approximately 30 mtpa of LNG (the “SPL Project”) at the Sabine Pass LNG terminal. The Sabine Pass LNG terminal has operational regasification facilities owned by Cheniere Partners’ subsidiary, SPLNG, that include pre-existing infrastructure of five LNG storage tanks with aggregate capacity of approximately 17 Bcfe, two existing marine berths and one under construction that can each accommodate vessels with nominal capacity of up to 266,000 cubic meters and vaporizers with regasification capacity of approximately 4 Bcf/d. Cheniere Partners also owns a 94-mile pipeline through its subsidiary, CTPL, that interconnects the Sabine Pass LNG terminal with a number of large interstate pipelines.
We also own the Corpus Christi LNG terminal near Corpus Christi, Texas, and are currently operating two Trains and one additional Train is undergoing commissioning for a total production capacity of approximately 15 mtpa of LNG. Additionally, we are operating a 23-mile natural gas supply pipeline that interconnects the Corpus Christi LNG terminal with several interstate and intrastate natural gas pipelines (the “Corpus Christi Pipeline” and together with the Trains, the “CCL Project”) through our subsidiaries CCL and CCP, respectively. The CCL Project, once fully constructed, will contain three LNG storage tanks with aggregate capacity of approximately 10 Bcfe and two marine berths that can each accommodate vessels with nominal capacity of up to 266,000 cubic meters.
We have contracted approximately 85% of the total production capacity from the SPL Project and the CCL Project (collectively, the “Liquefaction Projects”) on a term basis, with approximately 18 years of average remaining life as of December 31, 2020. This includes volumes contracted under SPAs in which the customers are required to pay a fixed fee with
respect to the contracted volumes irrespective of their election to cancel or suspend deliveries of LNG cargoes, as well as volumes contracted under integrated production marketing (“IPM”) gas supply agreements.
Additionally, separate from the CCH Group, we are developing an expansion of the Corpus Christi LNG terminal adjacent to the CCL Project (“Corpus Christi Stage 3”) through our subsidiary CCL Stage III for up to seven midscale Trains with an expected total production capacity of approximately 10 mtpa of LNG. We received approval from FERC in November 2019 to site, construct and operate the expansion project.
We remain focused on operational excellence and customer satisfaction. Increasing demand of LNG has allowed us to expand our liquefaction infrastructure in a financially disciplined manner. We have increased available liquefaction capacity at our Liquefaction Projects as a result of debottlenecking and other optimization projects. We hold significant land positions at both the Sabine Pass LNG terminal and the Corpus Christi LNG terminal which provide opportunity for further liquefaction capacity expansion. The development of these sites or other projects, including infrastructure projects in support of natural gas supply and LNG demand, will require, among other things, acceptable commercial and financing arrangements before we can make a final investment decision (“FID”).
Overview of Significant Events
Our significant events since January 1, 2020 and through the filing date of this Form 10-K include the following:
Operational
•As of February 19, 2021, approximately 1,425 cumulative LNG cargoes totaling over 95 million tonnes of LNG have been produced, loaded and exported from the Liquefaction Projects.
•In December 2020, CCL commenced shipment of LNG commissioning cargoes from Train 3 of the CCL Project.
Financial
•We completed the following financing transactions:
◦In February 2021, SPL entered into a note purchase agreement for the sale of approximately $147 million aggregate principal amount of 2.95% Senior Secured Notes due 2037 (the “2.95% SPL 2037 Senior Secured Notes”) on a private placement basis. The 2.95% SPL 2037 Senior Secured Notes are expected to be issued in December 2021, and the net proceeds are expected to be used to refinance a portion of SPL’s outstanding Senior Secured Notes due 2022. The 2.95% SPL 2037 Senior Secured Notes will be fully amortizing, with a weighted average life of over 10 years.
◦In September 2020, we issued an aggregate principal amount of $2.0 billion of 4.625% Senior Secured Notes due 2028 (the “2028 Cheniere Senior Secured Notes”). The net proceeds were used to prepay approximately $2.0 billion of outstanding indebtedness of the Cheniere Term Loan Facility.
◦In August 2020, CCH issued an aggregate principal amount of approximately $769 million of 3.52% Senior Secured Notes due 2039 (the “3.52% CCH Senior Secured Notes”). The net proceeds of these notes were used to repay a portion of the outstanding borrowings under CCH’s amended and restated credit facility (“CCH Credit Facility”), pay costs associated with certain interest rate derivative instruments that were settled and pay certain fees, costs and expenses incurred in connection with these transactions.
◦In June 2020, we entered into the Cheniere Term Loan Facility with original commitments of $2.62 billion, which in July 2020 was subsequently increased to $2.695 billion. In July 2020, borrowings under the Cheniere Term Loan Facility were used to (1) redeem the remaining outstanding principal amount of the 11% Convertible Senior Secured Notes due 2025 (the “2025 CCH HoldCo II Convertible Senior Notes”), subsequent to the $300 million redemption in March 2020, pursuant to the amended and restated note purchase agreement for the 2025 CCH HoldCo II Convertible Senior Notes which allowed CCH HoldCo II to redeem the outstanding notes with cash at a price of $1,080 per $1,000 principal amount, (2) repurchase $844 million in aggregate principal amount of outstanding 4.875% Convertible Unsecured Notes due 2021 (the “2021 Cheniere Convertible Unsecured Notes”) at individually negotiated prices from a small number of investors and (3) pay the related fees and expenses. The remaining available commitments under the Cheniere Term Loan Facility of $372 million are expected to be used to repay and/or repurchase a portion of
the remaining outstanding principal amount of the 2021 Cheniere Convertible Unsecured Notes and for the payment of related fees and expenses.
◦In May 2020, SPL issued an aggregate principal amount of $2.0 billion of 4.500% Senior Secured Notes due 2030 (the “2030 SPL Senior Notes”). Net proceeds of the offering, along with available cash, were used to redeem all of SPL’s outstanding 5.625% Senior Secured Notes due 2021 (the “2021 SPL Senior Notes”).
◦In March 2020, SPL entered into a $1.2 billion Working Capital Revolving Credit and Letter of Credit Reimbursement Agreement (the “2020 SPL Working Capital Facility”), which refinanced its previous working capital facility, reduced the interest rate and extended the maturity date to March 2025.
•During the year ended December 31, 2020, in line with our previously announced capital allocation priorities, with available cash, we: (1) prepaid $200 million of the borrowings made during the year under the $2.695 billion delayed draw term loan credit agreement (the “Cheniere Term Loan Facility”) and (2) redeemed $300 million of the 2025 CCH HoldCo II Convertible Senior Notes.
•In December 2020, we loaded and shipped the first two LNG cargoes under the 25-year SPA with CPC Corporation, Taiwan, which were delivered in January 2021.
•In May 2020, the date of first commercial delivery was reached under the 20-year SPAs with PT Pertamina (Persero), Naturgy LNG GOM, Limited, Woodside Energy Trading Singapore Pte Ltd, Iberdrola Generación España, S.A.U. (assigned by Iberdrola, S.A.) and Électricité de France, S.A. relating to Train 2 of the CCL Project.
•In February 2021, Fitch Ratings upgraded the outlook of SPL’s senior secured notes rating to positive from stable.
Impact of COVID-19 and Market Environment
The LNG business environment in 2020 was impacted by the coronavirus pandemic and its economic ramifications. Lockdown measures across the globe reduced economic activity and resulted in lower energy needs throughout most of the year. However, LNG demand proved relatively resilient as compared to other hydrocarbons, showing an annual gain of approximately 1.4%, or 5 MT, to 364 MT in 2020. While the economic recovery in Asia, and particularly in China, lifted LNG demand in the second half of the year, uncertainty about the pandemic’s track remains the primary near-term risk to LNG trade. A slow return towards normal is expected to occur in the coming months, depending on the speed of vaccine rollout within regions, vaccine effectiveness against mutations and the speed and shape of economic recovery across the LNG importing nations. The continued improvements in global economic indicators seen in the fourth quarter is encouraging especially in China, which represents one of the key countries for LNG demand growth.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, natural gas and LNG spot prices significantly increased in line with the increase in economic activity and with seasonal norms. After falling to all-time lows in the second quarter, global LNG price benchmarks have made an impressive climb and exited the year at the highest levels since March 2019. As an example, the Dutch Title Transfer Facility (“TTF”), a virtual trading point for natural gas in the Netherlands, settled December at $5.08/MMBtu, $3.94/MMBtu higher than its June 2020 settlement. Similarly, the Japan Korea Marker (“JKM”), an LNG benchmark price assessment for spot physical cargoes delivered ex-ship into certain key markets in Asia, settled December at $6.90/MMBtu, which is $4.84/MMBtu higher than its all-time low July 2020 settlement. Record-low winter temperatures, supply outages and transportation bottlenecks contributed to drive JKM prices up to all-time highs by mid-January 2021. In a projection published in July 2020, IHS Markit estimated LNG demand to reach 383 MT in 2021, implying a return to higher growth in 2021.
We have limited exposure to the fluctuations in oil and LNG spot prices as we have contracted a significant portion of our LNG production capacity under long-term sale and purchase agreements linked to a Henry Hub price. For this reason, we do not expect price fluctuations to have a material impact on our forecasted financial results for 2021.
The number of LNG cargoes for which customers notified us that they would not take delivery has reduced from this summer, a sign that the market is continuing to adjust and rebalance toward equilibrium. We do not expect these events to have a material adverse impact on our forecasted financial results for 2021, due to the highly contracted nature of our business and the fact that customers continue to be obligated to pay fixed fees for cargoes with respect to which they have exercised their contractual right to cancel. As such, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $969 million in LNG revenues associated with LNG cargoes for which customers notified us that they would not take delivery, of which $38 million would have been recognized subsequent to December 31, 2020, if the cargoes were lifted pursuant to the delivery schedules with the
customers. We experienced decreased revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020 associated with LNG cargoes that were scheduled for delivery for which customers notified us that they would not take delivery of such cargoes.
In addition, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have modified certain business and workforce practices to protect the safety and welfare of our employees who continue to work at our facilities and offices worldwide, as well as implemented certain mitigation efforts to ensure business continuity. In March 2020, we began consulting with a medical advisor, and implemented social distancing through revised shift schedules, work from home policies and designated remote work locations where appropriate, restricted non-essential business travel and began requiring self-screening for employees and contractors. In April 2020, we began providing temporary housing for our workforce for our facilities, implemented temperature testing, incorporated medical and social workers to support employees, implemented prior self-isolation and screening for temporary housing and implemented marine operations with zero contact during loading activities. These measures have resulted in increased costs. While response measures continue to evolve and in most cases have moderated or ceased, we expect to incur incremental operating costs associated with business continuity and protection of our workforce until the risks associated with the pandemic diminish. We have incurred approximately $69 million of such costs during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Results of Operations
The following charts summarize the number of Trains that were in operation during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 and total revenues and total LNG volumes loaded from our Liquefaction Projects (including both operational and commissioning volumes) for the respective periods:
The following table summarizes the volumes of operational and commissioning LNG cargoes that were loaded from the Liquefaction Projects, which were recognized on our Consolidated Financial Statements during the year ended December 31, 2020:
Our consolidated net loss attributable to common stockholders was $85 million, or $0.34 per share (basic and diluted), for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income attributable to common stockholders of $648 million, or $2.53 per share-basic and $2.51 per share-diluted, in the year ended December 31, 2019. This $733 million decrease in net income attributable to common stockholders in 2020 was primarily attributable to increases in: (1) losses from commodity derivatives
to secure natural gas feedstock for the Liquefaction Projects, (2) income tax provision, (3) losses on modification or extinguishment of debt, (4) operating and maintenance expense, (5) depreciation and amortization expense, (6) interest rate derivative losses and (7) interest expense, net of capitalized interest. This loss was partially offset by increased gross margins primarily due to additional LNG volume available to be sold from additional Trains that have reached substantial completion between the periods, a portion of which the customers elected not to take delivery but were required to pay a fixed fee with respect to the contracted volumes.
Our consolidated net income attributable to common stockholders was $471 million, or $1.92 per share-basic and $1.90 per share-diluted, in the year ended December 31, 2018. This $177 million increase in net income in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily attributable to (1) increased gross margins due to increased volume of LNG sold partially offset by decreased pricing on LNG, (2) increased tax benefit from the release of a significant portion of the valuation allowance previously recorded against our deferred tax assets, (3) increased LNG revenues as a result of derivative gains on commodity derivatives and (4) decreased net income attributable to non-controlling interest, which were partially offset by an increase in (1) interest expense, net of amounts capitalized, (2) operating and maintenance expense, (3) derivative losses, net, associated with our interest rate derivatives, (4) depreciation and amortization expense and (5) losses on equity method investments.
We enter into derivative instruments to manage our exposure to (1) changing interest rates, (2) commodity-related marketing and price risks and (3) foreign exchange volatility. Derivative instruments are reported at fair value on our Consolidated Financial Statements. In some cases, the underlying transactions economically hedged receive accrual accounting treatment, whereby revenues and expenses are recognized only upon delivery, receipt or realization of the underlying transaction. Because the recognition of derivative instruments at fair value has the effect of recognizing gains or losses relating to future period exposure, use of derivative instruments may increase the volatility of our results of operations based on changes in market pricing, counterparty credit risk and other relevant factors.
Revenues
2020 vs. 2019 and 2019 vs. 2018
Total revenues decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable period in 2019, primarily as a result of decreased revenues recognized by our integrated marketing function due to the recent downturn in the energy market and the absence of variable fees for cargoes in which customers notified us they would not take delivery. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $969 million in revenues associated with LNG cargoes for which customers notified us that they would not take delivery, of which $38 million would have been recognized subsequent to December 31, 2020, if the cargoes were lifted pursuant to the delivery schedules with the customers. The increase in revenue attributable to LNG volume sold during the year ended December 31, 2019 from the comparable period in 2018 was due to increased volume of LNG sold following the achievement of substantial completion of Trains between the years, partially offset by decreased LNG revenues per MMBtu, which was primarily affected by market prices realized for volumes sold by our integrated marketing function. We expect our LNG revenues to increase in the future upon Train 3 of the CCL Project and Train 6 of the SPL Project becoming operational.
Prior to substantial completion of a Train, amounts received from the sale of commissioning cargoes from that Train are offset against LNG terminal construction-in-process, because these amounts are earned or loaded during the testing phase for the construction of that Train. During the years ended years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we realized offsets to LNG terminal costs of $19 million, $301 million and $140 million, corresponding to 3 TBtu, 51 TBtu and 17 TBtu, respectively, that were related to the sale of commissioning cargoes from the Liquefaction Projects.
Also included in LNG revenues are sale of unutilized natural gas procured for the liquefaction process, gains and losses from derivative instruments, which include the realized value associated with a portion of derivative instruments that settle through physical delivery, and revenues from arrangements in which we financially settled previously-scheduled LNG cargo
sales without physical delivery. We recognized revenues of $436 million, $693 million and $163 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to these transactions.
The following table presents the components of LNG revenues and the corresponding LNG volumes sold:
(1) Long-term agreements include agreements with an initial tenure of 12 months or more.
(2) LNG revenues include revenues with no corresponding volumes due to revenues attributable to LNG cargoes for which customers notified us that they would not take delivery.
Operating costs and expenses
2020 vs. 2019 and 2019 vs. 2018
Our total operating costs and expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of decreased cost of sales, partially offset by increased operating and maintenance expense and depreciation and amortization expense from additional operating Trains between the periods. Our total operating costs and expenses increased during the year ended December 31, 2019 from the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily as a result of the increase in operating Trains between each of the periods, and further due to increased third-party service and maintenance costs from turnaround and related activities at the SPL Project.
Cost of sales includes costs incurred directly for the production and delivery of LNG from the Liquefaction Projects, to the extent those costs are not utilized for the commissioning process. Cost of sales decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable 2019 period, primarily due to decreased pricing of natural gas feedstock between the periods and decreased vessel charter costs. Partially offsetting this decrease was decreased fair value of commodity derivatives to secure natural gas feedstock for the Liquefaction Projects due to unfavorable shifts in long-term forward prices relative to our hedged position and increases in costs associated with sale of unutilized natural gas procured for the liquefaction process and a portion of derivative instruments that settle through physical delivery. Cost of sales increased during the year ended December 31, 2019 from the year ended December 31, 2018 due to increased volume of natural gas feedstock partially offset by decreased
pricing and increased vessel charter costs. Partially offsetting this increase was increased derivative gains from an increase in fair value of the derivatives associated with economic hedges to secure natural gas feedstock for the Liquefaction Projects, primarily due to a favorable shift in long-term forward prices. Cost of sales also includes port and canal fees, variable transportation and storage costs and the sale of natural gas procured for the liquefaction process and other costs to convert natural gas into LNG.
Operating and maintenance expense primarily includes costs associated with operating and maintaining the Liquefaction Projects. During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating and maintenance expense also included costs incurred in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as further described above in Impact of COVID-19 and Market Environment. Excluding the costs incurred in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, operating and maintenance expense (including affiliates) increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable period in 2019, primarily due to increased natural gas transportation and storage capacity demand charges, increased TUA reservation charges due to Total Gas & Power North America, Inc. (“Total”) under the partial TUA assignment agreement and increased payroll and benefit costs from increased headcount from additional Trains operating at the Liquefaction Projects between the periods. The increase during the year ended December 31, 2019 from the comparable period in 2018 was primarily related to: (1) increased natural gas transportation and storage capacity demand charges from operating Train 5 of the SPL Project and Trains 1 and 2 of the CCL Project following the respective substantial completions, (2) increased cost of turnaround and related activities at the SPL Project, (3) increased TUA reservation charges paid to Total from payments under the partial TUA assignment agreement and (4) increased payroll and benefit costs from increased headcount to operate Train 5 of the SPL Project and Trains 1 and 2 of the CCL Project. Operating and maintenance expense also includes insurance and regulatory and other operating costs.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 as a result of an increased number of operational Trains, as the related assets began depreciating upon reaching substantial completion.
Impairment expense and loss on disposal of assets decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 and increased during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The higher impairment expense and loss on disposal of assets recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to the write down of assets used in non-core operations outside of our liquefaction activities, including losses from uncollectible notes receivable.
We expect our operating costs and expenses to generally increase in the future upon Train 3 of the CCL Project and Train 6 of the SPL Project achieving substantial completion, although we expect certain costs will not proportionally increase with the number of operational Trains as cost efficiencies will be realized.
Other income (expense)
2020 vs. 2019 and 2019 vs. 2018
Interest expense, net of capitalized interest, increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable 2019 and 2018 periods as a result of a decrease in the portion of total interest costs that is eligible for capitalization as additional Trains of the Liquefaction Projects completed construction between the periods. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we incurred $1.8 billion, $1.8 billion and $1.7 billion of total interest cost, respectively, of which we capitalized $248 million, $414 million and $803 million, respectively, which was primarily related to interest costs incurred for the construction of the Liquefaction Projects.
Loss on modification or extinguishment of debt increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable periods in 2019 and 2018. The loss on modification or extinguishment of debt in each of the years included the incurrence of fees paid to lenders, third party fees and write off of unamortized debt issuance costs recognized upon the redemption and repurchase of convertible senior notes, refinancing our credit facilities with senior notes, refinancing of senior
notes, prepayment of the outstanding indebtedness of our term loan facility and paydown of our credit facilities as part of the capital allocation framework.
Interest rate derivative loss, net increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the comparable 2019 and 2018 periods, primarily due to an unfavorable shift in the long-term forward LIBOR curve between the periods.
Other expense, net increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable periods in 2019 and 2018, due to an impairment loss recognized related to our equity method investments. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized other-than-temporary impairment losses of $129 million related to our investment in Midship Holdings, LLC (“Midship Holdings”) which was precipitated primarily due to declining market conditions in the energy industry and customer credit risk, resulting in a reduction in the fair value of our equity interests. We recognized losses of $87 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 related to our investments in certain equity method investees, including Midship Holdings. Impairments were primarily the result of cost overruns and extended construction timelines for operating infrastructure of our investees’ projects, resulting in a reduction of the expected fair value of our equity interests. In each of the years, these impairment losses were partially offset by interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Income tax benefit (provision)
2020 vs. 2019 and 2019 vs. 2018
The effective tax rate of 7.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 was lower than the 21% federal statutory tax rate primarily due to income allocated to non-controlling interest that is not taxable to Cheniere. The effective tax rate of (72.3)% for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to a one-time tax benefit resulting from the release of a significant portion of our deferred tax asset valuation allowance. The effective tax rate of 2.2% for the year ended December 31, 2018 was lower than the 21% statutory rate primarily as a result of maintaining a valuation allowance against our federal and state net deferred tax assets. Our effective tax rate may continue to experience volatility prospectively due to variability in our pre-tax and taxable earnings and the proportion of such earnings attributable to non-controlling interests.
Net income attributable to non-controlling interest
2020 vs. 2019
Net income attributable to non-controlling interest slightly increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to an increase in consolidated net income recognized by Cheniere Partners, primarily a result of increased margins due to lower pricing of natural gas feedstock, partially offset by increases in (1) loss on modification or extinguishment of debt incurred in conjunction with the refinancing of the 2021 SPL Senior Notes, (2) interest expense, net of capitalized interest and (3) depreciation and amortization expense.
2019 vs. 2018
Net income attributable to non-controlling interest decreased during the year ended December 31, 2019 from the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to the annualized decrease of non-controlling interest as a result of our merger with Cheniere Holdings in September 2018, in which all publicly-held shares of Cheniere Holdings were canceled and the non-controlling interest in Cheniere Holdings was reduced to zero. The consolidated net income recognized by Cheniere Partners decreased from $1.3 billion in the year ended December 31, 2018 to $1.2 billion in the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily
due a decrease in income from operations from higher operating and maintenance expense and an increase in interest expense, net of capitalized interest and increased depreciation and amortization expense, partially offset by increased margins due to higher volumes of LNG sold but decreased pricing on LNG.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Although results are consolidated for financial reporting, SPL, Cheniere Partners, CCH Group and Cheniere operate with independent capital structures. Our capital requirements include capital and investment expenditures, repayment of long-term debt and repurchase of our shares. We expect the cash needs for at least the next twelve months will be met for each of these independent capital structures as follows:
•SPL through project debt and borrowings, operating cash flows and equity contributions from Cheniere Partners;
•Cheniere Partners through operating cash flows from SPLNG, SPL and CTPL and debt or equity offerings;
•CCH Group through operating cash flows from CCL and CCP, project debt and borrowings and equity contributions from Cheniere; and
•Cheniere through existing unrestricted cash, debt and equity offerings by us or our subsidiaries, operating cash flows, borrowings, services fees from our subsidiaries and distributions from our investment in Cheniere Partners.
The following table provides a summary of our liquidity position at December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
(1) Amounts presented include balances held by our consolidated variable interest entity (“VIE”), Cheniere Partners, as discussed in Note 9-Non-controlling Interest and Variable Interest Entity of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, assets of Cheniere Partners, which are included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets, included $1.2 billion and $1.8 billion, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents.
Sabine Pass LNG Terminal
Liquefaction Facilities
The SPL Project is one of the largest LNG production facilities in the world. Through Cheniere Partners, we are currently operating five Trains and two marine berths at the SPL Project, and are constructing one additional Train that is expected to be substantially completed in the second half of 2022, and a third marine berth. We have received authorization from the FERC to site, construct and operate Trains 1 through 6, as well as for the construction of the third marine berth. We have achieved substantial completion of the first five Trains of the SPL Project and commenced commercial operating activities for each Train at various times starting in May 2016. The following table summarizes the project completion and construction status of Train 6 of the SPL Project as of December 31, 2020:
The following orders have been issued by the DOE authorizing the export of domestically produced LNG by vessel from the Sabine Pass LNG terminal:
•Trains 1 through 4-FTA countries and non-FTA countries through December 31, 2050, in an amount up to a combined total of the equivalent of 16 mtpa (approximately 803 Bcf/yr of natural gas).
•Trains 1 through 4-FTA countries and non-FTA countries through December 31, 2050, in an amount up to a combined total of the equivalent of approximately 203 Bcf/yr of natural gas (approximately 4 mtpa).
•Trains 5 and 6-FTA countries and non-FTA countries through December 31, 2050, in an amount up to a combined total of 503.3 Bcf/yr of natural gas (approximately 10 mtpa).
In December 2020, the DOE announced a new policy in which it would no longer issue short-term export authorizations separately from long-term authorizations. Accordingly, the DOE amended each of SPL’s long-term authorizations to include short-term export authority, and vacated the short-term orders.
An application was filed in September 2019 seeking authorization to make additional exports from the SPL Project to FTA countries for a 25-year term and to non-FTA countries for a 20-year term in an amount up to the equivalent of approximately 153 Bcf/yr of natural gas, for a total SPL Project export capacity of approximately 1,662 Bcf/yr. The terms of the authorizations are requested to commence on the date of first commercial export from the SPL Project of the volumes contemplated in the application. In April 2020, the DOE issued an order authorizing SPL to export to FTA countries related to this application, for which the term was subsequently extended through December 31, 2050, but has not yet issued an order authorizing SPL to export to non-FTA countries for the corresponding LNG volume. A corresponding application for authorization to increase the total LNG production capacity of the SPL Project from the currently authorized level to approximately 1,662 Bcf/yr was also submitted to the FERC and is currently pending.
Customers
SPL has entered into fixed price long-term SPAs generally with terms of 20 years (plus extension rights) and with a weighted average remaining contract length of approximately 17 years (plus extension rights) with eight third parties for Trains 1 through 6 of the SPL Project. Under these SPAs, the customers will purchase LNG from SPL for a price consisting of a fixed fee per MMBtu of LNG (a portion of which is subject to annual adjustment for inflation) plus a variable fee per MMBtu of LNG generally equal to approximately 115% of Henry Hub. The customers may elect to cancel or suspend deliveries of LNG cargoes, with advance notice as governed by each respective SPA, in which case the customers would still be required to pay the fixed fee with respect to the contracted volumes that are not delivered as a result of such cancellation or suspension. We refer to the fee component that is applicable regardless of a cancellation or suspension of LNG cargo deliveries under the SPAs as the fixed fee component of the price under SPL’s SPAs. We refer to the fee component that is applicable only in connection
with LNG cargo deliveries as the variable fee component of the price under SPL’s SPAs. The variable fees under SPL’s SPAs were generally sized at the time of entry into each SPA with the intent to cover the costs of gas purchases and transportation and liquefaction fuel to produce the LNG to be sold under each such SPA. The SPAs and contracted volumes to be made available under the SPAs are not tied to a specific Train; however, the term of each SPA generally commences upon the date of first commercial delivery of a specified Train.
In aggregate, the annual fixed fee portion to be paid by the third-party SPA customers is approximately $2.9 billion for Trains 1 through 5. After giving effect to an SPA that Cheniere has committed to provide to SPL, the annual fixed fee portion to be paid by the third-party SPA customers would increase to at least $3.3 billion, which is expected to occur upon the date of first commercial delivery of Train 6.
In addition, Cheniere Marketing has an agreement with SPL to purchase at Cheniere Marketing’s option, any LNG produced by SPL in excess of that required for other customers. See Marketing section for additional information regarding agreements entered into by Cheniere Marketing.
Natural Gas Transportation, Storage and Supply
To ensure SPL is able to transport adequate natural gas feedstock to the Sabine Pass LNG terminal, it has entered into transportation precedent and other agreements to secure firm pipeline transportation capacity with CTPL and third-party pipeline companies. SPL has entered into firm storage services agreements with third parties to assist in managing variability in natural gas needs for the SPL Project. SPL has also entered into enabling agreements and long-term natural gas supply contracts with third parties in order to secure natural gas feedstock for the SPL Project. As of December 31, 2020, SPL had secured up to approximately 4,950 TBtu of natural gas feedstock through long-term and short-term natural gas supply contracts with remaining terms that range up to 10 years, a portion of which is subject to conditions precedent.
Construction
SPL entered into lump sum turnkey contracts with Bechtel Oil, Gas and Chemicals, Inc. (“Bechtel”) for the engineering, procurement and construction of Trains 1 through 6 of the SPL Project, under which Bechtel charges a lump sum for all work performed and generally bears project cost, schedule and performance risks unless certain specified events occur, in which case Bechtel may cause SPL to enter into a change order, or SPL agrees with Bechtel to a change order.
The total contract price of the EPC contract for Train 6 of the SPL Project is approximately $2.5 billion, including estimated costs for the third marine berth that is currently under construction. As of December 31, 2020, we have incurred $1.9 billion under this contract.
Regasification Facilities
The Sabine Pass LNG terminal has operational regasification capacity of approximately 4 Bcf/d and aggregate LNG storage capacity of approximately 17 Bcfe. Approximately 2 Bcf/d of the regasification capacity at the Sabine Pass LNG terminal has been reserved under two long-term third-party TUAs, under which SPLNG’s customers are required to pay fixed monthly fees, whether or not they use the LNG terminal. Each of Total and Chevron U.S.A. Inc. (“Chevron”) has reserved approximately 1 Bcf/d of regasification capacity and is obligated to make monthly capacity payments to SPLNG aggregating approximately $125 million annually, prior to inflation adjustments, for 20 years that commenced in 2009. Total S.A. has guaranteed Total’s obligations under its TUA up to $2.5 billion, subject to certain exceptions, and Chevron Corporation has guaranteed Chevron’s obligations under its TUA up to 80% of the fees payable by Chevron.
The remaining approximately 2 Bcf/d of capacity has been reserved under a TUA by SPL. SPL is obligated to make monthly capacity payments to SPLNG aggregating approximately $250 million annually, prior to inflation adjustments, continuing until at least May 2036. SPL entered into a partial TUA assignment agreement with Total, whereby upon substantial completion of Train 5 of the SPL Project, SPL gained access to substantially all of Total’s capacity and other services provided under Total’s TUA with SPLNG. This agreement provides SPL with additional berthing and storage capacity at the Sabine Pass LNG terminal that may be used to provide increased flexibility in managing LNG cargo loading and unloading activity, permit SPL to more flexibly manage its LNG storage capacity and accommodate the development of Train 6. Notwithstanding any arrangements between Total and SPL, payments required to be made by Total to SPLNG will continue to be made by Total to SPLNG in accordance with its TUA. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, SPL recorded $129
million, $104 million and $30 million, respectively, as operating and maintenance expense under this partial TUA assignment agreement.
Under each of these TUAs, SPLNG is entitled to retain 2% of the LNG delivered to the Sabine Pass LNG terminal.
Capital Resources
We currently expect that SPL’s capital resources requirements with respect to the SPL Project will be financed through project debt and borrowings, cash flows under the SPAs and equity contributions from Cheniere Partners. We believe that with the net proceeds of borrowings, available commitments under the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility, 2019 CQP Credit Facilities, cash flows from operations and equity contributions from Cheniere Partners, SPL will have adequate financial resources available to meet its currently anticipated capital, operating and debt service requirements with respect to Trains 1 through 6 of the SPL Project. Additionally, SPLNG generates cash flows from the TUAs, as discussed above.
The following table provides a summary of our capital resources from borrowings and available commitments for the Sabine Pass LNG Terminal, excluding equity contributions to our subsidiaries and cash flows from operations (as described in Sources and Uses of Cash), at December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
(1) Includes SPL’s 2021 SPL Senior Notes, 6.25% Senior Secured Notes due 2022, 5.625% Senior Secured Notes due 2023, 5.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2024, 5.625% Senior Secured Notes due 2025, 5.875% Senior Secured Notes due 2026 (the “2026 SPL Senior Notes”), 5.00% Senior Secured Notes due 2027 (the “2027 SPL Senior Notes”), 4.200% Senior Secured Notes due 2028 (the “2028 SPL Senior Notes”), 2030 SPL Senior Notes and 5.00% Senior Secured Notes due 2037 (the “2037 SPL Senior Notes”) (collectively, the “SPL Senior Notes”), as well as Cheniere Partners’ $1.5 billion of 5.250% Senior Notes due 2025 (the “2025 CQP Senior Notes”), $1.1 billion of 5.625% Senior Notes due 2026 (the “2026 CQP Senior Notes”) and the 4.500% Senior Notes due 2029 (the “2029 CQP Senior Notes”) (collectively, the “CQP Senior Notes”).
(2) Includes outstanding balances under the 2015 SPL Working Capital Facility, 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility and 2019 CQP Credit Facilities, inclusive of any portion of the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility and 2019 CQP Credit Facilities that may be used for general corporate purposes.
(3) Consists of 2015 SPL Working Capital Facility, 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility and 2019 CQP Credit Facilities.
(4) Does not include equity contributions that may be available from Cheniere’s borrowings and available cash and cash equivalents.
SPL Senior Notes
The SPL Senior Notes are governed by a common indenture (the “SPL Indenture”) and the terms of the 2037 SPL Senior Notes are governed by a separate indenture (the “2037 SPL Senior Notes Indenture”). Both the SPL Indenture and the 2037 SPL Senior Notes Indenture contain terms and events of default and certain covenants that, among other things, limit SPL’s ability and the ability of SPL’s restricted subsidiaries to incur additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock, make certain investments or pay dividends or distributions on capital stock or subordinated indebtedness or purchase, redeem or retire capital stock, sell or transfer assets, including capital stock of SPL’s restricted subsidiaries, restrict dividends or other payments by restricted subsidiaries, incur liens, enter into transactions with affiliates, dissolve, liquidate, consolidate, merge, sell or lease all or substantially all of SPL’s assets and enter into certain LNG sales contracts. Subject to permitted liens, the SPL Senior Notes are secured on a pari passu first-priority basis by a security interest in all of the membership interests in SPL and substantially all of SPL’s assets. SPL may not make any distributions until, among other requirements, deposits are made into debt service reserve accounts as required and a debt service coverage ratio test of 1.25:1.00 is satisfied.
At any time prior to three months before the respective dates of maturity for each series of the SPL Senior Notes (except for the 2026 SPL Senior Notes, 2027 SPL Senior Notes, 2028 SPL Senior Notes, 2030 SPL Senior Notes and 2037 SPL Senior Notes, in which case the time period is six months before the respective dates of maturity), SPL may redeem all or part of such series of the SPL Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to the ‘make-whole’ price (except for the 2037 SPL Senior Notes, in which case the redemption price is equal to the “optional redemption” price) set forth in the respective indentures governing the SPL Senior Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption. SPL may also, at any time within three months of the respective maturity dates for each series of the SPL Senior Notes (except for the 2026 SPL Senior Notes, 2027 SPL Senior Notes, 2028 SPL Senior Notes, 2030 SPL Senior Notes and 2037 SPL Senior Notes, in which case the time period is within six months of the respective dates of maturity), redeem all or part of such series of the SPL Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of such series of the SPL Senior Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption.
Both the 2037 SPL Senior Notes Indenture and the SPL Indenture include restrictive covenants. SPL may incur additional indebtedness in the future, including by issuing additional notes, and such indebtedness could be at higher interest rates and have different maturity dates and more restrictive covenants than the current outstanding indebtedness of SPL, including the SPL Senior Notes and the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility. Semi-annual principal payments for the 2037 SPL Senior Notes are due on March 15 and September 15 of each year beginning September 15, 2025 and are fully amortizing according to a fixed sculpted amortization schedule.
2015 SPL Working Capital Facility
In March 2020, SPL terminated the remaining commitments under the 2015 SPL Working Capital Facility. As of December 31, 2019, SPL had $786 million of available commitments, $414 million aggregate amount of issued letters of credit and no outstanding borrowings under the 2015 SPL Working Capital Facility.
2020 SPL Working Capital Facility
In March 2020, SPL entered into the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility with aggregate commitments of $1.2 billion, which replaced the 2015 SPL Working Capital Facility. The 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility is intended to be used for loans to SPL, swing line loans to SPL and the issuance of letters of credit on behalf of SPL, primarily for (1) the refinancing of the 2015 SPL Working Capital Facility, (2) fees and expenses related to the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility, (3) SPL and its future subsidiaries’ gas purchase obligations and (4) SPL and certain of its future subsidiaries’ general corporate purposes. SPL may, from time to time, request increases in the commitments under the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility of up to $800 million. As of December 31, 2020, SPL had $787 million of available commitments, $413 million aggregate amount of issued letters of credit and no outstanding borrowings under the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility.
The 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility matures on March 19, 2025, but may be extended with consent of the lenders. The 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility provides for mandatory prepayments under customary circumstances.
The 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility contains customary conditions precedent for extensions of credit, as well as customary affirmative and negative covenants. SPL is restricted from making certain distributions under agreements governing its indebtedness generally until, among other requirements, satisfaction of a 12-month forward-looking and backward-looking 1.25:1.00 debt service reserve ratio test. The obligations of SPL under the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility are secured by substantially all of the assets of SPL as well as a pledge of all of the membership interests in SPL and certain future subsidiaries of SPL on a pari passu basis by a first priority lien with the SPL Senior Notes.
Cheniere Partners
CQP Senior Notes
The CQP Senior Notes are jointly and severally guaranteed by each of Cheniere Partners’ subsidiaries other than SPL and, subject to certain conditions governing its guarantee, Sabine Pass LP (each a “Guarantor” and collectively, the “CQP Guarantors”). The CQP Senior Notes are governed by the same base indenture (the “CQP Base Indenture”). The 2025 CQP Senior Notes are further governed by the First Supplemental Indenture, the 2026 CQP Senior Notes are further governed by the Second Supplemental Indenture and the 2029 CQP Senior Notes are further governed by the Third Supplemental Indenture. The indentures governing the CQP Senior Notes contain terms and events of default and certain covenants that, among other
things, limit the ability of Cheniere Partners and the CQP Guarantors to incur liens and sell assets, enter into transactions with affiliates, enter into sale-leaseback transactions and consolidate, merge or sell, lease or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of the applicable entity’s properties or assets.
At any time prior to October 1, 2021 for the 2026 CQP Senior Notes and October 1, 2024 for the 2029 CQP Senior Notes, Cheniere Partners may redeem all or a part of the applicable CQP Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount of the CQP Senior Notes redeemed, plus the “applicable premium” set forth in the respective indentures governing the CQP Senior Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption. In addition, at any time prior to October 1, 2021 for the 2026 CQP Senior Notes and October 1, 2024 for the 2029 CQP Senior Notes, Cheniere Partners may redeem up to 35% of the aggregate principal amount of the CQP Senior Notes with an amount of cash not greater than the net cash proceeds from certain equity offerings at a redemption price equal to 105.625% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2026 CQP Senior Notes and 104.5% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2029 CQP Senior Notes redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption. Cheniere Partners also may at any time through the maturity date of October 1, 2025 for the 2025 CQP Senior Notes, October 1, 2021 through the maturity date of October 1, 2026 for the 2026 CQP Senior Notes and October 1, 2024 through the maturity date of October 1, 2029 for the 2029 CQP Senior Notes, redeem the CQP Senior Notes, in whole or in part, at the redemption prices set forth in the respective indentures governing the CQP Senior Notes.
The CQP Senior Notes are Cheniere Partners’ senior obligations, ranking equally in right of payment with Cheniere Partners’ other existing and future unsubordinated debt and senior to any of its future subordinated debt. In the event that the aggregate amount of Cheniere Partners’ secured indebtedness and the secured indebtedness of the CQP Guarantors (other than the CQP Senior Notes or any other series of notes issued under the CQP Base Indenture) outstanding at any one time exceeds the greater of (1) $1.5 billion and (2) 10% of net tangible assets, the CQP Senior Notes will be secured to the same extent as such obligations under the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities. The obligations under the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities are secured on a first-priority basis (subject to permitted encumbrances) with liens on substantially all the existing and future tangible and intangible assets and rights of Cheniere Partners and the CQP Guarantors and equity interests in the CQP Guarantors (except, in each case, for certain excluded properties set forth in the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities). The liens securing the CQP Senior Notes, if applicable, will be shared equally and ratably (subject to permitted liens) with the holders of other senior secured obligations, which include the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities obligations and any future additional senior secured debt obligations.
2019 CQP Credit Facilities
In May 2019, Cheniere Partners entered into the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities, which consisted of the $750 million term loan (“CQP Term Facility”), which was prepaid and terminated upon issuance of the 2029 CQP Senior Notes in September 2019, and the $750 million revolving credit facility (“CQP Revolving Facility”). Borrowings under the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities will be used to fund the development and construction of Train 6 of the SPL Project and for general corporate purposes, subject to a sublimit, and the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities are also available for the issuance of letters of credit. As of both December 31, 2020 and 2019, Cheniere Partners had $750 million of available commitments and no letters of credit issued or loans outstanding under the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities.
The 2019 CQP Credit Facilities mature on May 29, 2024. Any outstanding balance may be repaid, in whole or in part, at any time without premium or penalty, except for interest rate breakage costs. The 2019 CQP Credit Facilities contain conditions precedent for extensions of credit, as well as customary affirmative and negative covenants, and limit Cheniere Partners’ ability to make restricted payments, including distributions, to once per fiscal quarter and one true-up per fiscal quarter as long as certain conditions are satisfied.
The 2019 CQP Credit Facilities are unconditionally guaranteed and secured by a first priority lien (subject to permitted encumbrances) on substantially all of Cheniere Partners’ and the CQP Guarantors’ existing and future tangible and intangible assets and rights and equity interests in the CQP Guarantors (except, in each case, for certain excluded properties set forth in the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities).
Corpus Christi LNG Terminal
Liquefaction Facilities
We are currently operating two Trains and two marine berths at the CCL Project and commissioning one additional Train that is expected to be substantially completed in the first quarter of 2021. We have received authorization from the FERC to site, construct and operate Trains 1 through 3 of the CCL Project. We completed construction of Trains 1 and 2 of the CCL Project and commenced commercial operating activities in February 2019 and August 2019, respectively. The following table summarizes the project completion and construction status of Train 3 of the CCL Project, including the related infrastructure, as of December 31, 2020:
Separate from the CCH Group, we are also developing Corpus Christi Stage 3 through our subsidiary CCL Stage III, adjacent to the CCL Project. We received approval from FERC in November 2019 to site, construct and operate seven midscale Trains with an expected total production capacity of approximately 10 mtpa of LNG.
The following orders have been issued by the DOE authorizing the export of domestically produced LNG by vessel from the Corpus Christi LNG terminal:
•CCL Project-FTA countries and non-FTA countries through December 31, 2050, up to a combined total of the equivalent of 767 Bcf/yr (approximately 15 mtpa) of natural gas.
•Corpus Christi Stage 3-FTA countries and non-FTA countries through December 31, 2050 in an amount equivalent to 582.14 Bcf/yr (approximately 11 mtpa) of natural gas.
In December 2020, the DOE announced a new policy in which it would no longer issue short-term export authorizations separately from long-term authorizations. Accordingly, the DOE amended each of CCL’s long-term authorizations to include short-term export authority, and vacated the short-term orders.
An application was filed in September 2019 to authorize additional exports from the CCL Project to FTA countries for a 25-year term and to non-FTA countries for a 20-year term in an amount up to the equivalent of approximately 108 Bcf/yr of natural gas, for a total CCL Project export of 875.16 Bcf/yr. The terms of the authorizations are requested to commence on the date of first commercial export from the CCL Project of the volumes contemplated in the application. In April 2020, the DOE issued an order authorizing CCL to export to FTA countries related to this application, for which the term was subsequently extended through December 31, 2050, but has not yet issued an order authorizing CCL to export to non-FTA countries for the corresponding LNG volume. A corresponding application for authorization to increase the total LNG production capacity of the CCL Project from the currently authorized level to approximately 875.16 Bcf/yr was also submitted to the FERC and is currently pending.
Customers
CCL has entered into fixed price long-term SPAs generally with terms of 20 years (plus extension rights) and with a weighted average remaining contract length of approximately 19 years (plus extension rights) with nine third parties for Trains 1 through 3 of the CCL Project. Under these SPAs, the customers will purchase LNG from CCL on a free on board (“FOB”) basis for a price consisting of a fixed fee per MMBtu of LNG (a portion of which is subject to annual adjustment for inflation) plus a variable fee per MMBtu of LNG equal to approximately 115% of Henry Hub. The customers may elect to cancel or suspend deliveries of LNG cargoes, with advance notice as governed by each respective SPA, in which case the customers would still be required to pay the fixed fee with respect to the contracted volumes that are not delivered as a result of such cancellation or suspension. We refer to the fee component that is applicable regardless of a cancellation or suspension of LNG
cargo deliveries under the SPAs as the fixed fee component of the price under our SPAs. We refer to the fee component that is applicable only in connection with LNG cargo deliveries as the variable fee component of the price under our SPAs. The variable fee under CCL’s SPAs entered into in connection with the development of the CCL Project was sized at the time of entry into each SPA with the intent to cover the costs of gas purchases and transportation and liquefaction fuel to produce the LNG to be sold under each such SPA. The SPAs and contracted volumes to be made available under the SPAs are not tied to a specific Train; however, the term of each SPA generally commences upon the date of first commercial delivery for the applicable Train, as specified in each SPA.
In aggregate, the minimum annual fixed fee portion to be paid by the third-party SPA customers is approximately $1.4 billion for Trains 1 and 2 and increasing to approximately $1.8 billion following the substantial completion of Train 3 of the CCL Project.
In addition, Cheniere Marketing has agreements with CCL to purchase: (1) approximately 15 TBtu per annum of LNG with an approximate term of 23 years, (2) any LNG produced by CCL in excess of that required for other customers at Cheniere Marketing’s option and (3) approximately 44 TBtu of LNG with a term of up to seven years associated with the IPM gas supply agreement between CCL and EOG Resources, Inc. See Marketing section for additional information regarding agreements entered into by Cheniere Marketing.
Natural Gas Transportation, Storage and Supply
To ensure CCL is able to transport adequate natural gas feedstock to the Corpus Christi LNG terminal, it has entered into transportation precedent agreements to secure firm pipeline transportation capacity with CCP and certain third-party pipeline companies. CCL has entered into a firm storage services agreement with a third party to assist in managing variability in natural gas needs for the CCL Project. CCL has also entered into enabling agreements and long-term natural gas supply contracts with third parties, and will continue to enter into such agreements, in order to secure natural gas feedstock for the CCL Project. As of December 31, 2020, CCL had secured up to approximately 2,938 TBtu of natural gas feedstock through long-term natural gas supply contracts with remaining terms that range up to 10 years, a portion of which is subject to the achievement of certain project milestones and other conditions precedent.
CCL Stage III has also entered into long-term natural gas supply contracts with third parties, and anticipates continuing to enter into such agreements, in order to secure natural gas feedstock for Corpus Christi Stage 3. As of December 31, 2020, CCL Stage III had secured up to approximately 2,361 TBtu of natural gas feedstock through long-term natural gas supply contracts with remaining terms that range up to approximately 15 years, which is subject to the achievement of certain project milestones and other conditions precedent.
A portion of the natural gas feedstock transactions for CCL and CCL Stage III are IPM transactions, in which the natural gas producers are paid based on a global gas market price less a fixed liquefaction fee and certain costs incurred by us.
Construction
CCL entered into separate lump sum turnkey contracts with Bechtel for the engineering, procurement and construction of Trains 1 through 3 of the CCL Project under which Bechtel charges a lump sum for all work performed and generally bears project cost, schedule and performance risks unless certain specified events occur, in which case Bechtel may cause CCL to enter into a change order, or CCL agrees with Bechtel to a change order.
The total contract price of the EPC contract for Train 3, which is currently undergoing commissioning, is approximately $2.4 billion, reflecting amounts incurred under change orders through December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we have incurred $2.4 billion under this contract.
Final Investment Decision for Corpus Christi Stage 3
FID for Corpus Christi Stage 3 will be subject to, among other things, entering into an EPC contract, obtaining additional commercial support for the project and securing the necessary financing arrangements.
Pipeline Facilities
In November 2019, the FERC authorized CCP to construct and operate the pipeline for Corpus Christi Stage 3. The pipeline will be designed to transport 1.5 Bcf/d of natural gas feedstock required by Corpus Christi Stage 3 from the existing regional natural gas pipeline grid.
Capital Resources
The CCH Group expects to finance the construction costs of the CCL Project from one or more of the following: operating cash flows from CCL and CCP, project debt and equity contributions from Cheniere. The following table provides a summary of the capital resources of the CCH Group from borrowings and available commitments for the CCL Project, excluding equity contributions from Cheniere, at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (in millions):
(1) Includes CCH’s 7.000% Senior Secured Notes due 2024, 5.875% Senior Secured Notes due 2025, 5.125% Senior Secured Notes due 2027, 3.700% Senior Secured Notes due 2029, 4.80% Senior Secured Notes due 2039, 3.925% Senior Secured Notes due 2039 and 3.52% CCH Senior Secured Notes (collectively, the “CCH Senior Notes”).
(2) Aggregate original principal amount before debt discount and debt issuance costs and interest paid-in-kind.
(3) Includes the CCH Credit Facility and CCH Working Capital Facility.
(4) Does not include equity contributions that may be available from Cheniere’s borrowings and available cash and cash equivalents.
2025 CCH HoldCo II Convertible Senior Notes
In May 2015, CCH HoldCo II issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of the 2025 CCH HoldCo II Convertible Senior Notes in a private placement. In May 2018, the amended and restated note purchase agreement under which the 2025 CCH HoldCo II Convertible Senior Notes were issued was subsequently amended in connection with commercialization and financing of Train 3 of the CCL Project and to provide the note holders with certain prepayment rights related thereto consistent with those under the CCH Credit Facility. In February 2020, the amended and restated note purchase agreement for the 2025 CCH HoldCo II Convertible Senior Notes was further amended to allow CCH HoldCo II the option to redeem all or a portion of the outstanding notes with cash at a price of $1,080 per $1,000 principal amount, at the time of any CCH HoldCo II or noteholder-initiated conversion through September 2, 2020. In March 2020, CCH HoldCo II redeemed an aggregate outstanding principal amount of $300 million and in July 2020, redeemed the remaining outstanding principal amount with borrowings under the Cheniere Term Loan Facility.
CCH Senior Notes
The CCH Senior Notes are jointly and severally guaranteed by CCH’s subsidiaries, CCL, CCP and Corpus Christi Pipeline GP, LLC (each a “CCH Guarantor” and collectively, the “CCH Guarantors”). The indentures governing the CCH Senior Notes contain customary terms and events of default and certain covenants that, among other things, limit CCH’s ability and the ability of CCH’s restricted subsidiaries to: incur additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock; make certain investments or pay dividends or distributions on membership interests or subordinated indebtedness or purchase, redeem or retire membership interests; sell or transfer assets, including membership or partnership interests of CCH’s restricted subsidiaries; restrict dividends or other payments by restricted subsidiaries to CCH or any of CCH’s restricted subsidiaries; incur liens; enter into transactions with affiliates; dissolve, liquidate, consolidate, merge, sell or lease all or substantially all of the properties or assets of CCH and its restricted subsidiaries taken as a whole; or permit any CCH Guarantor to dissolve,
liquidate, consolidate, merge, sell or lease all or substantially all of its properties and assets. The covenants included in the respective indentures that govern the CCH Senior Notes are subject to a number of important limitations and exceptions.
The CCH Senior Notes are CCH’s senior secured obligations, ranking senior in right of payment to any and all of CCH’s future indebtedness that is subordinated to the CCH Senior Notes and equal in right of payment with CCH’s other existing and future indebtedness that is senior and secured by the same collateral securing the CCH Senior Notes. The CCH Senior Notes are secured by a first-priority security interest in substantially all of CCH’s and the CCH Guarantors’ assets.
At any time prior to six months before the respective dates of maturity for each of the CCH Senior Notes, CCH may redeem all or part of such series of the CCH Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to the “make-whole” price set forth in the appropriate indenture, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption. At any time within six months of the respective dates of maturity for each of the CCH Senior Notes, CCH may redeem all or part of such series of the CCH Senior Notes, in whole or in part, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the CCH Senior Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption.
CCH Credit Facility
In May 2018, CCH amended and restated the CCH Credit Facility to increase total commitments under the CCH Credit Facility from $4.6 billion to $6.1 billion. The obligations of CCH under the CCH Credit Facility are secured by a first priority lien on substantially all of the assets of CCH and its subsidiaries and by a pledge by CCH HoldCo I of its limited liability company interests in CCH. There were no available commitments under the CCH Credit Facility as of both December 31, 2020 and 2019. CCH had $2.6 billion and $3.3 billion of loans outstanding under the CCH Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The CCH Credit Facility matures on June 30, 2024, with principal payments due quarterly commencing on the earlier of (1) the first quarterly payment date occurring more than three calendar months following the completion of the CCL Project as defined in the common terms agreement and (2) a set date determined by reference to the date under which a certain LNG buyer linked to the last Train of the CCL Project to become operational is entitled to terminate its SPA for failure to achieve the date of first commercial delivery for that agreement. Scheduled repayments will be based upon a 19-year tailored amortization, commencing the first full quarter after the completion of Trains 1 through 3 and designed to achieve a minimum projected fixed debt service coverage ratio of 1.50:1.
Under the CCH Credit Facility, CCH is required to hedge not less than 65% of the variable interest rate exposure of its senior secured debt. CCH is restricted from making certain distributions under agreements governing its indebtedness generally until, among other requirements, the completion of the construction of Trains 1 through 3 of the CCL Project, funding of a debt service reserve account equal to six months of debt service and achieving a historical debt service coverage ratio and fixed projected debt service coverage ratio of at least 1.25:1.00.
CCH Working Capital Facility
In June 2018, CCH amended and restated the CCH Working Capital Facility to increase total commitments under the CCH Working Capital Facility from $350 million to $1.2 billion. The CCH Working Capital Facility is intended to be used for loans to CCH (“CCH Working Capital Loans”) and the issuance of letters of credit on behalf of CCH for certain working capital requirements related to developing and operating the CCL Project and for related business purposes. Loans under the CCH Working Capital Facility are guaranteed by the CCH Guarantors. CCH may, from time to time, request increases in the commitments under the CCH Working Capital Facility of up to the maximum allowed for working capital under the Common Terms Agreement that was entered into concurrently with the CCH Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, CCH had $767 million and $729 million of available commitments, $293 million and $471 million aggregate amount of issued letters of credit and $140 million and zero of loans outstanding under the CCH Working Capital Facility, respectively.
The CCH Working Capital Facility matures on June 29, 2023, and CCH may prepay the CCH Working Capital Loans and loans made in connection with a draw upon any letter of credit (“CCH LC Loans”) at any time without premium or penalty upon three business days’ notice and may re-borrow at any time. CCH LC Loans have a term of up to one year. CCH is required to reduce the aggregate outstanding principal amount of all CCH Working Capital Loans to zero for a period of five consecutive business days at least once each year.
The CCH Working Capital Facility contains conditions precedent for extensions of credit, as well as customary affirmative and negative covenants. The obligations of CCH under the CCH Working Capital Facility are secured by substantially all of the assets of CCH and the CCH Guarantors as well as all of the membership interests in CCH and each of the CCH Guarantors on a pari passu basis with the CCH Senior Notes and the CCH Credit Facility.
Cheniere
Senior Notes
In September 2020, we issued an aggregate principal amount of $2.0 billion of 2028 Cheniere Senior Secured Notes, the proceeds of which were used to prepay a portion of the outstanding indebtedness under the Cheniere Term Loan Facility and to pay related fees and expenses. The associated indentures (“Cheniere Indenture”) contain customary terms and events of default and certain covenants that, among other things, limit our ability to create liens or other encumbrances, enter into sale-leaseback transactions and merge or consolidate with other entities or sell all or substantially all of our assets. The Cheniere Indenture covenants are subject to a number of important limitations and exceptions.
At any time prior to October 15, 2023, we may redeem all or a part of the 2028 Cheniere Senior Secured Notes at a redemption price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount thereof, plus the “applicable premium” and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to but not including the date of redemption. We also may, at any time prior to October 15, 2023, redeem up to 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2028 Cheniere Senior Secured Notes with an amount of cash not greater than the net cash proceeds from certain equity offerings at a redemption price equal to 104.625% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes being redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to but not including, the date of redemption. At any time on or after October 15, 2023 through the maturity date of October 15, 2028, we may redeem all or part of the 2028 Cheniere Senior Secured Notes at the redemption prices described in the Cheniere Indenture.
The 2028 Cheniere Senior Secured Notes are our general senior obligations and rank senior in right of payment to all of our future obligations that are, by their terms, expressly subordinated in right of payment to the 2028 Cheniere Senior Secured Notes and equally in right of payment with all of our other existing and future unsubordinated indebtedness. The 2028 Cheniere Senior Secured Notes will initially be secured on a first-priority basis by a lien on substantially all of our assets and equity interests in our direct subsidiaries (other than certain excluded subsidiaries) (the “Collateral”), which liens will rank pari passu with the liens securing the Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility and Cheniere Term Loan Facility. The 2028 Cheniere Senior Secured Notes will remain secured as long as (1) there are any obligations or undrawn commitments outstanding under the Cheniere Term Loan Facility that are secured by liens on the Collateral or (2) the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our secured indebtedness exceeds $1.25 billion. As of December 31, 2020, the 2028 Cheniere Senior Secured Notes are not guaranteed by any of our subsidiaries. In the future, the 2028 Cheniere Senior Secured Notes will be guaranteed by our subsidiaries who guarantee our other material indebtedness.
Convertible Notes
In November 2014, we issued an aggregate principal amount of $1.0 billion of the 2021 Cheniere Convertible Unsecured Notes. The 2021 Cheniere Convertible Unsecured Notes are convertible at the option of the holder into our common stock at the then applicable conversion rate, provided that the closing price of our common stock is greater than or equal to the conversion price on the date of conversion. In July 2020, we repurchased $844 million in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding 2021 Cheniere Convertible Unsecured Notes at individually negotiated prices from a small number of investors.
In March 2015, we issued $625 million aggregate principal amount of 4.25% Convertible Senior Notes due 2045 (the “2045 Cheniere Convertible Senior Notes”). We have the right, at our option, at any time after March 15, 2020, to redeem all or any part of the 2045 Cheniere Convertible Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to the accreted amount of the 2045 Cheniere Convertible Senior Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to such redemption date.
We have the option to satisfy the conversion obligation for the 2021 Cheniere Convertible Unsecured Notes and the 2045 Cheniere Convertible Senior Notes with cash, common stock or a combination thereof.
Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility
In December 2018, we amended and restated the Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility to increase total commitments under the Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility from $750 million to $1.25 billion. The Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility is intended to fund, through loans and letters of credit, equity capital contributions to CCH HoldCo II and its subsidiaries for the development of the CCL Project and, provided that certain conditions are met, for general corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $1.1 billion and $665 million of available commitments, $124 million and $585 million aggregate amount of issued letters of credit and no loans outstanding under the Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility, respectively.
The Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility matures on December 13, 2022 and contains representations, warranties and affirmative and negative covenants customary for companies like us with lenders of the type participating in the Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility that limit our ability to make restricted payments, including distributions, unless certain conditions are satisfied, as well as limitations on indebtedness, guarantees, hedging, liens, investments and affiliate transactions. Under the Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility, we are required to ensure that the sum of our unrestricted cash and the amount of undrawn commitments under the Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility is at least equal to the lesser of (1) 20% of the commitments under the Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility and (2) $200 million (the “Liquidity Covenant”). However, at any time that the aggregate principal amount of outstanding loans plus drawn and unreimbursed letters of credit under the Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility is greater than 30% of aggregate commitments under the Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility, the Liquidity Covenant will not apply and we will instead be governed by a quarterly non-consolidated leverage ratio covenant not to exceed 5.75:1.00 (the “Springing Leverage Covenant”).
The Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility is secured by a first priority security interest (subject to permitted liens and other customary exceptions) in substantially all of our assets, including our interests in our direct subsidiaries (excluding CCH HoldCo II and certain other subsidiaries).
Cheniere Term Loan Facility
In June 2020, we entered into the Cheniere Term Loan Facility, which was subsequently increased to $2.695 billion in July 2020. In July 2020, borrowings under the Cheniere Term Loan Facility were used to (1) redeem the outstanding principal amount of the 2025 CCH HoldCo II Convertible Senior Notes, (2) repurchase $844 million in aggregate principal amount of outstanding 2021 Cheniere Convertible Unsecured Notes at individually negotiated prices from a small number of investors and (3) pay the related fees and expenses. The remaining commitments under the Cheniere Term Loan Facility are expected to be used to repay and/or repurchase a portion of the remaining principal amount of the 2021 Cheniere Convertible Unsecured Notes and for the payment of related fees and expenses. In September 2020, we prepaid approximately $2.1 billion of the outstanding indebtedness of the Cheniere Term Loan Facility with net proceeds from the 2028 Cheniere Senior Secured Notes and available cash. As of December 31, 2020, we had $372 million of available commitments and $148 million of loans outstanding under the Cheniere Term Loan Facility.
The Cheniere Term Loan Facility matures on June 18, 2023. Loans under the Cheniere Term Loan Facility may be voluntarily prepaid, in whole or in part, at any time, without premium or penalty. Borrowings under the Cheniere Term Loan Facility are subject to customary conditions precedent. The Cheniere Term Loan Facility includes representations, warranties, affirmative and negative covenants and events of default customary for companies like us with lenders of the type participating in the Cheniere Term Loan Facility and consistent with the equivalent provisions contained in the Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility.
The Cheniere Term Loan Facility is secured by a first priority security interest (subject to permitted liens and other customary exceptions) on a pari passu basis with the Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility in substantially all of our assets and equity interests in direct subsidiaries (other than certain excluded subsidiaries). Upon redemption of the 2025 CCH HoldCo II Convertible Senior Notes in July 2020, the equity interests in CCH HoldCo II were pledged as collateral to secure the obligations under the Cheniere Revolving Credit Facility and the Cheniere Term Loan Facility.
Cash Receipts from Subsidiaries
Our ownership interest in the Sabine Pass LNG terminal is held through Cheniere Partners. As of December 31, 2020, we owned a 48.6% limited partner interest in Cheniere Partners in the form of 239.9 million common units. In July 2020, the financial tests required for conversion of Cheniere Partners’ subordinated units, all of which were held by us, were met under
the terms of Cheniere Partners’ partnership agreement and effective August 17, 2020, the first business day following the payment of the quarterly distribution with respect to the quarter ended June 30, 2020, all of Cheniere Partners’ subordinated units were automatically converted into common units on a one-for-one basis and the subordination period was terminated. We also own 100% of the general partner interest and the incentive distribution rights in Cheniere Partners. We are eligible to receive quarterly equity distributions from Cheniere Partners related to our ownership interests and our incentive distribution rights.
We also receive fees for providing management services to some of our subsidiaries. We received $120 million, $119 million and $85 million in total service fees from these subsidiaries during the each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Share Repurchase Program
On June 3, 2019, we announced that our Board of Directors (“Board”) authorized a 3-year, $1.0 billion share repurchase program. The following table presents information with respect to repurchases of common stock during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
As of December 31, 2020, we had up to $596 million of the share repurchase program available. Under the share repurchase program, repurchases can be made from time to time using a variety of methods, which may include open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise, all in accordance with the rules of the SEC and other applicable legal requirements. The timing and amount of any shares of our common stock that are repurchased under the share repurchase program will be determined by our management based on market conditions and other factors. The share repurchase program does not obligate us to acquire any particular amount of common stock, and may be modified, suspended or discontinued at any time or from time to time at our discretion.
Marketing
We market and sell LNG produced by the Liquefaction Projects that is not required for other customers through our integrated marketing function. We have, and continue to develop, a portfolio of long-, medium- and short-term SPAs to transport and unload commercial LNG cargoes to locations worldwide. These volumes are expected to be primarily sourced by LNG produced by the Liquefaction Projects but supplemented by volumes procured from other locations worldwide, as needed. As of December 31, 2020, we have sold or have options to sell approximately 4,995 TBtu of LNG to be delivered to customers between 2021 and 2045, including volume from an SPA Cheniere Marketing has committed to provide to SPL. The cargoes have been sold either on a FOB basis (delivered to the customer at the Sabine Pass LNG terminal or the Corpus Christi LNG terminal, as applicable) or a delivered at terminal (“DAT”) basis (delivered to the customer at their specified LNG receiving terminal). We have chartered LNG vessels to be utilized for cargoes sold on a DAT basis.
Cheniere Marketing entered into uncommitted trade finance facilities with available credit of $241 million as of December 31, 2020, primarily to be used for the purchase and sale of LNG for ultimate resale in the course of its operations. The finance facilities are intended to be used for advances, guarantees or the issuance of letters of credit or standby letters of credit on behalf of Cheniere Marketing. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, Cheniere Marketing had $34 million and $41 million, respectively, in standby letters of credit and guarantees outstanding under the finance facilities. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no loans outstanding under the finance facilities. Cheniere Marketing pays interest or fees on utilized commitments.
Corporate and Other Activities
We are required to maintain corporate and general and administrative functions to serve our business activities described above. The development of our sites or other projects, including infrastructure projects in support of natural gas supply and LNG demand, will require, among other things, acceptable commercial and financing arrangements before we make an FID.
We have made an equity investment in Midship Holdings, which manages the business and affairs of Midship Pipeline. Midship Pipeline operates the Midship Project with current capacity of up to 1.1 million Dekatherms per day that connects new gas production in the Anadarko Basin to Gulf Coast markets, including markets serving the Liquefaction Projects. The Midship Project was placed in service in April 2020.
Restrictive Debt Covenants
As of December 31, 2020, each of our issuers was in compliance with all covenants related to their respective debt agreements.
LIBOR
The use of LIBOR is expected to be phased out by the end of 2021. It is currently unclear whether LIBOR will be utilized beyond that date or whether it will be replaced by a particular rate. We intend to continue working with our lenders and counterparties to pursue any amendments to our debt and derivative agreements that are currently subject to LIBOR and will continue to monitor, assess and plan for the phase out of LIBOR.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The following table summarizes the sources and uses of our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in millions). The table presents capital expenditures on a cash basis; therefore, these amounts differ from the amounts of capital expenditures, including accruals, which are referred to elsewhere in this report. Additional discussion of these items follows the table.
Operating Cash Flows
Our operating cash net inflows during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $1,265 million, $1,833 million and $1,990 million, respectively. The $568 million decrease in operating cash inflows in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily related to repayment of paid-in-kind interest related to the redemption of the 2025 CCH HoldCo II Convertible Senior Notes, repurchase of a portion of the 2021 Cheniere Convertible Unsecured Notes and an increase in cash paid for interest, partially offset by the increased cash receipts from the sale of LNG cargoes due to additional LNG volume available to be sold from additional Trains that have reached substantial completion between the periods, a portion of which the customers elected not to take delivery but were required to pay a fixed fee with respect to the contracted volumes. The $157 million decrease in operating cash inflows in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily related to increased operating costs and expenses, which were partially offset by increased cash receipts from the sale of LNG cargoes, as a result of the additional Trains that were operating at the Liquefaction Projects in 2019.
Proceeds from Issuance of Debt, Repayments of Debt, Debt Issuance and Other Financing Costs and Debt Modification or Extinguishment Costs
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued an aggregate principal amount of $4.8 billion in senior secured notes to refinance our near-term debt and repay or prepay the outstanding indebtedness under our credit facilities and convertible notes. Borrowings of $3.1 billion under our credit facilities were used to redeem or repurchase our convertible notes, to fund our working capital requirements or for general corporate purposes. We incurred $125 million of debt issuance costs primarily related to up-front fees paid and $172 million of debt modification or extinguishment costs upon the closing of these transactions.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we issued an aggregate principal amount of $4.2 billion in senior notes to prepay the outstanding indebtedness under our credit facilities. Borrowings of $2.2 billion under our credit facilities were used for funding future capital expenditures in connection with the construction costs for the Liquefaction Projects, to fund our working capital requirements or for general corporate purposes. We incurred $51 million of debt issuance costs primarily related to up-front fees paid and $15 million of debt modification or extinguishment costs upon the closing of these transactions.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we issued an aggregate principal amount of $1.1 billion in senior notes to prepay the outstanding indebtedness under our credit facilities. Borrowings of $3.2 billion under our credit facilities during the year were used for funding future capital expenditures in connection with the construction costs for the Liquefaction Projects, to fund our working capital requirements or for general corporate purposes. We incurred $66 million of debt issuance costs primarily related to up-front fees paid and $17 million of debt modification or extinguishment costs upon the closing of these transactions.
Property, Plant and Equipment, net
Cash outflows for property, plant and equipment were primarily for the construction costs for the Liquefaction Projects. These costs are capitalized as construction-in-process until achievement of substantial completion.
Distributions and Dividends to Non-controlling Interest
We own a 48.6% limited partner interest in Cheniere Partners, with the remaining non-controlling interest held by The Blackstone Group Inc., Brookfield Asset Management Inc. and the public, to whom we paid distributions and dividends during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Investment in Equity Method Investment
We invested $100 million, $105 million and $25 million in Midship Holdings, our equity method investment, during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Repurchase of Common Stock
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we paid $155 million and $249 million, respectively, to repurchase approximately 3 million shares and 4 million shares, respectively, of our common stock under the share repurchase program.
Contractual Obligations
We are committed to make cash payments in the future pursuant to certain of our contracts. The following table summarizes certain contractual obligations in place as of December 31, 2020 (in millions):
(1)Agreements in force as of December 31, 2020 that have terms dependent on project milestone dates are based on the estimated dates as of December 31, 2020.
(2)Based on the total debt balance, scheduled maturities and fixed or estimated forward interest rates in effect at December 31, 2020. Debt balance is presented net of $501 million in debt discount for outstanding convertible notes with significant spread between the coupon rate and the effective interest rate. The debt discount and the repayment of paid in kind interest are included in interest payments, which is consistent with the presentation in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. Interest payment obligations exclude adjustments for interest rate swap agreements. A discussion of our debt obligations can be found in Note 11-Debt of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(3)Operating lease obligations primarily relate to LNG vessel time charters, land sites related to the Liquefaction Projects and corporate office leases. Operating lease obligations do not include $1.6 billion of legally binding minimum lease payments for vessel charters which were executed as of December 31, 2020 but will commence between 2021 and 2022 and have fixed minimum lease terms of up to seven years. A discussion of our lease obligations can be found in Note 12-Leases of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(4)Finance lease obligations consist of tug leases supporting the CCL Project, as further discussed in Note 12-Leases of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(5)Purchase obligations consist of agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding that specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased. We include only contracts for which conditions precedent have been met. As project milestones and other conditions precedent are achieved, our obligations are expected to increase accordingly. We include contracts for which we have an early termination option if the option is not expected to be exercised.
(6)Construction obligations primarily consist of the estimated remaining cost pursuant to our EPC contracts as of December 31, 2020 for projects with respect to which we have made an FID to commence construction. A discussion of these obligations can be found at Note 20-Commitments and Contingencies of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(7)Pricing of natural gas supply agreements is based on estimated forward prices and basis spreads as of December 31, 2020. Natural gas supply, transportation and storage service agreements includes $1.5 billion in payments under agreements with related parties as discussed in Note 14-Related Party Transactions of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(8)Other purchase obligations primarily relate to payments under SPL’s partial TUA assignment agreement with Total as discussed in Note 13-Revenues from Contracts with Customers of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
In addition, as of December 31, 2020, we had $830 million aggregate amount of issued letters of credit under our credit facilities. We also had tax agreements with certain local taxing jurisdictions for an aggregate amount of $196 million to be paid through 2033, based on estimated tax obligations as of December 31, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no transactions that met the definition of off-balance sheet arrangements that may have a current or future material effect on our consolidated financial position or operating results.
Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes. Management evaluates its estimates and related assumptions regularly, including those related to the valuation of derivative instruments. Changes in facts and circumstances or additional information may result in revised estimates, and actual results may differ from these estimates. Management considers the following to be its most critical accounting estimates that involve significant judgment.
Fair Value of Derivative Instruments
All derivative instruments, other than those that satisfy specific exceptions, are recorded at fair value. We record changes in the fair value of our derivative positions based on the value for which the derivative instrument could be exchanged between willing parties. If market quotes are not available to estimate fair value, management’s best estimate of fair value is based on the quoted market price of derivatives with similar characteristics or determined through industry-standard valuation approaches. Such evaluations may involve significant judgment and the results are based on expected future events or conditions, particularly for those valuations using inputs unobservable in the market.
Our derivative instruments consist of interest rate swaps, financial commodity derivative contracts transacted in an over-the-counter market, physical commodity contracts and foreign currency exchange (“FX”) contracts. We value our interest rate swaps using observable inputs including interest rate curves, risk adjusted discount rates, credit spreads and other relevant data. Valuation of our financial commodity derivative contracts is determined using observable commodity price curves and other relevant data. We estimate the fair values of our FX derivative instruments using observable FX rates and other relevant data.
Valuation of our physical commodity contracts is predominantly driven by observable and unobservable market commodity prices and, as applicable to our natural gas supply contracts, our assessment of the associated events deriving fair value, including evaluating whether the respective market is available as pipeline infrastructure is developed. The fair value of our physical commodity contracts incorporates risk premiums related to the satisfaction of conditions precedent, such as completion and placement into service of relevant pipeline infrastructure to accommodate marketable physical gas flow. A portion of our physical commodity contracts require us to make critical accounting estimates that involve significant judgment, as the fair value is developed through the use of internal models which incorporate significant unobservable inputs. In instances where observable data is unavailable, consideration is given to the assumptions that market participants would use in valuing the asset or liability. This includes assumptions about market risks, such as future prices of energy units for unobservable periods, liquidity, volatility and contract duration.
Gains and losses on derivative instruments are recognized in earnings. The ultimate fair value of our derivative instruments is uncertain, and we believe that it is reasonably possible that a change in the estimated fair value could occur in the near future as interest rates, commodity prices and FX rates change.
Recent Accounting Standards
For descriptions of recently issued accounting standards, see Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.