ITEM 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Concerning Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, contains not only historical information, but also forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Statements that are not historical are forward-looking and reflect expectations for future Company performance. In addition, forward-looking statements may be made orally or in press releases, conferences, reports, on the Company’s web site, or otherwise, in the future by or on behalf of the Company. When used by or on behalf of the Company, the words “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “intend,” “will,” “plan,” “predict,” “project,” “outlook,” “could,” “may,” “should,” and similar expressions generally identify forward-looking statements. For these statements throughout the Annual Report on Form 10-K, the Company claims the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The entire sections entitled “Financial Overview and Outlook” and “Risk Factors” should be considered forward-looking statements.
Forward-looking statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to those discussed in the “Risk Factors” section contained in Item 1A. Readers should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statement and should recognize that the statements are predictions of future results or conditions, which may not occur as anticipated. Actual results or conditions could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements and from historical results, due to the risks and uncertainties described herein, as well as others not now anticipated. The risks and uncertainties described herein are not exclusive and further information concerning the Company and its businesses, including factors that potentially could materially affect the Company’s financial results, may emerge from time to time. Except as required by law, the Company assumes no obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect actual results or changes in factors or assumptions affecting such forward-looking statements.
Company Overview
The Company manufactures and markets center pivot, lateral move, and hose reel irrigation systems. The Company also produces and markets irrigation controls, chemical injection systems, remote monitoring and irrigation scheduling systems. These products are used by farmers to increase or stabilize crop production while conserving water, energy, and labor. Through its acquisitions and third-party commercial arrangements, the Company has been able to enhance its capabilities in providing innovative, turn-key solutions to customers through the integration of designs, controls, and pump stations. The Company sells its irrigation products primarily to a world-wide independent dealer network, who resell to their customers, the farmers. The Company’s primary production facilities are located in the United States. The Company has smaller production and sales operations in Brazil, France, China, Turkey, and South Africa, as well as distribution and sales operations in the Netherlands, Australia, and New Zealand. The Company also manufactures and markets, through distributors and direct sales to customers, various infrastructure products, including moveable barriers for traffic lane management, crash cushions, preformed reflective pavement tapes, and other road safety devices, through its production facilities in the United States and Italy, and has produced road safety products in irrigation manufacturing facilities in China and Brazil. In addition, the Company’s infrastructure segment produces large diameter steel tubing, and railroad signals and structures, and provides outsourced manufacturing and production services for other companies.
For the business overall, the global, long-term drivers of population growth, water conservation and environmental sustainability, the need for increased food production, and the need for safer, more efficient transportation solutions remain positive. Key factors which impact demand for the Company’s irrigation products include total worldwide agricultural crop production, the profitability of agricultural crop production, agricultural commodity prices, net farm income, availability of financing for farmers, governmental policies regarding the agricultural sector, water and energy conservation policies, the regularity of rainfall, regional climate conditions, and foreign currency exchange rates. A key factor which impacts demand for the Company’s infrastructure products is the amount of spending authorized by governments to improve road and highway systems. Much of the U.S. highway infrastructure market is driven by government spending programs. For example, the U.S. government funds highway and road improvements through the Federal Highway Trust Fund Program. This program provides funding to improve the nation’s roadway system. In December 2015, the U.S. government enacted a five-year, $305 billion highway-funding bill (the FAST Act”) to fund highway and bridge projects. The FAST Act expired September 30, 2020, and a one-year extension was approved. On October 2, 2021, an additional one-month extension was approved as Congress seeks resolution of a new long-term infrastructure bill. Matching funding from the various states may be required as a condition of federal funding.
The Company continues to have an ongoing, structured, acquisition process that it expects to generate additional growth opportunities throughout the world and add to its irrigation and infrastructure capabilities. The Company is committed to achieving earnings growth by global market expansion, improvements in margins, and strategic acquisitions.
COVID-19 Impact
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared coronavirus (COVID-19) a global pandemic. This outbreak has adversely affected workforces, customers, economies, and financial markets globally, leading to economic uncertainty. Shelter-in-place or stay-at-home orders have been implemented from time to time in many of the jurisdictions in which the Company operates. However, because the Company supports critical industries, the Company’s facilities worldwide have generally been considered “business essential” and have remained open throughout the outbreak with limited exceptions. Accordingly, COVID-19 has had a limited impact on the Company’s manufacturing operations to date. While the Company has implemented new procedures to protect the health and well-being of employees and customers, costs associated with these procedures have not been material. The pandemic has not had a material adverse effect on demand for the Company’s irrigation or infrastructure products; however, the pandemic has resulted in a slowdown of road construction activity and delays in certain project implementations. As pandemic conditions improved and economic activity increased, the Company has experienced a number of supply chain challenges including increased lead times and availability of certain components, significant raw material inflation, and labor and logistics constraints.
The ultimate impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s business, results of operations, or cash flows remains uncertain and depends on numerous evolving factors that the Company may not be able to accurately predict or effectively respond to, including, without limitation: the duration and scope of the outbreak; mutations of COVID-19; actions taken by governments, businesses, and individuals in response to the outbreak; the effect on economic activity and actions taken in response; the effect on customers and their demand for the Company’s products and services; and the Company’s ability to manufacture, sell, and service its products, including without limitation as a result of supply chain challenges, facility closures, social distancing, restrictions on travel, fear or anxiety by the populace, and shelter-in-place orders. As such, the financial impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s business is difficult to estimate.
New Accounting Standards Issued But Not Yet Adopted
See Note 2, New Accounting Pronouncements, to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
In preparing the consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), management must make a variety of decisions which impact the reported amounts and the related disclosures. Such decisions include the selection of the appropriate accounting principles to be applied and the assumptions on which to base accounting estimates. In reaching such decisions, management applies judgment based on its understanding and analysis of the relevant facts and circumstances. Certain of the Company’s accounting policies are critical, as these policies are most important to the presentation of the Company’s consolidated results of operations and financial condition. They require the greatest use of judgments and estimates by management based on the Company’s historical experience and management’s knowledge and understanding of current facts and circumstances. Management periodically re-evaluates and adjusts the estimates that are used as circumstances change. Following is the accounting policy management considers critical to the Company’s consolidated results of operations and financial condition:
Environmental Remediation Liabilities
The Company’s accounting policy on environmental remediation is critical because it requires significant judgments and estimates by management, involves changing regulations and approaches to remediation plans, and any revisions could be material to the operating results of any fiscal quarter or fiscal year. The Company is subject to an array of environmental laws and regulations relating to the protection of the environment. In particular, the Company committed to remediate environmental contamination of the groundwater at, and land adjacent, to its Lindsay, Nebraska facility (the “site”) with the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”). The Company and its environmental consultants have developed a remedial alternative work plan, under which the Company continues to work with the EPA to define and implement steps to better contain and remediate the remaining contamination.
Environmental remediation liabilities include costs directly associated with site investigation and clean up, such as materials, external contractor costs, and incremental internal costs directly related to the remedy. Estimates used to record environmental remediation liabilities are based on the Company’s best estimate of probable future costs
based on site-specific facts and circumstances. Estimates of the cost for the likely remedy are developed using internal resources or by third-party environmental engineers or other service providers. The Company records the environmental remediation liabilities that represent the points in the range of estimates that are most probable, or the minimum amount when no amount within the range is a better estimate than any other amount. Portions of the long-term liability that are fixed and reliably determinable are discounted at a risk-free rate.
The Company accrues the anticipated cost of environmental remediation when the obligation is probable and can be reasonably estimated. While the plan has not been formally approved by the EPA, the Company believes the current accrual is a good faith estimate of the long-term cost of remediation at this site; however, the estimate of costs and their timing could change as a result of a number of factors, including but not limited to (1) EPA input on the proposed remediation plan and any changes which the EPA may subsequently require, (2) refinement of cost estimates and length of time required to complete remediation and post-remediation operations and maintenance, (3) effectiveness of the technology chosen in remediation of the site as well as changes in technology that may be available in the future, and (4) unforeseen circumstances existing at the site. As a result of these factors, the actual amount of costs incurred by the Company in connection with the remediation of contamination of its Lindsay, Nebraska site could exceed the amounts accrued for this expense at this time. While any revisions could be material to the operating results of any fiscal quarter or fiscal year, the Company does not expect such additional expenses would have a material adverse effect on its liquidity or financial condition.
Warranties
The Company’s accounting policy on accounting for its product warranties is critical because it includes significant judgments and estimates by management about the amount, nature, and timing of future product-related warranty costs.
The Company generally warrants its products against certain manufacturing and other defects. These product warranties are provided for specific periods and/or usage of the product. At the time a sale is recognized, the company records the estimated future warranty costs. The Company generally determines its total future warranty liability by applying historical claims rate experience to the amount of equipment that has been sold and is still within the warranty period. In addition, the Company records provisions for known warranty claims.
The Company periodically reviews the assumptions used to determine the liabilities for product warranties and adjusts its assumptions based upon factors such as actual failure rates and cost experience. A number a factors could affect actual failure rates and cost experience, including the amount and timing of new product introductions, changes in manufacturing techniques or locations, components or suppliers used. If actual costs differ from the estimates, an adjustment may be made to the product warranty liability.
Financial Overview and Outlook
Operating revenues in fiscal 2021 were $567.6 million, a 20 percent increase compared to $474.7 million in the prior year. Irrigation segment revenues increased 35 percent to $471.4 million and infrastructure segment revenues decreased 23 percent to $96.3 million. Net earnings for fiscal 2021 were $42.6 million or $3.88 per diluted share compared with $38.6 million or $3.56 per diluted share in the prior year.
The global drivers for the Company’s irrigation segment are population growth and the attendant need for expanded food production and efficient water use. The need for irrigated agricultural crop production, which depends upon many factors, include the following primary drivers:
•
Agricultural commodity prices - During fiscal 2021, agricultural commodity prices improved significantly due to lower yield expectations in the U.S. as well as increased exports to China, with corn prices in August 2021 approximately 66 percent higher and soybean prices approximately 42 percent higher compared to August 2020.
•
Net farm income - As of September 2021, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (the “USDA”) estimated U.S. 2021 net farm income to be $113.0 billion, an increase of 19.5 percent from the USDA’s final U.S. 2020 net farm income of $94.6 billion. This increase is projected to come primarily from higher crop and animal receipts.
•
Weather conditions - Demand for irrigation equipment is often positively affected by storm damage and prolonged periods of drought conditions as producers look for ways to reduce the risk of low crop production and crop failures. Conversely, demand for irrigation equipment can be negatively affected during periods of more predictable or abundant natural precipitation.
•
Governmental policies - A number of government laws and regulations can impact the Company’s business, including:
o
The Agricultural Improvement Act of 2018 (the “2018 Farm Bill”) was signed into law in December 2018 and continued many of the programs that were in previous federal farm bills that are designed to provide a degree of certainty to growers. The programs include funding for the Environmental Quality Incentives Program, which provides financial assistance to farmers to implement conservation practices and is frequently used to assist in the purchase of center pivot irrigation systems.
o
U.S. Tax Reform enacted in December 2017 increased the benefit of certain tax incentives, such as the Section 179 income tax deduction and Section 168 bonus depreciation, which are intended to encourage equipment purchases by allowing the entire cost of equipment to be treated as an expense in the year of purchase rather than amortized over its useful life.
o
Biofuel production continues to be a major demand driver for irrigated corn, sugar cane and soybeans as these crops are used in high volumes to produce ethanol and biodiesel. In May 2021 the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) announced that Renewable Fuels Standard (RFS) volume requirements for 2021 and 2022 are likely to be in line with those of 2020, as the EPA accounts for weaker fuel demand since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic.
o
Many international markets are affected by government policies such as subsidies and other agriculturally related incentives. While these policies can have a significant effect on individual markets, they typically do not have a material effect on the consolidated results of the Company.
•
Currency -The value of the U.S. dollar fluctuates in relation to the value of currencies in a number of countries to which the Company exports products and maintains local operations. The strengthening of the dollar increases the cost in the local currency of the products exported from the U.S. into these countries and, therefore, could negatively affect the Company’s international sales and margins. In addition, the U.S. dollar value of sales made in any affected foreign currencies will decline as the value of the dollar rises in relation to these other currencies.
International markets remain active with opportunities for further development and expansion, however regional political and economic factors, currency conditions and other factors can create a challenging environment. Additionally, international results are heavily dependent upon project sales which tend to fluctuate and can be difficult to forecast accurately.
In the infrastructure segment, demand for the Company’s transportation safety products continues to be driven by population growth and the need for improved road safety but is largely dependent on government spending for road construction. In December 2015, the U.S. government enacted a five-year, $305 billion highway-funding bill (the “FAST Act”) to fund highway and bridge projects. The FAST Act expired September 30, 2020, and a one-year extension was approved. On October 2, 2021, an additional one-month extension was approved as Congress seeks resolution of a new long-term infrastructure bill. A Federal COVID-19 relief bill signed December 27, 2020 includes $10 billion of emergency aid for state departments of transportation to help fund eligible projects. Despite government spending uncertainty, opportunities exist for market expansion in each of the infrastructure product lines. Demand for the Company’s transportation safety products continues to be driven by population growth and the need for improved road safety.
As of August 31, 2021, the Company had an order backlog of $149.1 million compared with $58.7 million at August 31, 2020. The irrigation backlog as of August 31, 2021 is higher compared to the prior year while the infrastructure backlog is lower due to large orders in the prior year that did not repeat. The Company’s backlog can fluctuate from period to period due to the seasonality, cyclicality, timing, and execution of contracts. Backlog typically represents long-term projects as well as short lead-time orders; therefore, it is generally not a good indication of the revenues to be realized in succeeding quarters.
Results of Operations
The following “Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020” section presents an analysis of the Company’s consolidated operating results displayed in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings and should be read together with the information in Note 18, Industry Segment Information, to the consolidated financial statements. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Item 7 of Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on October 22, 2020, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and the Company’s website at www.lindsay.com under the tab “Investor Relations - SEC Filings.”
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
The following table provides highlights for fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020:
(1)
Includes corporate general and administrative expenses of $29.2 million for fiscal 2021.
(2)
See Note 18 Industry Segment Information, to the consolidated financial statements, for further details regarding segments.
Revenues
Operating revenues in fiscal 2021 were $567.6 million, an increase of 20 percent or $93.0 million, compared to $474.7 million in fiscal 2020. Irrigation segment revenues of $471.4 million, increased $122.0 million, or 35 percent, and infrastructure revenues decreased $29.0 million, or 23 percent, compared to the prior fiscal year. The decrease in infrastructure revenues was due in part to the delivery of a large project in the U.K. of approximately $27.0 million in the prior year that did not repeat. The irrigation segment provided 83 percent of Company revenue in fiscal 2021 as compared to 74 percent in fiscal 2020.
North America irrigation revenues in fiscal 2021 were $273.9 million an increase of 22 percent or $49.1 million, from $224.8 million in fiscal 2020. The increase resulted from a combination of higher irrigation equipment unit sales volume and higher average selling prices. The increase was partially offset by revenue of approximately $19.0 million from engineering project services in the prior year that did not repeat.
International irrigation revenues in fiscal 2021 were $197.5 million an increase of 59 percent or $72.9 million, from $124.6 million in fiscal 2020. The increase resulted from a combination of higher prices and higher unit sales volumes in most international markets, namely Brazil, Europe and the Middle East. These increases were partially offset by the unfavorable effects of foreign currency translation of approximately $1.7 million compared to the prior fiscal year.
Infrastructure segment revenues in fiscal 2021 decreased by $29.0 million, or 23 percent, to $96.3 million from $125.3 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease resulted primarily from lower Road Zipper System® sales compared to the prior year. Road Zipper System® sales in fiscal 2020 included a large project in the United Kingdom of approximately $27.0 million that did not repeat in fiscal 2021. In addition, during fiscal 2021 the timing of certain projects has been impacted by coronavirus-related delays. Road Zipper System® lease revenues and sales of road safety products were slightly higher in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $150.2 million for fiscal 2021, a decrease of $2.4 million, or 2 percent, compared to $152.5 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in gross profit resulted in part from lower infrastructure segment revenues that were partially offset by higher irrigation segment revenues. In addition, gross profit was reduced by the impact of higher raw material and freight costs, including approximately $6.0 million resulting from the impact of the last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method of accounting for inventory. Under LIFO, higher raw material costs are recognized in cost of goods sold rather than in ending inventory values. Gross profit in fiscal 2020 also included a gain recorded in the infrastructure segment of $1.2 million on the sale of a building that had been held for sale. Gross margin was 26.5 percent of sales for fiscal 2021 compared to 32.1 percent of sales for fiscal 2020. Lower gross margin in fiscal 2021 resulted in part from a higher proportion of irrigation revenues, which have lower gross margin than infrastructure revenues as compared to fiscal 2020. The other items mentioned above also contributed to lower gross margin in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
Operating Expenses
The Company’s operating expenses of $96.1 million for fiscal 2021 decreased $2.2 million, or 2 percent, compared to fiscal 2020 operating expenses of $98.3 million. The decrease is primarily related to reductions in employee incentive compensation and travel expenses compared to the prior year, while other categories of operating expense did not differ materially from the prior year. Operating expenses in fiscal 2021 were also reduced by a gain on sale of a business of $1.1 million. These reductions were partially offset by a one-time expense of $1.5 million in equity awards related to the retirement of the Company’s former chief executive officer.
Income Taxes
The Company recorded income tax expense of $7.8 million and $10.2 million for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was 15.5 percent and reflected the earnings mix between the U.S. and foreign operations, the utilization of previously reserved net operating loss carryforwards, and adjustments related to the accrual for uncertain tax positions. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2020 was 20.9 percent and reflected the earnings mix between U.S. and foreign operations, the utilization of previously reserved net operating loss carryforwards and adjustments related to the accrual for uncertain tax positions.
Net Earnings
Net earnings for fiscal 2021 were $42.6 million, or $3.88 per diluted share, compared to $38.6 million, or $3.56 per diluted share, for fiscal 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities totaled $146.7 million at August 31, 2021 compared with $140.9 million at August 31, 2020. The increase resulted primarily from current year earnings, partially offset by current year capital expenditures and increases in working capital. The Company requires cash for financing its receivables and inventories, paying operating expenses and capital expenditures, and for dividends and share repurchases. The Company’s investments in marketable securities are primarily comprised of United States government securities and investment grade corporate bonds. The Company meets its liquidity needs and finances its capital expenditures from its available cash and funds provided by operations along with borrowings under the credit arrangements that are described below. In the normal course of business, the Company enters into contracts and commitments which obligate the Company to make future payments. The Company does not have any additional off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. The Company believes its current cash resources, investments in marketable securities, projected operating cash flow, and remaining capacity under its continuing bank lines of credit are sufficient to cover all of its expected working capital needs, planned capital expenditures and dividends. The Company may require additional borrowings to fund potential acquisitions in the future.
The Company’s total cash and cash equivalents held by foreign subsidiaries amounted to $38.4 million and $37.2 million as of August 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. The Company considers earnings of foreign subsidiaries to be indefinitely reinvested, and would need to accrue and pay incremental state, local, and foreign taxes if such earnings were repatriated to the United States. The Company does not intend to repatriate the funds and does not expect these funds to have a significant impact on the Company’s overall liquidity.
Net working capital was $277.9 million at August 31, 2021 as compared with $245.5 million at August 31, 2020. Cash flows provided by operating activities totaled $44.0 million during the year ended August 31, 2021 compared to $46.0 million provided by operating activities during the same prior year period. This change was primarily due to an increase in working capital and lower non-cash adjustments, partially offset by higher net earnings.
Cash flows used in investing activities totaled $27.6 million during the year ended August 31, 2021 compared to cash flows used in investing activities of $38.5 million during the same prior year period. Capital spending was $26.5 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $21.4 million in fiscal 2020. The change was primarily due to the Company’s initial investment in marketable securities occurring in the prior year, which was partially offset by higher capital expenditures in the current year.
Cash flows used in financing activities totaled $11.7 million during the year ended August 31, 2021 compared to cash flows used in financing activities of $13.4 million during the same prior year period. The change is primarily the result of higher proceeds from the exercise of stock options in the current year. Cash flows used in financing activities consists primarily of dividend payments. Dividends paid in fiscal 2021 increased by $0.5 million over fiscal 2020.
Capital Allocation Plan
The Company’s capital allocation plan is to continue investing in revenue and earnings growth, combined with a defined process for enhancing returns to stockholders. Priorities for the use of cash under the Company’s capital allocation plan include:
•
Investment in organic growth including capital expenditures,
•
Dividends to stockholders, along with expectations to increase dividends over time,
•
Synergistic acquisitions that provide attractive returns to stockholders, and
•
Opportunistic share repurchases taking into account cyclical and seasonal fluctuations.
Capital Expenditures
In fiscal 2022, the Company expects capital expenditures of approximately $20.0 million to $25.0 million, including equipment replacement, productivity improvements and commercial growth investments. The Company’s management does maintain flexibility to modify the amount and timing of some of the planned expenditures in response to economic conditions.
Dividends
In fiscal 2021, the Company paid cash dividends of $1.30 per common share or $14.2 million to stockholders as compared to $1.26 per common share or $13.6 million to stockholders in fiscal 2020.
Share Repurchases
The Company’s Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program of up to $250.0 million of common stock with no expiration date. Under the program, shares may be repurchased in privately negotiated and/or open market transactions as well as under formalized trading plans in accordance with the guidelines specified under Rule 10b5-1 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. There were no shares repurchased during the years ended August 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. The remaining amount available under the repurchase program was $63.7 million as of August 31, 2021.
Long-Term Borrowing Facilities
Senior Notes. The Company has outstanding $115.0 million in aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes, Series A (the “Senior Notes”). The entire principal of the Senior Notes is due and payable on February 19, 2030. Interest on the Senior Notes is payable semi-annually at a fixed annual rate of 3.82 percent. Borrowings under the Senior Notes are unsecured. The Company used the proceeds of the sale of the Senior Notes for general corporate purposes, including acquisitions and dividends.
Revolving Credit Facility. The Company has outstanding a $50.0 million unsecured Amended and Restated Revolving Credit Facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”) with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (“Wells Fargo”) expiring August 26, 2026. The Company intends to use borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility for working capital purposes and to fund future acquisitions. At August 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had no outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility. The amount of borrowings available at any time under the Revolving Credit Facility is reduced by the amount of standby letters of credit issued by Wells Fargo then outstanding. At August 31, 2021, the Company had the ability to borrow up to $50.0 million under the Revolving Credit Facility. The Revolving Credit Facility may be increased by up to an additional $50.0 million at any time, subject to additional commitment approval. The Revolving Credit Facility was amended to transition the benchmark rate from the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) to the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”). Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility bear interest at a variable rate equal to the SOFR plus a margin of between 100 and 210 basis points depending on the Company’s leverage ratio then in effect (which resulted in a variable rate of 1.40 percent at August 31, 2021), subject to adjustment as set forth in the loan documents for the Revolving Credit Facility. Interest is paid on a monthly to quarterly basis depending on loan type. The Company currently pays an annual commitment fee on the unused portion of the Revolving Credit Facility. The fee is between 0.125 percent and 0.2 percent (0.125 percent at August 31, 2021) on the unused balance depending on the Company’s leverage ratio then in effect.
Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility have equal priority with borrowings under the Company’s Senior Notes. Each of the credit arrangements described above include certain covenants relating primarily to the Company’s financial condition. These financial covenants include a funded debt to EBITDA leverage ratio and an interest coverage ratio. In the event that the loan documents for the Revolving Credit Facility were to require the Company to comply with any financial covenant that is not already included or is more restrictive than what is already included in the arrangement governing the Senior Notes, then such covenant shall be deemed incorporated by reference into the Senior Notes for the benefit of the holders of the Senior Notes. Upon the occurrence of any event of default of these covenants, including a change in control of the Company, all amounts outstanding thereunder may be declared to be immediately due and payable. At August 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company was in compliance with all financial loan covenants contained in its credit arrangements in place as of each of those dates.
Series 2006A Bonds. Elecsys International, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, has outstanding $1.3 million in principal amount of industrial revenue bonds that were issued in 2006 (the “Series 2006A Bonds”). Principal and interest on the Series 2006A Bonds are payable monthly through maturity on September 1, 2026. The interest rate is adjustable every five years based on the yield of the 5-year United States Treasury Notes, plus 0.45 percent (1.92 percent as of August 31, 2021 and 1.72 percent from September 1, 2021 through maturity). The obligations under the Series 2006A Bonds are secured by a first priority security interest in certain real estate.
Inflation
The Company is subject to the effects of changing prices. During fiscal 2021, the Company experienced pricing volatility for purchases of certain commodities, in particular steel and zinc products used in the production of its products, in addition to the availability of labor and logistics. While the cost outlook for commodities used in the production of the Company’s products is not certain, management believes it can manage these inflationary pressures by introducing appropriate sales price adjustments and by actively pursuing internal cost reduction efforts, while further refining the Company’s inventory and raw materials risk management system. However, competitive market pressures may affect the Company’s ability to pass price adjustments along to its customers.