Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those made, projected or implied in the forward-looking statements. Please see the “Risk Factors” section for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements.
Spin-Off
On October 1, 2020, PDL completed a Spin-Off of LENSAR, Inc., its medical device business segment. The Spin-Off was in the form of a dividend involving the distribution of substantially all outstanding shares of LENSAR common stock owned by PDL to holders of PDL common stock. The Spin-Off created a separate, independent, publicly traded global medical device company focused on designing, developing and marketing an advanced femtosecond laser system for the treatment of cataracts and the management of pre-existing or surgically induced corneal astigmatism. In connection with this Spin-Off, our stock began trading under the symbol “LNSR” on Nasdaq.
Our financial statements prior to October 1, 2020 were prepared on a stand-alone basis and were derived from PDL’s consolidated financial statements and accounting records. Our financial statements reflect, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows as the business was historically operated as part of PDL prior to the Spin-Off. The statements of operations include direct expenses for cost of revenue; research and development; selling, general and administrative expenses; and amortization, as well as allocated expenses for certain corporate support functions that were provided by PDL, such as administration and organizational oversight, including employee benefits, finance and accounting, treasury and risk management, professional and legal services, among others. These expenses were allocated to us on the basis of direct usage when identifiable, with the remainder allocated on a proportional basis of our expenses and expenses of PDL. Our management and PDL’s management considered the basis on which the expenses have been allocated to be a reasonable reflection of utilization of services provided to or to the benefit received by us during the periods presented. These allocations may not be reflective of the expenses that would have been incurred had we operated as a separate, unaffiliated entity apart from PDL. Actual costs that would have been incurred if we had been a stand-alone, public company would depend on multiple factors, including the chosen organizational structure and strategic decisions made in various areas, including information technology and infrastructure.
Transactions with PDL that were expected to be settled for cash are reflected in our balance sheet as of December 31, 2019. These transactions primarily included payables to PDL related to certain historical cross charge cost allocations. The cash flows related to payables due to PDL for these certain historical cross charge cost allocations are reflected in our statements of cash flows as operating activities. The cash flows, prior to our recapitalization related to the note payable due to PDL and our Series A Preferred Stock are reflected in our statements of cash flows as financing activities since these balances represent amounts financed by PDL. Transactions with PDL that were not historically settled in cash have been included in the balance sheets as a component of equity and are reflected in our statements of cash flows as financing activities. In July 2020, we entered into a contribution and exchange agreement with PDL, whereby we issued to PDL a total of 2.8 million shares of our common stock in exchange for the extinguishment of the $32.6 million outstanding, including accrued interest, we owed to PDL under the term loan facility we entered into with PDL in May 2017 and amended in July 2020, or the Credit Agreement. In July 2020, we issued to PDL a total of 3.4 million shares of our common stock in exchange for the extinguishment of all 30,000 shares of our Series A Preferred Stock, including any accrued and unpaid dividends thereon. We currently do not have any shares of Series A Preferred Stock outstanding. On September 10, 2020, we amended and restated our certificate of incorporation to effect a one-for-nine reverse stock split of our common stock. All issued and outstanding shares of common stock, other common stock share numbers, equity awards and per share amounts contained in the financial statements have been retroactively adjusted to give effect to the reverse stock split for all periods presented.
In connection with the Spin-Off, we entered into several agreements with PDL that govern the future relationship between us and PDL and impose certain obligations on us following the Spin-Off and which may cause us to incur
new costs, including a Separation and Distribution Agreement, a Transition Services Agreement and a Tax Matters Agreement.
As an independent public company, we perform the functions described above using our own resources or purchased services. For an interim period, however, some of these functions may continue to be provided by PDL under the transition service agreements with PDL as described above in connection with the Spin-Off.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage medical device company focused on designing, developing and marketing an advanced femtosecond laser system for the treatment of cataracts and the management of pre-existing or surgically induced corneal astigmatism. Our LENSAR Laser System incorporates a range of proprietary technologies designed to assist the surgeon in obtaining better visual outcomes, efficiency and reproducibility by providing advanced imaging, simplified procedure planning, efficient design and precision. We believe the cumulative effect of these technologies results in a laser system that can be quickly and efficiently integrated into a surgeon’s existing practice, is easy to use and provides surgeons the ability to deliver improved visual outcomes.
Our current product portfolio consists of the LENSAR Laser System with Streamline IV and IntelliAxis and its associated consumable components. The consumable portion of the system consists of a disposable patient interface device, or PID, kit and a procedure license. Each procedure on each system requires the use of a PID kit. The PID kit includes a suction ring, vacuum filter and fluidic connection that are designed to facilitate placement of the laser while minimizing a patient’s discomfort, intraocular pressure and trauma to the retina and maintaining corneal integrity. The procedure license is downloaded onto the system as required or as purchased by the customer. The system will not perform a procedure without an active license. We offer licenses in a subscription package with minimum monthly obligations and the ability to increase procedure numbers as the practice grows to address occasional increases in demand. We believe this structure allows the surgeon to implement a budget while also providing us with a predictable revenue stream.
We are focused on continuous innovation and are currently developing our proprietary, next generation integrated cataract treatment system, ALLY. ALLY is designed to combine our existing femtosecond laser technology with enhanced capabilities and a phacoemulsification system into a single unit and allow surgeons to perform each of the critical steps in a cataract procedure in a single operating room using this device. We expect this combination product will be a meaningful advancement and will provide significant administrative and financial benefit to a surgeon’s practice at a cost less than the cost of our current system. We anticipate submitting an application for 510(k) clearance to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA by the end of the first quarter of 2022 and, subject to FDA clearance, we expect to begin commercialization of ALLY by the end of 2022. If ALLY is cleared by the FDA, we believe its lower cost of goods and combined functions will help drive broader penetration for us into the overall cataract surgery market and could create a paradigm shift in the treatment of cataracts and management of astigmatism in cataract surgery.
We have built and are continuing to grow our commercial organization, which includes a direct sales force in the United States and distributors in Germany, China, South Korea and other targeted international markets. We believe there is significant opportunity for us to expand our presence in these countries and other markets and regions. In the United States, we sell our products through a direct sales organization that, as of December 31, 2020, consisted of approximately 35 commercial professionals, including regional sales managers, clinical applications and outcomes specialists, field service, technical and customer support personnel. We currently manufacture our LENSAR Laser System at a facility in Orlando, Florida. We purchase custom and off-the-shelf components from a number of suppliers, including some single-source suppliers. We purchase the majority of our components and major assemblies through purchase orders with limited long-term supply agreements and generally do not maintain large volumes of finished goods. We strive to maintain enough inventory of our various component parts to avoid the impact of a potential short-term disruption in the supply chain.
Our revenue decreased from $30.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $26.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decline of 13.6%, due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as discussed below. Our net losses were $14.7 million and $19.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively. Additionally, our installed base of LENSAR Laser Systems has increased from 207 as of December 31,
2019 to approximately 225 as of December 31, 2020. Although our installed base of LENSAR Laser Systems increased, the decrease in revenue was primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in a suspension of approximately three months of cataract procedures in all of our operating markets as well as a proportional decline in LENSAR Laser System sales and leases relative to 2019.
Factors to Consider
We operate in a highly competitive environment that involves a number of risks, some of which are beyond our control. We are subject to risks common to medical device companies, including risks inherent in:
•
our laser system development and commercialization efforts;
•
clinical trials;
•
uncertainty of regulatory actions and marketing approvals;
•
reliance on a network of international distributors and a network of suppliers;
•
levels of coverage and reimbursement by government or other third-party payors for procedures using our products;
•
patients’ willingness and ability to pay for procedures with significant costs not covered by or reimbursable through government or other third-party payors;
•
enforcement of patent and proprietary rights;
•
the need for future capital;
•
the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and all safety requirements and suggestions regarding patient treatment as required or suggested by health care authorities; and
•
competition associated with our products.
We cannot provide assurance that we will generate significant revenues or achieve and sustain profitability in the future. In addition, we can provide no assurance that we will have sufficient funding to meet our future capital requirements.
Our revenues and operating expenses are also difficult to predict and depend on several factors, including the level of ongoing research and development requirements necessary to complete development of our ALLY laser system, the number of laser systems we manufacture, sell, and lease on an annual basis, the availability of capital and direction from regulatory agencies, which are difficult to predict. We may be able to control the timing and level of research and development and selling, general and administrative expenses, but many of these expenditures will occur irrespective of our actions due to contractually committed activities and payments.
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared a global pandemic, as the outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus spread throughout the world. The outbreak of COVID-19 has significantly disrupted our business operations and adversely impacted our business, as non-essential medical procedures, including cataract surgeries, were suspended or significantly decreased in many geographic areas in which we operate for approximately three months. Actions taken to mitigate coronavirus have had, and are expected to continue to have, an adverse impact on the geographical areas in which we operate, and we are making adjustments intended to assist in protecting the safety of our employees and communities while continuing our business activities where possible and legally permitted. To date, implementation of these measures has not required material expenditures, but the temporary suspension of non-essential medical services significantly impacted our revenues and cash flows as well as increasing our inventories, and the pandemic continues to disrupt our commercial operations. During the second quarter of 2020, we made lease concessions to several customers related to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which adversely impacted revenue recognized during the period. In return for these concessions, the related contracts were extended by the same number of months waived. Although procedure volume has returned to pre-pandemic levels in the United States and Europe, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to negatively influence our ability to grow system placements at historical levels. We have also experienced minor supply chain disruptions as a result of COVID-19. We are continuing to monitor
developments with respect to the outbreak and its potential impacts on our operations and those of our employees, distributors, partners, suppliers, and regulators.
As a result of these and other factors, our historical results are not necessarily indicative of future performance, and any interim results we previously presented are not indicative of the results that may be expected for the full fiscal year.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
Total revenue comprises product revenue, service revenue and lease revenue. We derive product revenue from the sale of our laser systems and sales of our PID and procedure licenses to our surgeon customers and to our distributors outside the United States. A PID and procedure license, which may also be referred to as an application license, is required to perform each procedure using our laser system. A procedure license represents a one-time right to utilize the LENSAR Laser System surgical application in connection with a surgery procedure. Service revenue is derived from the sale of extended warranties for our laser systems that provide additional maintenance and service beyond our standard limited warranty. In some situations, we lease our laser systems to surgeons, primarily through non-cancellable leases with a fixed lease payment. We consider all components of our revenue to be recurring source revenue, with the exception of sales of our LENSAR laser systems. For the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately 85% of our revenue was attributable to recurring sources, compared to 79% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cost of Revenue
Total cost of revenue comprises cost of product revenue, cost of lease revenue and cost of service revenue.
Cost of product revenue primarily consists of the raw materials used in the manufacture of our products, plant and equipment overhead, salaries and wages, including stock-based compensation and benefits, packaging costs, depreciation expense, freight and other related costs, which include shipping, inspection and excess and obsolete inventory charges. Cost of service revenue primarily consists of costs associated with providing maintenance services under the extended warranty contracts. Cost of lease revenue primarily consists of depreciation expense associated with leased equipment and shipping costs associated with delivery of these systems.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Our selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, such as salaries and wages, including stock-based compensation and benefits, professional and legal fees, marketing, insurance, travel and other expenses.
We are continuing to grow our sales efforts of the LENSAR Laser System in the United States. We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in association with our planned growth. Additionally, if we receive regulatory clearance for ALLY, we anticipate additional increases in selling, general and administrative expenses as we prepare for and launch ALLY. We also expect to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses necessary to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange and those of the SEC, as well as increased expenses for director and officer insurance, investor relations and professional services.
Research and Development Expense
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of engineering, product development, clinical studies to develop and support our products, personnel costs, such as salaries and wages, including stock-based compensation and benefits, regulatory expenses, and other costs associated with products and technologies that are in development. Currently, our research and development expense primarily consists of costs associated with the continued development of our next-generation laser system, ALLY, which is designed to combine our existing femtosecond laser technology with a phacoemulsification system into an integrated cataract treatment system.
As we continue to advance the development of ALLY, we expect our research and development expenditures to increase from current levels, as we anticipate that the planned development of ALLY will consume significant capital resources.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Intangible assets with finite useful lives consist primarily of acquired trademarks, acquired technology, and customer relationships. Acquired trademarks and acquired technology are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives of 15 to 20 years. Customer relationships are amortized on a straight-line basis or a double declining basis over their estimated useful lives up to 20 years, based on the method that better represents the economic benefits to be obtained.
Interest Expense
Prior to the Spin-Off, interest expense primarily consisted of interest expense associated with the Series A Preferred Stock and a note payable to PDL. The Series A Preferred Stock was classified as a liability on our balance sheet and related dividends were recorded as interest expense using the effective interest method. In July 2020, we entered into a contribution and exchange agreement with PDL, whereby we issued to PDL a total of 2.8 million shares of our common stock in exchange for the extinguishment of the $32.6 million, including accrued interest, we owed to PDL under the Credit Agreement. In July 2020, we issued to PDL a total of 3.4 million shares of our common stock in exchange for the extinguishment of all 30,000 shares of our Series A Preferred Stock, including any accrued and unpaid dividends thereon. We currently do not have any shares of Series A Preferred Stock outstanding.
Seasonality
We have historically experienced seasonal variations in the sales and leases of our products, with our fourth quarter typically being the strongest and the third quarter being the slowest. We believe these seasonal variations are consistent across our industry.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $26.4 million, a decrease of 13.6% when compared to total revenue of $30.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated decline in elective surgical procedures and sales of LENSAR Laser Systems.
Product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $3.4 million, or 14.7%. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease of $2.4 million related to net sales of LENSAR Laser Systems. Furthermore, Product revenue declined due to a decrease in procedures performed. The number of procedures performed decreased by 10% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated decline in elective surgical procedures.
Service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $0.1 million primarily due to decreased sales of our extended warranty services due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Geographically, the decrease in product and service revenue was primarily attributable to lower international net revenues due to decreased sales volume. Changes in price did not have a material impact. Our international sales represented 49% and 59% of product and service revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decline was primarily driven by a decrease in product sales, specifically systems, PIDs and procedure licenses, and was comprised of a $4.8 million decrease in South Korea, which was partially offset by a $0.5 million increase in Asia, excluding South Korea, and a $0.7 million increase in the United States.
Lease revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $0.6 million, or 13.9%, primarily related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including approximately $0.3 million of lease concessions made in the period ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Revenue
Total cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $12.3 million, a decrease of 28.9% when compared to total cost of revenue of $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cost of product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $3.7 million or 31.0%. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in the number of LENSAR Laser Systems that were sold in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition, there was a decrease in the number of PIDs sold in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $0.1 million or 4.6%. This decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in service, maintenance, and warranty costs associated with lower sales volume. Although more systems were under service contracts, fewer service requests were made due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of lease revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $1.1 million, or 49.8%. This decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in rental depreciation as LENSAR Laser Systems reached the end of their depreciable life but were still active under lease arrangements in the field.
Operating Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative. Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $23.8 million, an increase of $6.6 million, or 38.6%, compared to $17.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $6.4 million increase in personnel expense primarily due to stock-based compensation expense and a $1.0 million increase in professional services fees. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in trade show and travel expenses as a result of travel restrictions and cancellations related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Selling, general and administrative expenses included $3.4 million and $4.4 million of expenses allocated from PDL for corporate support functions for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As we get closer to submitting the application for 510(k) clearance of ALLY to the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, currently expected by the end of the first quarter of 2022, and the projected commercial launch of ALLY in the latter half of 2022, we expect selling, general and administrative expense to increase from current levels.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses were $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was consistent with the year ended December 31, 2019. Research and development expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of expenses related to developing ALLY. There was an increase of $1.7 million in consulting expenses and supplies and an increase of $1.1 million increase in personnel expense primarily due increases in headcount and stock-based compensation expense offset by a decrease of $3.5 million in non-recurring project costs related to intellectual property purchased in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Amortization of Intangible Assets. Amortization of intangible assets was approximately $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was consistent with the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense decreased by $0.7 million, or 33.0%, to $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was attributable to a recapitalization of the Company in the third quarter of 2020, resulting in the elimination of interest expense related to our Series A Preferred Stock and outstanding note from PDL.
Income Taxes
Prior to the Spin-Off, we were included in the consolidated federal tax return of PDL. The provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 was calculated by using a “separate return” method. Under this method, we were assumed to file a separate return with the applicable tax authority(ies). The provision was the amount of tax payable or refundable on the basis of a hypothetical, current-year separate return. Deferred taxes were provided on temporary differences and on any attributes being carried forward that could be claimed on the hypothetical return. The need for a valuation allowance was assessed on a separate company basis and on projected separate return assets.
Subsequent to the Spin-Off, we are no longer included in the consolidated federal tax return of PDL and will file a tax return for the period following the Spin-Off as a separate company. The provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects the impact of the Spin-Off and our status as a separate company for federal and state income tax filing purposes.
We maintain a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We prepare and analyze operating and financial data and non-GAAP measures to assess the performance of our business, make strategic and offering decisions and build our financial projections. The key non-GAAP measures we use, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, are reconciled to net loss below for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
EBITDA is defined as net loss before interest expense, income tax expense, interest income, depreciation and amortization expenses. EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure. EBITDA is included in this filing because we believe that EBITDA provides meaningful supplemental information for investors regarding the performance of our business and facilitates a meaningful evaluation of actual results on a comparable basis with historical results. Adjusted EBITDA is also a non-GAAP financial measure. We believe Adjusted EBITDA, which excludes stock-based compensation expense, provides meaningful supplemental information for investors when evaluating our results and comparing us to peer companies as stock-based compensation expense is a significant non-cash charge due to the recapitalization of the Company. We use these non-GAAP financial measures in order to have comparable financial results to analyze changes in our underlying business from quarter to quarter. However, there are a number of limitations related to the use of non-GAAP measures and their nearest GAAP equivalents. For example, other companies may calculate non-GAAP measures differently, or may use other measures to calculate their financial performance and, therefore, any non-GAAP measures we use may not be directly comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had net losses of $19.8 million and $14.7 million, respectively, and, as of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $58.0 million. We expect to continue to incur losses and operating cash outflows for the foreseeable future as we continue to build our commercial and clinical infrastructure, pursue development and FDA clearance of our proprietary, next generation integrated cataract treatment system, known as ALLY, and invest in research and development. In addition, as a stand-alone public company, we will incur significant legal, accounting and other expenses that we did not incur as a subsidiary of PDL.
As discussed above, we also expect the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic will negatively affect our capital requirements and more operating capital may be needed to fund our operations.
In May 2017, we entered into a credit agreement with PDL whereby, we had drawn the full amount of $32.6 million under the Credit Agreement prior to the contribution and exchange agreement we entered into with PDL in July 2020. Under the contribution and exchange agreement with PDL, we issued to PDL a total of 2.8 million shares of our common stock in exchange for the extinguishment of the $32.6 million outstanding, including accrued interest, we owed to PDL under the Credit Agreement.
We issued 30,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock to PDL in May 2017. The Series A Preferred Stock had an aggregate liquidation preference of $30.0 million, plus all accrued and unpaid dividends, whether or not declared. In July 2020, we exchanged all 30,000 shares of our Series A Preferred Stock, including any accrued and unpaid dividends thereon, for a total of 3.4 million shares of our common stock. We currently do not have any shares of Series A Preferred Stock outstanding.
In July 2020, we issued an additional 0.7 million shares of our common stock to PDL in exchange for $8.0 million.
On August 4, 2020, PDL committed that through August 5, 2021 it would provide financial support to us of up to $20.0 million to fund our operating, financing and investing activities. This obligation was fulfilled on August 24, 2020 in connection with the receipt of a capital contribution of $29.0 million from PDL. We issued 0.7 million shares of common stock to PDL in exchange for $8.3 million. The remaining $20.7 million was a cash contribution from PDL.
On September 29, 2020, we issued an additional 9,000 shares of additional common stock to PDL in exchange for $0.1 million cash.
Historically, PDL, as our former parent, provided us cash management and other treasury services. Following the Spin-Off, PDL no longer provides such services and our primary sources of liquidity are our cash on hand, cash from the sale and lease of our systems and the sale of our consumables. We may raise additional capital from equity or debt financings or from other sources. As of December 31, 2020, we expect our cash and cash equivalents, together with
cash generated from the sale and lease of our products, to be sufficient to operate our business through the anticipated clearance and launch of ALLY, which is projected to occur in the latter half of 2022.
As we get closer to the commercial launch of ALLY later in 2022, we expect selling, general and administrative expenses to increase from current levels. Clearance of ALLY and its subsequent launch in 2022 is contingent on the regulatory review and discretion of the FDA and is not entirely within our control.
Our liquidity needs will be largely determined by the success of our operations regarding the successful commercialization of our existing products and the progression, anticipated clearance and launch of ALLY in the future. We will need to raise additional capital through equity or debt financings or from other sources to continue our operations beyond 2022. We may issue securities, including common stock, preferred stock, warrants, and/or debt securities through private placement transactions or registered public offerings in the future. Our ability to raise additional funds will depend, among other factors, on financial, economic and market conditions, many of which are outside of our control and we may be unable to raise financing when needed, or on terms favorable to us. If the necessary funds are not available from these sources, we may have to delay, reduce or suspend the scope of our sales and marketing efforts, research and development activities, or other components of our operations.
However, if these sources are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, we may seek additional funds from public and private stock offerings, borrowings under credit facilities or other sources. Such capital may not be available on favorable terms, or at all. Furthermore, if we issue equity securities to raise additional capital, our existing stockholders may experience dilution, and the new equity securities may have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of our existing stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. In addition, if we raise additional capital through collaboration, licensing or other similar arrangements, it may be necessary to relinquish valuable rights to our products, potential products or proprietary technologies, or grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us. If we cannot raise capital on acceptable terms, we may not be able to develop or enhance our products, execute our business plan, take advantage of future opportunities or respond to competitive pressures, changes in our supplier relationships or unanticipated customer requirements. Any of these events could adversely affect our ability to achieve our business and financial goals or to achieve or maintain profitability and could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Additionally, the extent and duration of the impact the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our stock price and on those of other companies in our industry is highly uncertain and may make us look less attractive to investors and, as a result, there may be a less active trading market for our common stock, our stock price may be more volatile, and our ability to raise capital could be impaired, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity and financial position.
We expect our revenue and expenses to increase in connection with our on-going activities, particularly as we continue to execute on our growth strategy, including expansion of our sales and customer support teams. We also expect to incur additional costs as a stand-alone public company. The primary factors determining our cash needs are the funding of operations, which we expect to continue to expand as the business grows, and enhancing our product offerings through the research and development of ALLY, our next generation integrated cataract treatment system. Our future liquidity needs, and ability to address those needs, will largely be determined by the success of our commercial efforts and those of our distributors; the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on our business; the timing, scope and magnitude of our commercial and development activities; and the timing of regulatory clearance of ALLY.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes, for the periods indicated, selected items in our statements of cash flows:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.8 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $19.8 million and an increase in net operating assets of $6.2 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $12.2 million. The increase in net operating assets was primarily due to changes in inventory and accounts receivable, net. Non-cash charges consisted of depreciation, amortization, and stock-based compensation.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $12.6 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $14.7 million and an increase in net operating assets of $2.4 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $4.4 million. The increase in net operating assets was primarily due to purchases of inventory offset by changes in accrued liabilities. Non-cash charges consisted of depreciation, amortization, and stock-based compensation.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.3 million, which consisted primarily of capital expenditures for property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities for year ended December 31, 2019 was $2.1 million, which consisted primarily of $1.7 million costs to acquire intangible assets and $0.4 million of capital expenditures for property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $50.0 million, primarily due to capital contributions of $20.7 million, sale of common stock of $16.4 million, proceeds of $12.4 million from the note due to PDL and a $2.4 million contributions from PDL, partially offset by a $1.9 million distributions to PDL.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $15.9 million, primarily due to the proceeds of $13.2 million from the loan due to PDL and a $3.8 million contributions from PDL, partially offset by a $1.1 million payment of contingent consideration.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC Regulation S-K Item 303(a)(4)(ii).
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Amounts represent the lease for the LENSAR corporate office and manufacturing facility in Orlando, Florida.
(2)
Consists of a $2.4 million minimum purchase obligation for inventory components for the manufacture and supply of certain components. LENSAR expects to meet these requirements.
Some of the amounts included in this table are based on management’s estimates and assumptions about these obligations, including their duration, timing, anticipated actions by third parties and other factors. Because these estimates and assumptions are necessarily subjective, the obligations we will actually pay in future periods may vary
from those reflected in the table. Furthermore, the table excludes contingent milestone and royalty payments we could be required to pay in connection with the exclusive license of certain intellectual property.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, or GAAP, and the discussion and analysis of our financial condition and operating results require our management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. The impact on accounting estimates and judgments on our financial condition and results of operations due to COVID-19 has introduced additional uncertainties. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Product and Service Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized from the sale of products and services when we transfer control of such promised products and services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these products and services. A five-step model is utilized to achieve the core principle and includes the following steps: (1) identify the customer contract; (2) identify the contract’s performance obligations; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (5) recognize revenue when the distinct performance obligations are satisfied.
We principally derive our revenue from the sale and lease of the LENSAR Laser System and the sale of other related products and services, including PIDs, procedure licenses, and extended warranty service agreements. A procedure license represents a one-time right to utilize the LENSAR Laser System surgical application in connection with a surgery procedure. Without separately procuring procedure licenses granted by us, either together with the purchase of the LENSAR Laser System or under separate subsequent contracts, the customer does not have the right to use the surgical software application to perform surgical procedures. Typically, returns are not allowed.
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately may require significant judgment. Judgment is required to determine the level of interdependency between the LENSAR Laser System and the sale of other related products and services. We evaluate each product or service promised in a contract to determine whether it represents a distinct performance obligation. A performance obligation is distinct if (1) the customer can benefit from the product or service on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer and (2) the products or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract.
For contracts involving the sale or lease of the LENSAR Laser System, our performance obligations generally include the LENSAR Laser System, PID, procedure license, and extended warranty service agreements. In addition, our customer contracts contain provisions for installation and training services, which are not assessed as performance obligations as they are determined to be immaterial promises in the context of the contract and are required for a customer to use the LENSAR Laser System.
We have determined that the LENSAR Laser System, PID and procedure license are each capable of being distinct because they are each sold separately and the customer can benefit from these products with the other readily available resources that are sold by us. In addition, we have determined each are separately identifiable because the LENSAR Laser System, PID and procedure license (1) are not highly interdependent or interrelated; (2) do not modify or customize one another; and (3) do not include a significant service of integrating the promised goods into a bundled output. This is because we are able to fulfill each promise in the contract independently of the others and we would
be able to fulfill our promise to transfer the LENSAR Laser System even if the customer did not purchase a PID or procedure license or to fulfill our promise to provide the PID or the procedure license even if the customer acquired the LENSAR Laser System separately.
The extended warranty, unlike our standard product warranty, is a performance obligation because it provides an incremental service that is beyond ensuring the product delivered will be consistent with stated contractual specifications.
When a contract contains multiple performance obligations, revenue is allocated to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price.
We recognize revenue as the performance obligations are satisfied by transferring control of the product or service to a customer as described below. We record a contract liability, or deferred revenue, when we have an obligation to provide a product or service to the customer and payment is received or due in advance of our performance.
Product revenue. We recognize revenue for the sale of the products at a point in time when control is transferred to customers.
Equipment. LENSAR Laser System sales are recognized as Product revenue when the Company transfers control of the system. This usually occurs after the customer signs a contract, we install the system, and we perform the requisite training for use of the system for direct customers. LENSAR Laser System sales to distributors are recognized as revenue upon shipment.
PID and procedure licenses. The LENSAR Laser System requires both a PID and a procedure license to perform each procedure. We recognize Product revenue for PIDs when we transfer control of the PID. We recognize Product revenue for procedure licenses, which represent a one-time right to utilize the LENSAR Laser System surgical software application, at the point in time when control of the procedure license is transferred to the customer. Control transfers at the time a customer receives the license key. For the sale of PIDs and procedure licenses, we may offer volume discounts to certain customers. To determine the amount of revenue that should be recognized at the time control over these products transfers to the customer, we estimate the average per unit price, net of discounts.
Service revenue. We offer an extended warranty that provides additional maintenance services beyond the standard limited warranty. We recognize Service revenue from the sale of extended warranties over the warranty period on a ratable basis. Customers have the option of renewing the warranty period, which is considered a new and separate contract.
Lease Revenue
We lease equipment to customers under operating lease arrangements. At contract inception we perform an evaluation to determine if a lease arrangement conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset. To the extent such rights of control are conveyed, we further make an assessment as to the applicable lease classification. The identification of specified assets and determination of appropriate lease classification may require the use of management judgement.
Some of our operating leases include a purchase option for the customer to purchase the leased asset at the end of the lease arrangement, subject to a new contract. We do not believe the purchase price qualifies as a bargain purchase option.
For lease arrangements with lease and non-lease components where we are the lessor, we allocate the contract’s transaction price (including discounts) to the lease and non-lease components on a relative standalone selling price, which requires judgments. For those leases with variable lease payments, the variable lease payment is typically based upon use of the leased equipment or the purchase of procedure licenses and PIDs used with the leased equipment.
For operating leases, rental income is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term as lease revenue. Depreciation expense associated with the leased equipment under operating lease arrangements is reflected in cost of lease in the statements of operations.
Lessee leases
Lessee operating leases are included in other current liabilities and long-term operating lease liabilities in our balance sheets. We do not have lessee finance leases.
Operating lease ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. Lease payments are discounted using our incremental borrowing rate as of the commencement date of each lease. Our remaining lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis as operating expense in our statements of operations over the lease term.
Inventory
Inventory, which consists of raw materials, work-in-process and finished goods, is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Inventory levels are analyzed periodically on a first-in, first-out basis and written down to their net realizable value if they have become obsolete, have a cost basis in excess of its expected net realizable value or are in excess of expected requirements. We analyze current and future product demand relative to the remaining product shelf life to identify potential excess inventory. We build demand forecasts by considering factors such as, but not limited to, overall market potential, market share, market acceptance and patient usage.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets with finite useful lives consist primarily of acquired product rights, acquired technology, and customer relationships. Acquired product rights and acquired technology are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, over 15 to 20 years. Customer relationships are amortized on a straight- line basis or a double declining basis over their estimated useful lives up to 20 years, based on the method that better represents the economic benefits to be obtained. The estimated useful lives associated with finite-lived intangible assets are consistent with the estimated lives of the associated products and may be modified when circumstances warrant.
Such assets are reviewed for impairment when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of an asset and its eventual disposition are less than its carrying amount.
The impairment reviews require significant estimates about fair value, including estimation of future cash flows, selection of an appropriate discount rate, and estimates of long-term growth rates. We have not recorded any impairment to our intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Stock-based compensation
Prior to the Spin-Off, we had an equity incentive plan under which we grant phantom stock units, or PSUs, to LENSAR directors and employees. PSUs are awards in the form of phantom shares, denominated in a hypothetical equivalent number of shares of LENSAR common stock and with the value of each PSU equal to the fair value of LENSAR common stock at the date of grant.
Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is expensed over the requisite service period. The holders of the phantom stock units had the right to receive cash upon settlement. Awards of phantom stock were accounted for as a liability under ASC Topic 718 and changes in the fair value of the Company’s liability were recognized as compensation cost over the remaining requisite service period. Changes in the fair value of the liability that occurred after the requisite service period were recognized as compensation cost during the period in which the changes occurred. We remeasured the liability for the outstanding awards at the end of
each reporting period and the compensation cost was based on the change for each reporting period. Forfeitures were accounted for as they occur.
On July 9, 2020, the Board of Directors approved the LENSAR Inc. 2020 Incentive Award Plan (the “2020 Plan”). Under the 2020 Plan, the Company is authorized to issue up to 3,333 shares in the form of stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock unit awards and other stock-based awards. The amount and terms of grants are determined by the Company’s Board of Directors or a duly authorized committee thereof.
Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is generally expensed over the requisite service period. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized using a straight-line attribution method over the requisite service period, except for portions of awards subject to performance conditions, which will be recognized ratably over the service period for each separate performance vesting tranche once it is probable the performance condition will be met. The Company made accounting policy elections to account for modifications to the requisite service period using the bifurcated approach and to account for forfeitures as they occur.
Common stock valuation
Prior to the Spin-Off, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by our board of directors, with input from management. In the absence of a public trading market for the common stock, we developed an estimate of the fair value of the common stock based on the information known on the reporting date, upon a review of any recent events and their potential impact on the estimated fair value, and valuations from an independent third-party valuation firm.
In determining the fair value of our common stock, we established the enterprise value of our company using generally accepted valuation methodologies including discounted cash flow analysis, comparable public company analysis and comparable acquisitions analysis. We then allocated the equity value among the securities that comprised the capital structure of LENSAR using the Black Scholes Option-Pricing model after deducting the liquidation preference of the Series A Preferred Stock. Under the Option-Pricing model, the common stock was modeled as a call option that gave its owner the right but not the obligation to buy the underlying enterprise value at a predetermined or exercise price. Common stock was considered to be a call option with a claim on the enterprise at an exercise price equal to the remaining value immediately after the preferred stock was liquidated.
The Black-Scholes Option-Pricing model requires the use of highly subjective and complex assumptions which impact the fair value of the common stock, including the option’s expected term and the implied volatility of the underlying stock. Because we had not operated as a stand-alone public company, there was a lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, and therefore we have estimated stock price volatility based upon an index of the historical volatilities of a group of comparable publicly-traded medical device and pharmaceutical peer companies. We estimated the expected term using our expected time to a liquidity event. We also considered the fact that the stockholders could not freely trade the common stock in the public markets. Accordingly, the estimated fair value reflected a non-marketability discount partially based on the anticipated likelihood and timing of a future liquidity event.
The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent our best estimates, however the estimates involve inherent uncertainties and judgment and the use of different values could produce materially different results.
Following the Spin-Off, our board of directors determines the fair value of our common stock based on the closing price as reported on the date of grant on Nasdaq.
Income Taxes
We are subject to U.S. federal, state, and local corporate income taxes at the entity level. Prior to the Spin-Off, our losses were included with PDL’s consolidated U.S. federal and state income tax returns. Income taxes as presented in our financial statements for periods prior to the Spin-Off have been prepared on the separate return method as if we were a taxpayer separate from PDL. Subsequent to the Spin-Off, income taxes as presented in our financial statements reflect our status as a separate company, filing federal and state income tax returns on a stand-alone basis.
The provision for income taxes is determined using the asset and liability approach. Under this method, we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. Valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We adjust the level of the liability to reflect any subsequent changes in the relevant facts surrounding the uncertain positions. Any interest and penalties on uncertain tax positions are included within the tax provision.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” may take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Therefore, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We intend to rely on other exemptions provided by the JOBS Act, including without limitation, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of: (1) the last day of our first fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of more than $1.07 billion; (2) the date we qualify as a “large accelerated filer,” meaning, as of December 31, the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates as of the prior June 30 exceeded $700.0 million; (3) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period; and (4) December 31, 2025 (the fiscal year-end following the fifth anniversary of the completion of the Spin-Off).
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for a discussion of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted as of December 31, 2020.