ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this section to “we,” “us,” “our” or the “Company” refer to the Company prior to the consummation of the Merger. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Forward-Looking Statements; Market, Ranking and Other Industry Data,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a former blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on November 7, 2018 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more target businesses. We completed our initial public offering on February 26, 2019 and business combination on January 21, 2021.
Recent Developments
On January 21, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), we consummated the previously announced transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, dated October 21, 2020 and as amended by Amendment No. 1 dated December 16, 2020, by and among the Company, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”) and CarLotz Group, Inc. (f/k/a CarLotz, Inc.) (“Former CarLotz”). The Merger Agreement provided for the acquisition of Former CarLotz by the Company pursuant to the merger of Merger Sub with and into Former CarLotz (the “Merger”), with Former CarLotz continuing as the surviving entity and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company.
In connection with the Closing, the Company changed its name from Acamar Partners Acquisition Corp. to CarLotz, Inc.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, identifying a target company for a business combination and consummating the Merger. We generated non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Company’s trust account. We incurred expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence and merger and acquisition expenses in connection with completing a business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $3,542,687, which consisted of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $1,818,650, offset by operating costs of $5,020,847 and a provision for income taxes of $340,490.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had net income of $3,478,202, which consisted of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $5,531,557, offset by operating costs of $932,834 and a provision for income taxes of $1,120,521.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $2,299,225, resulting primarily from net loss of $3,542,687 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $1,818,650. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $3,062,112 of cash from operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $2,055,329, resulting primarily from net income of $3,478,202 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $5,531,557. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $1,974 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $310,899,678. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2020, the Company withdrew $2,023,749 of interest earned on the Trust Account to pay for its franchise and income tax obligations, of which $759,347 was withdrawn during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company withdrew $1,264,402 from the Trust Account.
In connection with the closing of the Merger, 2,493 shares of Acamar Partners Class A common stock were redeemed.
In connection with the Merger, pursuant to subscription agreements dated October 21, 2020 (the “Subscription Agreements”) by and between Acamar Partners and certain strategic and accredited investors (the “Subscribers”), with respect to a private placement of shares of Acamar Partners Class A common stock, the Company issued and sold to the Subscribers 12.5 million shares of Acamar Partners Class A common stock (the “PIPE Shares”) at a price per share of $10.00 (the “PIPE Investment”). The PIPE Investment was conditioned on all conditions set forth in the Merger Agreement having been satisfied or waived and other customary closing conditions. The proceeds from the PIPE Investment and the cash from the trust account (after redemptions, the payment of certain expenses incurred in connection with the Merger and related transactions, and the payment of the cash consideration and liquidation preference amounts) will be used for general corporate purposes, which may include repayment of indebtedness.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We had no obligations, assets or liabilities that would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We did not participate in transactions that created relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We did not enter into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $37,000 for office space, administrative support and salaries to be paid to employees of such affiliate for due diligence and related services in connection with the Company’s search for a target company (although no salaries or fees were paid from the monthly fee to members of the Company’s management team). We began incurring these fees on February 21, 2019. The administrative services agreement was terminated upon the closing of the Merger.
The underwriters were entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Acamar Partners unit, or $10,695,063 in the aggregate. The deferred fee was paid upon the closing of the Merger from the amounts held in the trust account.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. The Company identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounted for its Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption were classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that featured redemption rights that were either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) were classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock was classified as stockholders’ equity. Acamar Partners’ Class A common stock featured certain redemption rights that were considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We applied the two-class method in calculating earnings per common share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable common stock was calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the trust account by the weighted average number of shares Class A redeemable common stock outstanding since original issuance. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for Class B non-redeemable common stock was calculated by dividing the net income (loss), less income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on its consolidated financial statements.