Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Additionally, see "Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The following discussion contains "forward-looking statements" that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. We caution that assumptions, expectations, projections, intentions or beliefs about future events may, and often do, vary from actual results and the differences can be material. Please see "Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" and "Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors." Unless otherwise specified, references to "average sales price" refer to average sales price excluding the effects of our derivative transactions.
We are an independent energy company focused on the acquisition, exploration and development of oil and natural gas properties, primarily in the Permian Basin of West Texas. Since our inception, we have grown primarily through our drilling program coupled with select strategic acquisitions and joint ventures.
Our financial and operating performance included the following for the periods presented and corresponding changes:
_____________________________________________________________________________
(1)Our oil, NGL and natural gas sales decreased as a result of a 35% decrease in average sales price per BOE and were partially offset by a 9% increase in total volumes sold.
(2)Our net loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 includes non-cash full cost ceiling impairments of $889.5 million and $620.6 million, respectively.
(3)See pages 61-63 for discussions and calculations of these non-GAAP financial measures.
(4)See Note 20.d to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for discussion of changes in our estimated proved reserve quantities of oil, NGL and natural gas.
During February 2021, severe winter weather affected our operations. As of February 22, 2021, our production is close to returning to pre-storm levels. We currently estimate that the combined impact of shut-in production and completions delays will reduce first-quarter 2021 total production by approximately 8,000 BOE per day and oil production by approximately 3,000 barrels per day.
On January 24, 2020, we completed an offer and sale (the "Offering") of $600.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 9.500% senior unsecured notes due 2025 (the "January 2025 Notes") and $400.0 million in aggregate principal amount of
10.125% senior unsecured notes due 2028 (the "January 2028 Notes"). Interest for both the January 2025 Notes and January 2028 Notes is payable semi-annually, in cash in arrears on January 15 and July 15 of each year. The first interest payment was made on July 15, 2020, and consisted of interest from closing to that date. The terms of the January 2025 Notes and January 2028 Notes include covenants, which are in addition to but different than similar covenants in the Senior Secured Credit Facility, which limit our ability to incur indebtedness, make restricted payments, grant liens and dispose of assets.
We received net proceeds of $982.0 million from the Offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses. The proceeds from the Offering were used (i) to fund tender offers for our January 2022 Notes and March 2023 Notes, (ii) to repay our January 2022 Notes and March 2023 Notes that remained outstanding after settling the tender offers and (iii) for general corporate purposes, including repayment of a portion of the borrowings outstanding under the Senior Secured Credit Facility.
In November 2020, our board of directors authorized a $50.0 million bond repurchase program. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased $22.1 million in aggregate principal amount of the January 2025 Notes and $39.0 million in aggregate principal amount of the January 2028 Notes for aggregate consideration of $13.9 million and $24.2 million, respectively, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
On October 16, 2020 and November 16, 2020, we closed a bolt-on acquisition of 2,758 and 80 net acres, including production of 210 BOE/D, in Howard County, Texas for a total purchase price of $11.6 million, subject to customary post-closing purchase price adjustments.
On April 30, 2020, we closed an acquisition of 180 net acres in Howard County, Texas for a total purchase price of $0.6 million, subject to one or more potential contingent payments to be paid by us.
On February 4, 2020, we closed a transaction for $22.5 million acquiring 1,180 net acres and divesting 80 net acres in Howard County, Texas.
On April 9, 2020, we closed a divestiture of 80 net acres and working interests in two producing wells in Glasscock County, Texas for a total sales price of $0.7 million, net of customary post-closing sales price adjustments.
See Note 4 included elsewhere in this Annual Report for discussion of these acquisitions and divestiture of oil and natural gas properties.
On August 5, 2020, we filed an amendment to our first-quarter 2020 Quarterly Report to restate our unaudited consolidated financial statements for the quarter ended March 31, 2020 to correct an error in the future production costs component of the estimated present value ("PV-10") of our reserves. The omitted costs caused an understatement of approximately $160 million of the full cost ceiling impairment expense and balances of accumulated depletion and impairment and accumulated deficit, and a corresponding overstatement of the same amount to both net income and the balance of our oil and natural gas properties for the first quarter of 2020. This error was identified in the course of preparing our unaudited consolidated financial statements for the quarter ended June 30, 2020. This error was isolated to our first-quarter estimate of the PV-10 of our reserves and had no impact on our prior financial statements, including the 2019 Annual Report. This Annual Report gives effect to the restated financial information for the quarter ended March 31, 2020. In addition, we received a waiver from the lenders under our Senior Secured Credit Facility in connection with the error.
On June 1, 2020, we effected the previously announced 1-for-20 reverse stock split of our common stock and the related reduction of the number of authorized shares of common stock, which were previously approved by our stockholders at our 2020 annual meeting of stockholders. Our common stock began trading, on a reverse split-adjusted basis and under our existing trading symbol, at the opening of trading on June 2, 2020. See Note 8.a to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for discussion of the reverse stock split.
On June 17, 2020, we announced organizational changes, including a workforce reduction of 22 individuals, which included a senior officer, that were implemented immediately, subject to certain administrative procedures. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic and market conditions, our board of directors continues to monitor and evaluate our business and strategy and to reduce costs and better position us for the future. In connection with the organizational changes, we announced the departure of our former Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer ("former CFO"), effective as of June 17, 2020. Our former CFO's departure was not the result of any dispute or disagreement with us or our accounting practices or financial statements. We incurred $4.2 million of one-time organizational restructuring expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020, comprised of compensation, tax, professional, outplacement and insurance-related expenses. See Note 18 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for discussion of this organizational restructuring.
In December 2019, a highly transmissible and pathogenic strain of coronavirus surfaced in China, which has and is continuing to spread throughout the world, including the U.S. On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a "Public Health Emergency of International Concern," and on March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the outbreak as a "pandemic". The recommended actions by federal, state and local authorities to address the pandemic have resulted in a swift and unprecedented reduction in international and U.S. economic activity which, in turn, continues to adversely affect the demand for oil and natural gas and resulted in significant volatility and disruption of the financial markets. We are not able to predict the duration or ultimate impact that COVID-19 will have on our business, financial condition and results of operations. However, we have responded to these events with thoughtful planning and are committed to maintaining safe and reliable operations. The health and safety of our employees, suppliers, customers and business partners continue to be a top priority. Our policies to promote social distancing, both in the office and at field locations, remain in effect. Additionally, the majority of our non-field based employees successfully transitioned to working from home. We continue to closely monitor local infection rates and to conform to guidelines and best practices encouraged by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the World Health Organization and other governmental and regulatory authorities to transition to appropriate return-to-work policies while minimizing interruptions to our operations. We do not believe that these measures have had a material effect on our workforce productivity.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act") was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. It included provisions intended to provide relief to individuals and businesses in the form of loans and grants, and tax changes, among other provisions. We did not seek relief in the form of loans or grants from the CARES Act; however, we have benefited from the provision where the AMT credit carryforwards do not expire and are fully refundable.
In early March 2020, concurrent with the spread of COVID-19 to the U.S. and just prior to the government actions mentioned above, members of OPEC+ proposed production cuts in an attempt to stabilize the oil market. However, OPEC+ failed to reach an agreement and some producers instead announced planned production increases, after which oil prices declined sharply. By mid-March 2020, WTI oil prices had declined to less than $25 per barrel, the lowest price since 2002. Although OPEC+ subsequently reached agreement in April 2020 on production cuts that went into effect in May 2020, oil prices continued to decline following announcement of the agreement. Further, producers in the U.S. and globally were slow to reduce oil production at a rate sufficient to match the sharp slowdown in economic activity caused by measures to control the spread of COVID-19. This resulted in an oversupply of oil that caused WTI oil prices to fall to -$37 per barrel on April 20th. Since the April 20th low, WTI oil prices have rebounded and averaged $43 per barrel during the fourth-quarter 2020 and averaged $54 per barrel during the first-quarter 2021 through mid-February.
We maintain an active, multi-year commodity derivatives strategy to minimize commodity price volatility and support cash flows needed for operations. For 2021, we currently have oil derivatives in place for 8.1 million barrels at a weighted-average floor price of $50.83 Brent per barrel. For 2022, we currently have oil derivatives in place for 3.8 million barrels swapped at a weighted-average price of $47.05 Brent per barrel.
For 2021, we currently expect to operate two drilling rigs and one completions crew and capital expenditures to be approximately $360 million. However, we will continue to monitor commodity prices and service costs and adjust activity levels in order to proactively manage our cash flows and preserve liquidity.
Our results of operations are heavily influenced by oil, NGL and natural gas prices, and although prices have stabilized, they remained at low levels in fourth-quarter 2020 for oil and NGL. Oil, NGL and natural gas price fluctuations continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and policies of OPEC+, which have generally increased supply, decreased demand, made economic and market conditions more volatile, caused transportation and storage constraints and led to a variety of additional issues on both a regional and global basis. Historically, commodity prices have experienced significant fluctuations; however, the volatility in the prices has substantially increased as a result of world developments in 2020. The duration of such developments may affect the economic viability of, and our ability to fund our drilling projects, as well as the economic valuation and economic recovery of oil, NGL and natural gas reserves. See "Critical accounting estimates" for further discussion of our oil, NGL and natural gas reserve quantities and standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows.
We have entered into a number of commodity derivative contracts that have enabled us to offset a portion of the changes in our cash flow caused by fluctuations in price and basis differentials for our sales of oil, NGL and natural gas, as discussed in "