ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
STATEMENT ON FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
This Annual Report contains certain forward-looking statements. All statements other than statements of historical fact are “forward-looking statements” for purposes of these provisions, including any projections of earnings, revenues, or other financial items; any statements of the plans, strategies, and objectives of management for future operations; any statements concerning proposed new products, services, or developments; any statements regarding future economic conditions or performance; statements of belief; and any statement of assumptions underlying any of the foregoing. Such forward-looking statements are subject to inherent risks and uncertainties, and actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by the forward-looking statements.
These forward-looking statements involve significant risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the following: competition, promotional costs, and risk of declining revenues. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in such forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors. These forward-looking statements are made as of the date of this filing, and we assume no obligation to update such forward-looking statements. The following discusses our financial condition and results of operations based upon our financial statements which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. It should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere herein.
The following discussion and analysis provides information which our management believes to be relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. The discussion should be read together with our financial statements and the notes to the financial statements, which are included in this report.
Overview
Loop Media, Inc. (f/k/a Interlink Plus, Inc.) (the “Company”) is a Nevada corporation. The Company was incorporated under the laws of the State of Nevada on May 11, 2015. On February 5, 2020, the Company and the Company’s wholly owned subsidiary, Loop Media Acquisition, Inc. (“Merger Sub”), a Delaware corporation, closed the Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with Loop Media, Inc. (“Loop”), a Delaware corporation. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub merged with and into Loop with Loop as surviving entity and becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Merger”).
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the Company acquired 100% of the outstanding shares of Loop in exchange for 152,823,970 shares (pre-stock split; the post stock split number would be 101,882,647 shares) of the Company’s common stock at an exchange ratio of 1:1. Loop was incorporated on May 18, 2016, under the laws of the State of Delaware. As a result of such acquisition, the Company’s operations now are focused on premium short-form video for businesses and consumers.
In connection with the Merger, on February 6, 2020, the Company entered into a Purchase Agreement (the “Asset Purchase Agreement”) with Zixiao Chen (“Buyer”) for the purchase of assets relating to the Company’s two major business segments: travel agency assistance services and convention services (together, the “Business”). In consideration for the assets of the Business, Buyer transferred to the Company 2,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock and agreed to assume and discharge any and all liabilities relating to the Business accruing up to the effective time of the Asset Purchase Agreement. The shares will be retired and restored to the status of authorized and unissued shares.
For accounting purposes, Loop was the surviving entity. The transaction was accounted for as a recapitalization of Loop pursuant to which Loop was treated as the accounting acquirer, surviving and continuing entity although the Company is the legal acquirer. The Company did not recognize goodwill or any intangible assets in connection with the Merger. Accordingly, the Company’s historical financial statements are those of Loop and its wholly-owned subsidiary, ScreenPlay, immediately following the consummation of this reverse merger transaction.
On June 8, 2020, a 1 for 1.5 reverse stock split of the Company’s common stock became effective. All share and per share information in the accompanying consolidated financial statements and footnotes has been retroactively adjusted for the effects of the reverse split for all periods presented.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, substantially all our revenues were derived from the historical business of ScreenPlay, which relies on a Subscription service-based model using older and more expensive A/V technology. Our revenues for 2020 did not contain any significant contribution from any Ad-Supported Services or the provision of the Loop Player to OOH venues or our Loop App to retail consumer end users.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Developments
Impact of COVID-19
The spread of COVID-19 around the world is continuing to affect the United States and global economies and may affect our operations and those of third parties on which we rely, including by causing disruptions in staffing, order fulfillment, and demand for product. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic may affect our revenue significantly in 2021, as it had in 2020. Additionally, while the potential ongoing negative economic impact brought by, and the duration of, the COVID-19 pandemic is still difficult to assess or predict, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global financial markets may reduce our ability to access capital, which could negatively impact our short-term and long-term liquidity. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021 is highly uncertain and subject to change.
The Company has been and continues to be significantly impacted by COVID-19 which was directly related to business closures of key customers. If our business continues to be impacted, we may reintroduce the salary reductions that we had in place from March 2020 through October 2020, or introduce other cost cutting activities.
As COVID-19 continues to evolve, the extent to which COVID-19 continues to impact operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration and changes in the severity of the outbreak, and the actions that may be required to try and contain COVID-19 or treat its impact. The Company continues to monitor the ongoing pandemic and, the extent to which the continued spread of the virus adversely affects our customer base and therefore revenue. As the COVID-19 pandemic is complex and rapidly evolving, the Company’s plans as described above may change. At this point, the Company cannot reasonably estimate the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021, which could have a material adverse impact on the business, results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
Share purchase agreement
The Company entered into a share purchase agreement dated August 1, 2020, for the private offer to a limited number of accredited investors of up to $6,500,000 worth of restricted shares of common stock of the Company at an issue price of $1.25 per share (“Share Purchase Agreement”). The shares are subject to restriction on resales until that date that is 365 days following the relevant closing date for any individual investor. As of April 14, 2021, the Company had raised an aggregate of $5,530,000 and issued 4,424,000 shares under the Share Purchase Agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Use of estimates and assumptions
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include assumptions used in the revenue recognition of performance obligations, fair value of stock-based compensation awards, fair value measurements, right-of-use assets (“ROU”), lease liabilities, and allowance for doubtful accounts.
Revenue recognition
ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”), became effective for the Company on January 1, 2018. The Company’s revenue recognition disclosure reflects its updated accounting policies that are affected by this new standard. The Company applied the “modified retrospective” transition method for open contracts for the implementation of Topic 606. As sales are and have been primarily from delivery of streaming services, delivery of subscription content services in customized formats, and delivery of hardware and ongoing content delivery through software and the Company has no significant post-delivery obligations, this new standard did not result in a material recognition of revenue on the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the cumulative impact of applying this new standard. Therefore, there was no cumulative effect adjustment required.
The Company recognizes revenue when it satisfies a performance obligation by transferring control over a product to a customer. Revenue is measured based on the consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for those products. In instances where final acceptance of the product is specified by the customer, revenue is deferred until all acceptance criteria have been met. Revenues are recognized under Topic 606 in a manner that reasonably reflects the delivery of the Company’s products and services to customers in return for expected consideration and includes the following elements:
● executed contracts with the Company’s customers that it believes are legally enforceable;
● identification of performance obligations in the respective contract;
● determination of the transaction price for each performance obligation in the respective contract;
● allocation the transaction price to each performance obligation; and
● recognition of revenue only when the Company satisfies each performance obligation.
Performance obligations and significant judgments
The Company’s revenue streams can be categorized into the following performance obligations and recognition patterns:
● delivery of streaming services including content encoding and hosting; the Company recognizes revenue over the term of the service based on bandwidth usage;
● delivery of subscription content services in customized formats; the Company recognizes revenue over the term of the service; and
● delivery of hardware for ongoing subscription content delivery through software; the Company recognizes revenue at the point of hardware delivery.
Transaction prices for performance obligations are explicitly outlined in relevant contractual agreements; therefore, the Company does not believe that significant judgments are required with respect to the determination of the transaction price, including any variable consideration identified.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue represents the cost of delivered hardware and bundled software and is recognized at the time of sale. For ongoing licensing and hosting fees, cost of sales is recognized over time based on usage patterns.
Stock-based compensation
Share-based compensation awarded to employees is measured at the award date, based on the fair value of the award, and is recognized as an expense over the requisite vesting period. The Company measures the fair value of the share-based compensation issued to non-employees using the stock price observed in the trading market (for stock transactions) or the fair value of the award (for non-stock transactions), which were more reliably determinable measures of fair value than the value of the services being rendered. The measurement date is the earlier of (1) the date at which commitment for performance by the counterparty to earn the equity instruments is reached, or (2) the date at which the counterparty’s performance is complete.
Fair value measurements
The Company determines the fair value of its assets and liabilities using a hierarchy established by the accounting guidance that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to valuations based upon unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to valuations based upon unobservable inputs that are significant to the valuation (Level 3 measurements). The three levels of valuation hierarchy are defined as follows:
● Level 1 inputs to the valuation methodology are quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets;
● Level 2 inputs to the valuation methodology included quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets in inactive markets, and inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the financial instrument; and
● Level 3 inputs to the valuation methodology is one or more unobservable inputs which are significant to the fair value measurement.
The carrying amount of the Company’s financial instruments, including cash, accounts receivable, deposits, short-term portion of notes receivable and notes payable, and current liabilities approximate fair value due to their short-term nature. The Company does not have financial assets or liabilities that are required under the U.S. GAAP to be measured at fair value on a recurring basis. The Company has not elected to use fair value measurement option for any assets or liabilities for which fair value measurement is not presently required.
The Company records assets and liabilities at fair value on nonrecurring basis as required by the U.S. GAAP. Assets recognized or disclosed at fair value in the consolidated financial statements on a nonrecurring basis include items such as property and equipment, operating lease assets, goodwill, and other intangible assets, which are measured at fair value if determined to be impaired.
Leases
The Company determines if an arrangement is a lease at inception. ROU assets represent the Company’s right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and the lease obligations are recorded as liabilities and represent an obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. ROU assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As most of the Company’s leases do not provide an implicit interest rate, the Company uses its incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the commencement date to determine the present value of the lease payments.
The ROU asset arrangement also consists of any prepaid lease payments and deferred rent liabilities. The lease terms used to calculate the ROU asset and related lease liability include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that the Company will exercise that option. Lease expense for operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term as an operating expense. The Company has lease agreements which require payments for both lease and non-lease components and has elected to account for these as a single lease component.
License Content Asset
On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted the guidance in ASU 2019-02, Entertainment-Films-Other Assets-Film Costs (Subtopic 926-20) and Entertainment-Broadcasters-Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Subtopic 920-350): Improvements to Accounting for Costs of Films and License Agreements for Program Materials, on a prospective basis. The Company capitalizes the fixed content fees and its corresponding liability when the license period begins, the cost of the content is known, and the content is accepted and available for streaming. If the licensing fee is not determinable or reasonably estimable, no asset or liability is recorded, and licensing costs are expenses as incurred. The Company amortizes licensed content assets into cost of revenue, using the straight-line method over the contractual period of availability. The liability is paid in accordance with the contractual terms of the arrangement.
Allowance for doubtful accounts
The Company assesses the collectability of receivables on an ongoing basis. A provision for the impairment of receivables involves significant management judgement and includes the review of individual receivables based on individual customers, current economic trends, and analysis of historical bad debts.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented. The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of future results:
Revenues
The Company’s revenue declined for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 2019 by $587,040 or 17%. Content and streaming services decreased $291,903 year over year as customers were impacted by the pandemic. A customer accounting for nearly all production services revenue terminated its relationship with the Company in February 2020, accounting for $127,165 decrease. An online video streaming customer’s subscription charges ended in August 2019, causing a year over year decrease of $124,258. A box office ticket reseller cancelled subscription charges in June 2020, resulting in a $33,747 decrease year over year. A media entertainment customer with multiple sites is charging contract minimums and are not charging for normal additional usage due to the pandemic in 2020, resulting in a $37,526 decrease year over year.
Content subscription revenues decreased $273,658 year over year 2020 is due to customers impacted by the pandemic. A customer’s multilocation gymnasium chain was provided with COVID-19 credits which decreased revenues year over year $105,411. A customer in the travel industry’s subscription revenues were credited due to non-operations and decreased $47,653 from 2019. A multilocation bar and restaurant chain owner’s locations were negatively impacted by the pandemic and COVID-19 credits resulted in a year over year subscription revenue decrease of $45,850.
Cost of revenue
The $195,536 increase in cost of revenues year over year is due to $380,890 amortization of contract assets in 2020 offset by usage decreases due to the pandemic. Hosting expenses decreased $72,788 as automated usage collection vendors track usage and charges the Company a percentage of usage measurement. Direct cost subcontractors decreased $41,292 primarily due to a consultant no longer providing editing/production services beginning in April 2020. Also, inventory cost of sales true up expense increased $27,007 year over year.
Total operating expenses
Operating expenses decreased $370,545, 2020 versus 2019 primarily due to personnel-related costs and impairment. Payroll increased $828,473 year over year due to headcount growth. Stock compensation to executives and employees increased $653,531 year over year. Consulting and staffing costs increased $816,726 year over year which includes $492,000 in warrants paid to an outside consultant with the remaining portion due to computer development and temporary staffing $837,716 increased operating expenses year over year due to accounting expenses due to financial statement review, audit and SEC reporting. There was an increase in amortization of intangibles of $289,079 due to the Spkr asset acquisition.
Decrease of $3,959,201 impairment expense was due to impairment of software intangible of 6,350,000 in the fourth quarter of 2019, offset by ScreenPlay brand impairment $130,000 and license contract asset impairment of $2,260,799 in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Other income and expenses
The gain/loss on settlement of obligations decreased $299,944 in 2019 there was a loss on settlement of obligations of $493,601 due to issuance of warrants to satisfy a liability, offset by a gain on settlement of obligations due to the relief of $192,557 of accrued interest.
Loss on extinguishment of debt decreased $258,417 year over year as there were no debt extinguishment gains or losses recognized in 2020 versus the $258,417 recognized in 2019.
In the first quarter of 2020 there was an inducement expense of $3,793,406 for the purchase of series B convertible preferred stock.
Provision for income taxes
Income tax expense increased $96,644 due to tax true up to prepaid tax from 2019. The tax prepaid balance will be adjusted as needed in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had cash of approximately $838,161. The following table provides a summary of the Company’s net cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities.
The Company has historically sought and continues to seek financing from private sources to implement its business plans. To satisfy its financial commitments, the Company has historically relied on private party financing, but that has inherent risks in terms of availability and adequacy of funding.
For the next twelve months, the Company anticipates that it will need to supplement its cash from revenues with additional cash raised from equity investment or debt transactions to ensure that the Company will have adequate cash to support its minimum operating cash requirements and thus to continue as a going concern.
There can be no guarantee or assurance that the Company can raise adequate capital from outside sources. If the Company is unable to raise funds when required or on acceptable terms, it may have to significantly reduce, or discontinue its operations.
Net cash flow from operating activities
There was approximately $3,737,156 more cash used in operations in the year ended December 31, 2020, than in 2019. Net income decreased $3,907,150 year over year. Non-cash add backs decreased $1,071,659 year over year.
Net cash flow from investing activities
Investing activities year over year increase is primarily due to an equity investment in the fourth quarter of 2020. In 2020, the Company invested $750,000 in an equity investment in an unconsolidated entity and $7,847 for the purchase of equipment as compared to $25,773 in 2019.
Net cash flow from financing activities
There was net cash increase from financing activities of $7,122,937 year over year, December 31, 2020 and 2019. In the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company raised $5,310,000 in new capital to continue strengthening its operations and building its organization, less $80,134 to pay for additional legal fees and other costs associated with the merger into a public company. The Company also received loan proceeds from the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan program in the amount of $573,500. The Company issued convertible debt of $750,000.
In 2019, the Company paid $2,149,875 in the ScreenPlay acquisition offset by $1,000,000 in loan proceeds.
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had cash of $838,161 and an accumulated deficit of $41,544,144. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company used net cash in operating activities of $5,933,667. The Company has incurred net losses since inception. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year from the issuance date of these consolidated financial statements.
The Company’s primary source of operating funds since inception has been cash proceeds from debt and equity financing transactions. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to generate sufficient revenue and its ability to raise additional funds by way of its debt and equity financing efforts. There can be no assurance that adequate financing will be available in a timely manner, on acceptable terms, or at all.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on management’s further implementation of the Company’s on-going and strategic plans, which include continuing to raise funds through equity and/or debt raises. Should the Company be unable to raise adequate funds, certain aspects of the on-going and strategic plans may require modification. Management is in the process of identifying sources of capital via strategic partnerships, debt refinancing and equity investments through one or more private placements soon.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See the Company’s discussion under Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies in its financial statements included in Item 15 of this Annual Report.