ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K, and with Part II, Item 7 (“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”) of our Form 10-K for our fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 13, 2020, which provides a discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018. The following discussion includes statements that are forward-looking statements that are based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management.
OVERVIEW
General
We are a leading provider of high-performance building solutions that meet the demands of builders, remodelers, and homeowners worldwide. We have leveraged our expertise serving the new home construction, repair and remodeling, and outdoor structures markets to become an industry leader known for innovation, quality, and reliability. Our manufacturing facilities are located in the U.S., Canada, Chile, and Brazil.
To serve these markets, we operate in four segments: Siding, OSB, EWP, and South America.
Executive Summary
Total net sales for 2020 increased by $478 million (or 21%) over the prior year to $2.8 billion. SmartSide net sales increased by $118 million (or 15%), and OSB prices increased by $481 million, partially offset by five percent lower OSB sales volume. LP South America net sales was $10 million higher than the prior year, net of $27 million of unfavorable currency movements. EWP net sales was lower by $7 million, and our strategic exits from fiber and CanExel products reduced net sales by $65 million and $32 million, respectively.
Net income attributed to LP was $499 million ($4.46 per diluted share) for 2020 compared to a net loss of $5 million ($(0.04) per diluted share) in the prior year. In addition to the growth in SmartSide net sales and increases to OSB prices, raw material costs (primarily wood fiber and resin) were favorable as compared to the prior year by $32 million. Fiber discontinuance costs of $20 million were also recognized during 2020. During 2019, we recognized pre-tax impairment charges of $92 million related to certain operating and non-operating assets.
Our Adjusted EBITDA increased $572 million over the prior year to $781 million, due to SmartSide growth, $481 million of OSB pricing, and the favorable raw material prices.
Demand for Building Products
Demand for our products correlates to a significant degree to the level of new home construction activity in North America, which historically has been characterized by significant cyclicality. While the COVID-19 pandemic did have an initial adverse impact on new home construction and repair and remodeling activity during the first and second quarters of 2020, the level of new home construction and remodel activity during 2020 increased overall as compared the prior year.
The U.S. Census Bureau reported on January 21, 2021, that 2020 actual single housing starts were 12% higher than those in 2019. Actual multi-family housing starts in 2020 were about three percent lower than those in 2019. Repair and remodeling activity is difficult to reasonably measure, but many indications, including the substantial increase in LP’s retail sales, suggest that it grew significantly in 2020.
The chart below, which is based on data published by U.S. Census Bureau, provides a graphical summary of new housing starts for single and multi-family in the U.S. showing actual and rolling five and ten-year averages for housing starts.
Supply and Demand for Siding
SmartSide is a specialty building material and is subject to competition from various siding technologies, including vinyl, stucco, wood, fiber cement, brick, and others. We believe we are the largest manufacturer to the $900 million engineered wood siding and trim market. The overall siding and trim market is estimated to be over $11 billion. We have consistently grown our SmartSide above the underlying market growth rates. SmartSide is generally less sensitive to new housing market cyclicality since roughly 50% of its demand comes from other markets, including: sheds and repair and remodel. Our growth in this market depends upon continued displacement of vinyl, wood fiber, cement, stucco, bricks and other alternatives, our product innovation and our technological expertise in wood and wood composites to address the needs of our customers.
Supply and Demand for OSB
OSB is a commodity product, and it is subject to competition from manufacturers worldwide. Product supply is influenced primarily by fluctuations in available manufacturing capacity and imports. The ratio of overall OSB demand to capacity generally drives price. While OSB prices increased significantly during 2020 as compared to 2019, we cannot predict whether the prices of our OSB products will remain at current levels or increase or decrease in the future.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND SIGNIFICANT ESTIMATES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make informed estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Our financial position and/or results of operations may be materially different when reported under different conditions or when using different assumptions in the application of such policies. In the event estimates or assumptions prove to be different from actual amounts, adjustments are made in subsequent periods to reflect more current information. Our significant accounting policies are disclosed in the Consolidated Financial Statements and Item 8 of this annual report on Form 10-K. The following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that
are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and that require significant judgment or use of complex estimates.
Long-lived Assets
Property, plant and equipment, and long-lived assets (including amortizable identifiable intangible assets) are tested for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying amount may not be recoverable, including but not limited to facility curtailments and asset abandonments. When such events occur, we group long-lived assets with other assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows exist. We compare the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset or asset group to the carrying amount of a long-lived asset or asset group. The cash flows are based on our best estimate of future cash flows derived from the most recent business projections. The significant assumptions used to determine estimated cash flows are the cash inflows and outflows directly resulting from the use of those assets in operations, including sales volume, product pricing, support costs, and other costs to operate. We recognize an impairment loss if the amount of the asset’s carrying value exceeds the asset’s estimated fair value. Fair value is estimated primarily using discounted expected future cash flows on a market-participant basis. If we recognize an impairment loss, the adjusted carrying amount of the asset becomes its new cost basis. For a depreciable long-lived asset, the new cost basis is depreciated (amortized) over the remaining estimated useful life of that asset.
Our impairment loss calculations contain uncertainties because they require management to make assumptions and to apply judgment to estimate future cash flows and asset fair values. We have not made any material changes in our impairment loss assessment methodology in the periods presented. We do not believe a material change in the estimates or assumptions that we use to calculate long-lived asset impairments is likely. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates and assumptions used in estimating future cash flows and asset fair values, we may be exposed to losses that could be material.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
We have a number of pension plans in the U.S. and Canada, covering many of the Company’s employees. Benefit accruals under our defined benefit pension plan in the U.S. were frozen as of January 1, 2010, and benefit accruals under our defined benefit pension plan in Canada were frozen as of January 1, 2020.
We are required to make assumptions that are used to calculate the related assets, liabilities, and expenses recorded in our Consolidated Financial Statements. Net actuarial gains and losses occur when actual experience differs from any of the assumptions used to value defined benefit pension plans or when assumptions change as they may each year. The primary factors contributing to actuarial gains and losses are changes in the discount rate and the differences between expected and actual returns on pension plan assets. This accounting method results in the potential for volatile and challenging to forecast gains and losses.
We record amounts relating to these defined benefit pension plans based on various actuarial assumptions, including discount rates, assumed rates of return, compensation increases, and life expectancy. We review our actuarial assumptions on an annual basis and make modifications to the assumptions based on current economic conditions and trends. The assumptions utilized in recording our obligations under our plans are based on our experience and on advice from our independent actuaries. However, differences in actual experience or changes in the assumptions may materially affect our financial condition or results of operations.
As of December 31, 2020, we used a discount rate and long-term rate of return assumption of 2.3% and 5.8%, respectively, for our U.S. defined benefit pension plan. We used a discount rate and a long-term rate of return assumption of 3.0% and 3.2%, respectively, for our Canadian plans as of December 31, 2020.
•A 50 basis point change in our discount rate assumption would lead to an increase or decrease in our pension liability of approximately $15 million.
•A 50 basis point change in the long-term rate of return on plan assets used in accounting for our pension plans would have a $1 million impact on pension expense, and a 50 basis point change in the discount rate
would have a nominal impact on pension expense.
It is not possible to forecast or predict whether there will be actuarial gains and losses in future periods, and if required, the magnitude of any such adjustment. These gains and losses are driven by differences in actual experience or changes in the assumptions that are beyond our control, such as changes in interest rates and the actual return on pension plan assets.
Income Taxes
We establish deferred tax liabilities or assets for temporary differences between financial and tax reporting bases and subsequently adjust them to reflect changes in tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. We review our deferred tax assets for recoverability and establish valuation allowances based on historical taxable income, projected future taxable income, applicable tax strategies, and the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. As of December 31, 2020, the valuation allowances on our deferred tax assets were $10 million.
In addition, we evaluate uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations in the calculation of tax liabilities. We provide for uncertain tax positions and the related interest and penalties based upon management’s assessment of whether a tax benefit is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by tax authorities. We make this assessment based only on the technical merits of the tax position. The technical merits of a tax position derive from both statutory and judicial authority (legislation and statutes, legislative intent, regulations, rulings, and case law) and their applicability to the facts and circumstances of the tax position. If a tax position does not meet the more likely than not recognition threshold, the benefit of that position is not recognized in the financial statements, and a liability to unrecognize the tax benefits is established. A tax position that meets the more likely than not recognition threshold is measured to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in our Consolidated Financial Statements. The tax benefit recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate resolution with a taxing authority. The actual benefits (expense) ultimately realized may differ from our estimates. In future periods, changes in facts, circumstances, and new information may require us to change the recognition and measurement estimates with regard to individual tax positions. Changes in recognition and measurement estimates are recorded in the Consolidated Financial Statements in the period in which such changes occur. As of December 31, 2020, we had liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits pertaining to uncertain tax positions totaling $11 million.
Customer Program Costs
Our businesses routinely incur customer program costs to obtain favorable product placement, to promote sales of products and to maintain competitive pricing. Customer program costs and incentives, including rebates and promotion and volume allowances, are accounted for as a reduction in net sales at the time the program is initiated and/or the revenue is recognized. The costs include, but are not limited to, volume allowances and rebates, promotional allowances, and cooperative advertising programs. These costs are recorded at the later of the time of sale or the implementation of the program based on management’s best estimates.
Our estimates are based on historical and projected experience for each type of program or customer. Volume allowances are accrued based on our estimates of customer volume achievement and other factors incorporated into customer agreements, such as new products, merchandising support, and customer training.
Although we believe we can reasonably estimate customer volumes and support and the related customer payments at interim periods, it is possible that actual results could be different from previously estimated amounts. At the end of each year, a significant portion of the actual volume and support activity is known. Thus, we do not believe that a material change in the amounts recorded as customer program costs payable is likely. As of December 31, 2020, we had $44 million accrued as customer rebates.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
In evaluating our business, we utilize non-GAAP financial measures that fall within the meaning of SEC Regulation G and Regulation S-K Item 10(e), which we believe provide users of the financial information with additional meaningful comparison to prior reported results. Non-GAAP financial measures do not have standardized definitions and are not defined by U.S. GAAP. In this annual report on Form 10-K, we disclose income attributed to LP before interest expense, provision for income taxes, depreciation and amortization, and exclude stock-based compensation expense, loss on impairment attributed to LP, product-line discontinuance charges, other operating credits and charges, net, loss on early debt extinguishment, investment income, and other non-operating items as Adjusted EBITDA (Adjusted EBITDA) which is a non-GAAP financial measure. We have included Adjusted EBITDA in this report because we view it as an important supplemental measure of our performance and believe that it is frequently used by interested persons in the evaluation of companies that have different financing and capital structures and/or tax rates. We also disclose income attributed to LP, excluding loss on impairment attributed to LP, product-line discontinuance charges, interest expense outside of normal operations, other operating credits and charges, net, loss on early debt extinguishment, gain (loss) on acquisition, and adjusts for a normalized tax rate as Adjusted Income (Adjusted Income). We also disclose Adjusted Diluted EPS, calculated as Adjusted Income divided by diluted shares outstanding. We believe that Adjusted Diluted EPS and Adjusted Income are useful measures for evaluating our ability to generate earnings and that providing this measure should allow interested persons to more readily compare the earnings for past and future periods.
Neither Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Income, nor Adjusted Diluted EPS is a substitute for the U.S. GAAP measure of net income or for any other U.S. GAAP measures of operating performance. It should be noted that other companies may present similarly-titled measures differently and therefore, as presented by us, these measures may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures reported by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Income, and Adjusted Diluted EPS have material limitations as performance measures because they exclude items that are actually incurred or experienced in connection with the operations of our business.
The following table presents significant items by operating segment and reconciles Net income to Adjusted EBITDA (dollar amounts in millions):
The following table provides the reconciliation of net income to Adjusted Income (dollar amounts in millions, except earnings per share):
OUR OPERATING RESULTS
Our results of operations for each of our segments are discussed below, as are results of operations for the “other” category, which comprises other products that are not individually significant. See Note 20 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this annual report on Form 10-K for further information regarding our segments.
Siding
The Siding segment serves diverse end markets with a broad product offering including LP® SmartSide® Trim & Siding, LP® SmartSide® ExpertFinish® prefinished siding, and LP Outdoor Building Solutions® products for premium outdoor buildings. Our SmartSide products consist of a full line of engineered wood siding, trim, soffit, and fascia. Our LP CanExel® prefinished siding was reclassified from Siding to our Other segment during the year ended December 31, 2020. All prior periods presented have been adjusted for comparability.
Segment Net sales, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA margin for this segment were as follows:
Net sales in this segment by product line were as follows:
Percent changes in average net sales price and unit shipments were as follows:
Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Siding net sales increased by $42 million (or five percent) compared to 2019, primarily due to SmartSide revenue growth of $118 million, or 15% (13% volume of unit shipments, two percent average net sales price). The strategic exit of fiber decreased revenue by $65 million compared to 2019. SmartSide siding revenue comprised 94% of the total siding shipments in 2020 as compared to 83% in 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA increased by $77 million (or 46%) from 2019, primarily due to SmartSide net sales growth, lower sales and marketing costs of $9 million, and lower raw material costs of $12 million, partially offset by the strategic exit of fiber.
OSB
The OSB segment manufactures and distributes OSB structural panel products including our value-added OSB portfolio known as LP Structural Solutions (LP® TechShield® Radiant Barrier, LP WeatherLogic® Air & Water Barrier, LP Legacy® Premium Sub-Flooring, and LP® FlameBlock® Fire-Rated Sheathing) and LP® TopNotch® Sub-Flooring. OSB is manufactured using wood strands arranged in layers and bonded with resins and wax. Significant cost inputs to produce OSB (including approximate breakdown percentages for 2020) were as follows: wood fiber (30%), resin and wax (16%), labor and burden (16%), utilities (six percent), and manufacturing and other (32%).
Segment Net sales, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA margin for this segment were as follows:
Net sales in this segment by product line were as follows:
Percent changes in average net sales prices and unit shipments were as follows:
Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
OSB net sales increased by $443 million (or 57%) from 2019, primarily due to $481 million attributable to increased prices, partially offset by a five percent reductions in shipments. Structural Solutions sales volume, as a percentage of total OSB segment sales volume, was 44% in 2020 compared to 43% in 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA increased by $509 million to $519 million from 2019, primarily due to the increase in OSB prices and lower raw material costs of $18 million.
EWP
The EWP segment is comprised of LP® SolidStart® I-Joist (I-Joist), Laminated Veneer Lumber (LVL), and Laminated Strand Lumber (LSL) and other related products. This segment also includes the sales of I-Joist and LVL products produced by our joint venture and sales of plywood produced as a by-product of the LVL production process.
Segment Net sales, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA margin for this segment were as follows:
Net sales in this segment by product line were as follows:
Percent changes in average net sales prices and unit shipments were as follows:
Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
EWP net sales decreased by $7 million (or two percent) from 2019, primarily due a reduction in sales volume. Adjusted EBITDA declined by $3 million primarily due to higher input costs, partially offset by operating efficiencies.
South America
Our South America segment manufactures and distributes OSB structural panel and siding products in South America and certain export markets. This segment has manufacturing operations in two countries, Chile and Brazil, and operates sales offices in Chile, Brazil, Peru, Columbia, and Argentina.
Segment Net sales, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA margin for this segment were as follows:
Net sales in this segment by product were as follows:
Percent changes in average net sales prices and unit shipments for 2020 compared to 2019 were as follows:
Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
South America net sales increased by $10 million (or six percent) compared to 2019 due to higher OSB and Siding pricing and volume (local and export), net of $27 million of unfavorable currency movements. Adjusted EBITDA increased by $8 million (or 24%) from 2019 due to both higher OSB and Siding prices and volumes, partially offset by higher imported raw material costs.
Other
Our other products segment includes our off-site framing operation Entekra Holdings, LLC (Entekra), remaining timber and timberlands, and other minor products, services, and closed operations, which are not classified as discontinued operations. During 2020, our LP CanExel® prefinished siding was reclassified from Siding to our Other segment, reflecting changes in the organizational structure of the business.
Net sales were $52 million for 2020 as compared to $66 million in 2019. Adjusted EBITDA was $(19) million for 2020 as compared to $(3) million in 2019.
GENERAL CORPORATE AND OTHER EXPENSE, NET
General corporate and other expenses primarily comprise corporate overhead unrelated to business activities such as: wages and benefits, professional fees, insurance, and other expenses for corporate functions, including certain executive officers, public company activities, tax, internal audits, and other corporate functions.
General corporate and other expense, net, was $37 million in 2020 as compared to $30 million in 2019. The increase in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to increased costs associated with the achievement of performance targets.
IMPAIRMENTS OF LONG-LIVED ASSETS
During 2020, we recorded $11 million of pre-tax impairment charges on our operating long-lived assets. Included within these impairment charges were $9 million charge related to our fiber producing assets. These impairment charges reflect the accelerated conversion from fiber production to pre-finishing. Additionally, we recorded $2 million in pre-tax impairment charges related to our divestiture of the East River facility.
During 2019, we recorded $92 million of pre-tax impairment charges of our non-operating and operating long-lived assets. Included within these impairment charges are $47 million related to non-operating assets located at Val-d’Or and St Michel, Quebec, Canada; Cook, Minnesota; and Silsbee, Texas; and $39 million related to an EWP facility producing LSL and OSB and $5 million related to the East River facility that we sold in 2020. These impairment charges reflected changes to anticipated usage of these facilities driven by market changes and improved operating efficiencies across our remaining facilities.
OTHER OPERATING CREDITS AND CHARGES, NET
For a discussion of other operating credits and charges, net, see Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this annual report on Form 10-K.
NON-OPERATING INCOME (EXPENSE)
For a discussion of Non-operating income (expense), see Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this annual report on Form 10-K.
INCOME TAXES
We recorded a tax provision of $125 million in 2020 compared to $13 million in 2019. For 2020, the primary differences between the U.S. statutory rate of 21% and the effective rate relate to state income tax, foreign tax rates, tax credits, uncertain tax positions, and changes in the valuation allowance. We paid $70 million and $20 million of income taxes net of refunds in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
LEGAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS
For a discussion of legal and environmental matters involving us and the potential impact thereof on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows, see Item 3 in this annual report on Form 10-K as well as Note 16 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this annual report on Form 10-K.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
Our principal sources of liquidity are existing cash and investment balances, cash generated by our operations, and our ability to borrow under such credit facilities as we may have in effect from time to time. We may also, from time to time, issue and sell equity, debt or hybrid securities, or engage in other capital market transactions.
Our principal uses of liquidity are paying the costs and expenses associated with our operations, servicing outstanding indebtedness, paying dividends, and making capital expenditures. We may also, from time to time, prepay or repurchase outstanding indebtedness or shares or acquire assets or businesses that are complementary to our operations. Any such repurchases may be commenced, suspended, discontinued or resumed, and the method or methods of effecting any such repurchases may be changed at any time, or from time to time, without prior notice.
Operating Activities
During 2020, we generated $659 million of cash from operations as compared to $159 million in 2019. The improvement in cash provided by operations was primarily related to growth in SmartSide and increases in OSB pricing. At December 31, 2020, and 2019, we had working capital of $172 million and $194 million, respectively.
Investing Activities
During 2020, net cash used for investing activities was $49 million as compared to $137 million in 2019. Capital expenditures for 2020 and 2019, were $77 million and $163 million, respectively. This reduction in capital expenditures was due, in part, to our decision at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic to reduce capital expenditure plans by 50% for the year 2020.
During 2020, we received $15 million in cash related to the divestiture of our East River facility and assets and brand rights of CanExel®. Additionally, we received $10 million related to the cash surrender value of the company-owned life insurance policy, and $3 million related to the sale of our auction rate securities (ARS).
During 2019, we acquired $40 million of cash in connection with our acquisition of a controlling interest in Entekra and the resulting consolidation of Entekra's financial results with those of the Company and paid $13 million in acquisitions and investments during 2019.
Capital expenditures in 2021 are expected to be in the range of $220 million to $230 million, including $80 million to $85 million for the Houlton conversion, $30 million to $35 million for other strategic growth projects, $10 million for Peace Valley, and $100 million for sustaining maintenance. We expect to fund our capital expenditures through cash on hand, cash generated from operations, and available borrowing under our credit facility, as necessary.
Financing Activities
During 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $272 million as compared to $717 million in 2019. We used $200 million to repurchase LP common stock pursuant to an authorization by our Board of Directors in February 2020 which was expanded by our Board of Directors in November 2020 by an additional $300 million. Additionally, we used $65 million to pay quarterly cash dividends. In the first quarter of 2020, we borrowed $350 million under our Amended Credit Facility as a precautionary measure due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and we repaid the outstanding balance in the second quarter of 2020.
Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisted of $638 million to repurchase LP common stock, $65 million to pay cash dividends, and $5 million to repay outstanding debt.
CREDIT AGREEMENT
Our revolving credit facility, dated June 27, 2019, with American AgCredit, PCA, as administrative agent, and CoBank, ACB, as a letter of credit issuer (the Credit Facility), which was amended by an amendment on May 1, 2020 to provide for a total capacity of $550 million and a second amendment on May 27, 2020 to modify certain representations and warranties included in the Credit Facility related to the impacts of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business, operations or financial conditions as described in more detail below and more particularly set forth in such amendment (as amended, the Amended Credit Facility), provides for revolving credit facilities in the aggregate principal amount of up to $550 million, with a $60 million sub-limit for letters of credit. The initial $350 million revolving facility provided pursuant to the Credit Facility (Revolving A Loan) terminates, and all loans thereunder become due, on June 27, 2024. The incremental $200 million revolving facility provided pursuant to the Amended Credit Facility (the Revolving B Loan) terminates, and all loans made thereunder become due, on May 1, 2023. As of December 31, 2020, we had no amounts outstanding under the Amended Credit Facility.
The Amended Credit Facility contains various restrictive covenants and customary events of default, the occurrence of which could result in the acceleration of our obligation to repay the indebtedness outstanding thereunder. The Amended Credit Facility also contains financial covenants that requires us and our consolidated subsidiaries to have, as of the end of each quarter, (i) a capitalization ratio (i.e., funded debt less unrestricted cash to total capitalization) of no more than 57.5% and (ii) a minimum consolidated net worth of at least $475 million plus 70% of consolidated net income after December 31, 2019, without deduction for net losses.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all financial covenants under the Amended Credit Facility.
In March 2020, LP entered into the Letter of Credit Facility with Bank of America, N.A. (the Letter of Credit Facility), which provides for the funding of letters of credit up to an aggregate outstanding amount of $20 million, which may be secured by certain cash collateral of LP. The Letter of Credit Facility includes a letter of credit fee, due quarterly, ranging from 0.50% to 1.875% of the daily available amount to be drawn on each letter of credit issued under the Letter of Credit Facility. The Letter of Credit Facility is subject to similar affirmative, negative and financial covenants as those set forth in the Amended Credit Facility, including capitalization ratio and minimum net worth covenants.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants under the Letter of Credit Facility.
OTHER LIQUIDITY MATTERS
2024 Senior Notes
In September 2016, we issued the 2024 Senior Notes in the aggregate principal amount of $350 million, which mature on September 15, 2024. For additional information regarding the 2024 Senior Notes, please see Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Contingency Reserves
Contingency reserves, which represent an estimate of future cash needs for various contingencies (principally, environmental reserves), totaled $14 million at December 31, 2020, of which $1 million is estimated to be payable within one year. There is inherent uncertainty concerning the reliability and precision of such estimates, and as such, the amounts ultimately paid in resolving these contingencies could exceed the current reserves by a material amount.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had standby letters of credit of $12 million outstanding related to collateral for environmental impact on owned properties, deposit for forestry license, and insurance collateral, including workers' compensation.
Contractual Obligations
The table below summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020, over the next several years. See the discussion above concerning provisions that could accelerate the due dates on our long-term debt.
_______________
1As described in Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, our 2024 Senior Notes are subject to certain acceleration provisions.
2The estimate of interest payments assumes interest is paid through the date of maturity or expiration of the related debt based upon stated rates in the respective debt instruments.
3Other long-term obligations primarily consist of obligations related to information technology infrastructure.
4Unrecognized uncertain tax positions have been excluded from the above table as it is not reasonably possible to estimate when these unrecognized uncertain tax positions may need to be paid. As of December 31, 2020, the amount of uncertain tax positions excluded from the above table is $11 million.
5As of December 31, 2020, LP had warranty reserves of $8 million. These have been excluded from the above table as it is not reasonably possible to determine when these may need to be paid.
Impact of Inflation
The Company does not believe inflation has had a material impact on sales or operating results during periods covered in this document.
Potential Impairments
We continue to review several mills and investments for potential impairments. Management currently believes we have adequate support for the carrying value of each of these assets based upon the anticipated cash flows that result from our estimates of future demand, pricing and production costs, assuming certain levels of planned capital
expenditures. If demand and pricing for the relevant products continue at levels significantly below cycle average demand and pricing, or should we decide to invest capital in alternative projects, or should changes occur related to our wood supply for these locations, it is possible that further impairment charges will be required. As of December 31, 2020, we concluded that the remaining curtailed facility in our OSB segment is temporarily idled rather than abandoned, and it remains within its historical asset group, for which no impairment is required.
We also review from time to time possible dispositions of various assets in light of current and anticipated economic and industry conditions, our strategic plan, and other relevant factors. Because a determination to dispose of particular assets can require management to make assumptions regarding the transaction structure of the disposition and to estimate the net sales proceeds, which may be less than previous estimates of undiscounted future net cash flows, we may be required to record impairment charges in connection with decisions to dispose of assets.
PROSPECTIVE ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 2 for discussion of prospective accounting pronouncements of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this annual report on Form 10-K.