Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development, manufacturing and commercialization of products that address unmet patient needs, with current focus directed towards the treatment of pulmonary hypertension (PH). We operate as a single entity through our two wholly owned operating subsidiaries, Liquidia Technologies and Liquidia PAH (formerly known as RareGen).
We generate revenue pursuant to a Promotion Agreement between Liquidia PAH and Sandoz Inc. (“Sandoz”). sharing profit derived from the sale of the first-to-file fully substitutable generic treprostinil injection (“Treprostinil Injection”) in the United States. Liquidia PAH has the exclusive rights to conduct commercial activities to encourage the appropriate use of Treprostinil Injection. We employ a targeted sales force calling on physicians and hospital pharmacies involved in the treatment of PAH, as well as key stakeholders involved in the distribution and reimbursement of Treprostinil Injection. Strategically, we believe that our commercial presence in the field will enable an efficient launch of LIQ861 upon approval, leveraging existing relationships and further validating our reputation as a company committed to supporting PAH patients.
We conduct research, development and manufacturing of novel products by applying our proprietary PRINT® technology, a particle engineering platform, to enable precise production of uniform drug particles designed to improve the safety, efficacy and performance of a wide range of therapies. We have development experience in inhaled therapies, vaccines, biologics, and implants, among others.
We have not generated any revenue to date from the sale of pharmaceutical products, and we have historically financed our operations in large part with an aggregate of $311.0 million of gross proceeds from sales of our capital stock and convertible promissory notes and term loans from banks. We do not expect to generate significant product revenue unless and until we obtain marketing approval for and commercialize LIQ861, LIQ865 or one of our other future product candidates. Following the acquisition of Liquidia PAH in the fourth quarter of 2020, we began to generate service revenues under the Sandoz Promotion Agreement.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net loss was $59.8 million and $47.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $275.0 million. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we advance our product candidates through clinical trials, seek regulatory approval and pursue commercialization of any approved product candidates. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution. In addition, we may incur expenses in connection with the in-license or acquisition of additional product candidates.
Product Pipeline
We are currently developing two product candidates for which we hold worldwide commercial rights: LIQ861 to treat PAH, and LIQ865 to treat post-operative pain.
Our most advanced development product, LIQ861, is an inhaled dry powder formulation of treprostinil designed to improve the therapeutic profile of treprostinil by enhancing deep lung delivery and achieving higher dose levels than current inhaled therapies while using a convenient, east-to-use dry-powder inhaler (DPI). We submitted the New Drug Application (NDA) for LIQ861 in January 2020 and we are actively preparing our reply to the Complete Response Letter (CRL) issued by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in November 2020.
Our second product candidate, LIQ865, is designed to deliver sustained release of bupivacaine, a non-opioid anesthetic, to treat local post-operative pain for three to five days through a single administration. We have completed two Phase 1 clinical trials and additional toxicology studies to help enable continued clinical development in Phase 2 studies of LIQ865. We will seek to advance LIQ865 through a strategic collaboration with an external partner in order for Liquidia to focus efforts on its lead asset, LIQ861, and commercial efforts to support Treprostinil Injection.
Recent Events
On February 26, 2021 (the “Effective Date”), we and our two wholly owned subsidiaries, Liquidia Technologies and Liquidia PAH, entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with Silicon Valley Bank, a California corporation, as lender (“SVB”).
The Loan Agreement established a term loan facility in the aggregate principal amount of up to $20.5 million (the “Term Loan Facility”). An initial $10.5 million (the “Term A Loan”) was funded on March 1, 2021. Availability of $5.0 million under the second tranche of the Term Loan Facility (the “Term B Loan”) is conditioned upon us having received tentative U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for LIQ861 by June 30, 2022, and availability of $5.0 million under the third tranche of the Term Loan Facility (the “Term C Loan” and, collectively with the Term A Loan and Term B Loan, the “Term Loans”) is conditioned upon us having received final and unconditional FDA approval for LIQ861 by December 31, 2022. The entire Term A Loan was used to satisfy our existing obligations under our previously disclosed Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement, dated as of October 26, 2018, as amended, by and between us and Pacific Western Bank, consisting of approximately $9.4 million in outstanding principal and interest, and such obligations are considered fully repaid and terminated.
As security for its obligations under the Loan Agreement, we granted SVB a continuing security interest in substantially all of our assets, other than intellectual property.
The Term Loans made under the Term Loan Facility mature on September 1, 2024 (the “Maturity Date”) and have an interest-only monthly payment period through March 31, 2023 (the “Interest-Only Period”). Following the Interest-Only Period, we will begin making monthly payments of principal and interest until the Maturity Date. Interest will accrue on the unpaid principal balance of the outstanding Term Loans at a floating per annum rate equal to the greater of (i) the Wall Street Journal prime rate plus 0.75% and (ii) four percent (4.0%). Furthermore, on the earliest to occur of (x) the Maturity Date, (y) the date the Term Loans are repaid in full or (z) the date of termination of the Loan Agreement, we shall pay to SVB five percent (5.0%) of the aggregate original principal amount of all Term Loans made by SVB (the “Final Payment”).
In the event that we elect to terminate the Term Loan Facility in its entirety, we may do so at any time by paying the outstanding principal balance, unpaid accrued interest, the Final Payment and a prepayment fee equal to (i) five percent (5.0%) of the outstanding principal balance, if such prepayment is made during the Interest-Only Period or (ii) zero, if such prepayment is made after the Interest-Only Period and before the Maturity Date.
Subject to certain exceptions, the Loan Agreement contains covenants prohibiting us from, among other things, and subject to certain limited exceptions: (a) conveying, selling, leasing, transferring or otherwise disposing of our properties or assets; (b) liquidating or dissolving; (c) engaging in any business other than the business currently engaged in or reasonably related thereto by us or any of our subsidiaries; (d) engaging in mergers or acquisitions; (e) incurrence of additional indebtedness; (f) allowing any lien or encumbrance on any of our property; (g) paying any dividends; (h) repurchasing our equity; and (i) making payment on subordinated debt. In addition, the Loan Agreement requires us to maintain an unrestricted and unencumbered “Minimum Cash Balance” (as defined therein) equal to at least (i) $30.0 million during the period commencing on the Effective Date and including the date immediately prior to the funding date of the Term B Loan (the “Term B Loan Funding Date”) and (ii) during the period commencing on the Term B Loan Funding Date through and including the date immediately prior to the funding date of the Term C Loan (the “Term C Loan Funding Date”), $35.0 million. Moreover, in the event the Minimum Cash Balance is not achieved during any calendar quarter during the term of the Loan Agreement, the Loan Agreement requires us to maintain cumulative “Cash Burn” (as defined in the Loan Agreement) for the periods ending March 31, 2021, June 30, 2021, September 30, 2021, December 31, 2021, March 31, 2022 and June 30, 2022 and for each calendar quarter thereafter equal to $10.5 million, $17.0 million, $23.0 million, $28.5 million, $33.5 million and $38.0 million, respectively; provided, however, that the above amounts shall be increased by an amount equal to 75% of the aggregate net cash proceeds received by us from the sale of our equity securities on or after the Effective Date but on or prior to the last day of such calendar quarter; provided, further, that upon the Term C Loan Funding Date, the Cash Burn covenant shall no longer apply.
The Loan Agreement also contains customary events of default, including among other things, our failure to make any principal or interest payments when due, the occurrence of certain bankruptcy or insolvency events or our breach of the covenants under the Loan Agreement, or other material adverse changes relating to our company. Furthermore, per the Loan Agreement, an event of default shall occur upon any formal court ruling against us that SVB determines in its good faith busines judgment is reasonably likely to prohibit our ability to obtain final approval from the FDA with respect to our NDA for LIQ861 or impair or delay our ability to commercialize LIQ861 as currently contemplated. Upon the occurrence of an event of default, SVB may, among other things, accelerate our obligations under the Loan Agreement.
In connection with the Loan Agreement, we issued to SVB a warrant, dated as of the Effective Date (the “Warrant”), to purchase up to 200,000 shares of our common stock, of which (x) 100,000 shares vested on the Effective Date, with an exercise price per share equal to $3.05, and (y) 50,000 shares shall vest on each of the Term B Loan Funding Date and Term C Loan Funding Date, with an exercise price per share equal to the lower of (i) the trailing 10-day average price of the common stock on the applicable funding date and (ii) the closing price per share of common stock on the trading day prior to applicable funding date. The Warrant is exercisable for ten (10) years from the date of issuance, and will be exercised automatically on a net issuance basis if not exercised prior to the expiration date and if the then-current fair market value of one share of common stock is greater than the exercise price then in effect.
Components of Statements of Operations
Revenue
We primarily generate revenue pursuant to the Promotion Agreement, under which we share in the profit derived from the sale of Treprostinil Injection in the United States. Liquidia PAH has the exclusive rights to conduct commercial activities to encourage the appropriate use of Treprostinil Injection. We also derive revenue from licensing our proprietary PRINT® technology and from conducting research, development and manufacturing of novel products by applying our proprietary PRINT® technology. We expect our revenue to increase significantly as a result of the inclusion of Liquidia PAH in our operating results.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists of (i) the cost of employing a targeted sales force calling on physicians and hospital pharmacies involved in the treatment of PAH, as well as key stakeholders involved in the distribution and reimbursement of Treprostinil Injection, (ii) a portion of the amortization of the intangible asset associated with the Promotion Agreement and (iii) amortization of license fees owed to UNC upon our receipt of licensing revenues. See “Business - Our Collaboration and Licensing Agreements” for further details. We amortize the Promotion Agreement and the license fees owed to UNC in a manner consistent with our recognition of the related revenue. We expect our cost of revenue to increase in conjunction with the expected increase in revenue.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expense consists of expenses incurred in connection with the development of our product candidates. We expense research and development costs as incurred. These expenses include:
●
expenses incurred under agreements with CROs as well as investigative sites and consultants that conduct our clinical trials and preclinical studies;
●
manufacturing process development and scale-up expenses and the cost of acquiring and manufacturing preclinical and clinical trial materials and commercial materials, including manufacturing validation batches;
●
outsourced professional scientific development services;
●
employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and share-based compensation for personnel in research and development functions;
●
expenses relating to regulatory activities, including filing fees paid to regulatory agencies;
●
laboratory materials and supplies used to support our research activities; and
●
allocated expenses for utilities and other facility-related costs.
Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. In the near term we expect our research and development expenses to decrease, however, levels of research and development spending are highly dependent upon the progression of product candidates. The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of, or when, if ever, material net cash inflows may commence from any of our product candidates. This uncertainty is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the duration and cost of clinical trials, which vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of many factors, including:
●
the number of clinical sites included in the trials;
●
the length of time required to enroll suitable patients;
●
the number of patients that ultimately participate in the trials;
●
the number of doses patients receive;
●
the duration of patient follow-up; and
●
the results of our clinical trials.
Our expenditures are subject to additional uncertainties, including the terms and timing of regulatory approvals, and the expense of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims or other intellectual property rights. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. We may obtain unexpected results from our clinical trials. We may elect to discontinue, delay or modify clinical trials of some product candidates or focus on others. A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or other regulatory authorities were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, or our ability to manufacture and supply product, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development. Drug commercialization will take several years and millions of dollars in development costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, administrative, finance and legal functions, including share-based compensation, travel expenses and recruiting expenses. Other general and administrative expenses include facility related costs, patent filing and prosecution costs and professional fees for marketing, legal, auditing and tax services and insurance costs.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will decrease in the short-term as a result of lower personnel costs, including share-based compensation, reflecting our reduction-in-force and cash conservation measures enacted during the first quarter of 2021. When we believe a regulatory approval of a product candidate appears likely, we anticipate an increase in payroll and expense as a result of our preparation for commercial operations, especially as it relates to our sales and marketing.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) is comprised primarily of interest income and expense. Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash deposits. Interest expense consists of interest charges on leases and debt. These charges include monthly recurring interest on such obligations in addition to non-cash charges. Non-cash charges include the expensing of debt issuance costs and amortization of discounts on long-term debt to interest expense.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations:
_______________
* Not meaningful
Revenue
Revenue was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $7.3 million, or 90.8%, was due to the full recognition in the second quarter of 2019 of $8.1 million of deferred revenue from the GSK ICO Agreement resulting from the third amendment to such agreement that was entered into in June 2019 which was offset by revenue recognized in 2020 under the Promotion Agreement after the acquisition of Liquidia PAH in November 2020.
Cost of Revenue
We recognized $0.2 million of cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. As noted above, the decrease of $0.6 million was due to the decrease in revenue. Cost of revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 includes sales force costs as well as the cost of a portion of the amortization of the intangible asset associated with the Promotion Agreement. Cost of revenue during the year ended December 31, 2019 represents sub-licensing fees paid to UNC when licensing revenue is recognized from the use of the intellectual property that we in-licensed from UNC.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $32.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $40.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $8.3 million or 20.4%. The decrease primarily related to lower expenses from our LIQ861 clinical program, which was substantially completed prior to filing the NDA in April 2020 and lower expenses from our LIQ865 clinical program. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $17.4 million related to LIQ861 compared to $23.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $0.8 million related to LIQ865 compared to $3.4 million during the year ended December 2019. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 also included $12.0 million and $11.9 million, respectively, in consulting and personnel costs, including share-based compensation.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $27.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $13.8 million, or 101.3%, was due to $4.8 million in expenses related to our acquisition of Liquidia PAH, $2.4 million in legal and patent expenses from our ongoing LIQ861-related litigation, an increase of $5.8 million in outside consulting expenses and personnel costs, including share-based compensation and a one-time charge of $1.4 million associated with a reduction of headcount.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest income was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income of $0.4 million was primarily due to lower interest rates earned during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest expense was $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense of $0.5 million was primarily due to lower levels of debt during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash of $65.3 million and $55.8 million, respectively.
We have financed our growth and operations through a combination of funds generated from revenues, the issuance of convertible preferred stock and common stock, finance leases, bank borrowings and the issuance of convertible notes. Our principal uses of cash have been for working capital requirements and capital expenditures. As of December 31, 2020, we had a cash balance of $65.3 million, stockholders’ equity of $71.1 million and an accumulated deficit of $275.0 million.
In July 2020, we closed an underwritten public offering of 9,375,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $8.00 per share. The gross proceeds from the offering were $75.0 million and net proceeds were approximately $70.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
In December 2019, we entered into a Common Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional accredited investors (the “Purchasers”) for the sale by us in a private placement (the “Private Placement”) of an aggregate of 7,164,534 shares (the “Private Placement Shares”) of our common stock, at a purchase price of $3.13 per Private Placement Share. The gross proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Shares were $22.4 million and net proceeds were $21.0 million, after placement agent fees and offering expenses.
In August 2019, we entered into a sales agreement (the “ATM Agreement”) with Jefferies to issue and sell shares of our common stock, having an aggregate offering price of up to $40.0 million, from time to time during the term of the ATM Agreement, through an “at-the-market” equity offering program at our sole discretion, under which Jefferies acted as our agent and/or principal. We paid Jefferies a commission equal to 3.0% of the gross proceeds of any common stock sold through Jefferies under the ATM Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we sold 2,409,356 shares of our common stock for gross proceeds of $8.4 million and net proceeds were $8.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering expenses under the ATM Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 131,425 shares of our common stock for net proceeds of $0.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering expenses under the ATM Agreement. We anticipate entering into a new sales agreement with Jefferies with Liquidia Corporation as the issuer in 2021, which would supersede the ATM Agreement with Liquidia Technologies as the issuer.
In March 2019, we closed an underwritten follow-on offering of 3,000,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $11.50 per share. The gross proceeds from the offering were $34.5 million and net proceeds were $31.8 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
In October 2018, we and PWB entered into an Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement (the “A&R LSA”) in which we received an initial tranche of $11.0 million to extinguish our then-current debt of $8.0 million and repay in full the outstanding indebtedness under a previously issued promissory note. The A&R LSA provided for access to a second tranche of up to $5.0 million, the full amount of which we drew in June 2019. The second tranche became accessible as a result of the full enrollment of the Company’s LIQ861 INSPIRE clinical trial, without observing any materially adverse data through the two-week endpoint. Both tranches required payments of interest-only through December 31, 2019. The A&R LSA carried a one-time success fee of $375,000, which was triggered in December 2019 by the sale of our common stock and this was recorded as interest expense of $375,000 during the year ended December 2019.
In February 2021, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank, the proceeds of which were used to pay off the approximately $9.4 million in outstanding principal and interest under A&R LSA. We received a 24-month interest-only period and also have access to additional tranches of capital, pending achievement of certain milestones. See “Recent Events” for further information.
Future Funding Requirements
We plan to focus in the near-term on the development, regulatory approval and potential commercialization of LIQ861. We anticipate we will incur net losses for the next several years as we complete clinical development of these product candidates and continue research and development of additional product candidates. In addition, we plan to commercialize LIQ861, continue sales of generic Remodulin® through our Liquidia PAH acquisition, expand our corporate infrastructure and continue to invest in research and development efforts to explore additional product candidates. We may not be able to complete the development and initiate commercialization of these programs if, among others, our clinical trials are not successful or if the FDA does not approve our product candidates arising out of our current clinical trials when we expect, or at all.
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related personnel expenses, clinical costs, manufacturing process development, external research and development services, laboratory and related supplies, legal and other regulatory expenses, administrative and overhead costs and debt service. Our future funding requirements will be heavily determined by the resources needed to support development of our product candidates. Additionally, as a publicly traded company we incur significant legal, accounting and other expenses. In addition, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, as well as rules adopted by the SEC and Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”) require public companies to implement specified corporate governance practices.
We believe that our current cash balance will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through key value-creating events in 2021 and 2022, beyond the projected expiration of the regulatory stay in October 2022. We are in the process of implementing a more cost-efficient operating plan to further improve our cashflow. In addition, the close of the Merger Transaction has the potential to improve our cashflow going forward. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect. We expect that we will require additional capital to complete NDA regulatory review of LIQ861 and commercialize our product candidates, if we receive regulatory approval, and to pursue in-licenses or acquisitions of other product candidates. If we receive regulatory approval for LIQ861 or LIQ865, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product manufacturing, sales, marketing and distribution, depending on where we choose to commercialize. Additional funds may not be available on a timely basis, on favorable terms, or at all, and such funds, if raised, may not be sufficient to enable us to continue to implement our long-term business strategy. If we are unable to raise sufficient additional capital, we may need to substantially curtail our planned operations and the pursuit of our growth strategy.
We may raise additional capital through licensing activities, other business arrangements or the sale of equity or convertible debt securities. In such an event, the ownership of our existing shareholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights associated with holdings of our common stock.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceuticals, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
●
the number and characteristics of the product candidates we pursue;
●
the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials;
●
the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
●
the cost of manufacturing our product candidates and any product we successfully commercialize;
●
our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
●
the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation; and
●
the timing, receipt and amount of sales of, or milestone payments related to or royalties on, our current or future product candidates, if any.
See “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities increased $5.9 million to $54.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $48.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly due to an increase in our general and administrative expenses partially offset by a decrease in our research and development expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the net cash used in operating activities of $54.1 million was comprised of operating cash outflows before working capital changes of $52.4 million and net working capital outflows of $1.7 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the net cash used in operating activities of $48.3 million was comprised of operating cash outflows before working capital changes of $40.8 million and net working capital outflows of $7.5 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities consisted of $1.0 million acquired from the acquisition of Liquidia PAH as well as purchases of property, plant and equipment of $0.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $1.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $63.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $66.4 million provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $70.3 million from the public offering of common stock in July 2020 and $0.7 million from the sale of our common stock under our ATM facility, which was offset by $5.6 million in principal payments on our long-term debt, $1.6 million for expenses related to our sale of Private Placement Shares that closed in December 2019 and $1.1 million in principal payments on our finance leases. During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities consisted primarily of $63.0 million in net proceeds from a follow-on sale of our common stock and a $5.0 million draw under the A&R LSA.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
In connection with the Merger Transaction, we agreed to issue additional consideration of up to 2,708,333 additional shares of common stock to the former equity holders of Raregen (now Liqudia PAH) contingent on achievement of certain revenue targets during the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of this contingent consideration was deemed to be immaterial.
In March 2012, the Company entered into an agreement, as amended, with Chasm Technologies, Inc. for manufacturing consulting services related to the Company’s manufacturing capabilities during the term of the agreement. The Company agreed to pay future contingent royalties on net sales totaling no more than $1,500,000, none of which has been earned as of December 31, 2020.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with contract service providers to assist in the performance of our research and development and manufacturing activities. Subject to required notice periods and our obligations under binding purchase orders, we can elect to discontinue the work under these agreements at any time. In addition, we have entered into a multi-year agreement with LGM Pharma, LLC (“LGM”) to produce active pharmaceutical ingredients for LIQ861. Under our manufacturing agreement with LGM, we are required to provide rolling forecasts, a portion of which will be considered a binding, firm order, subject to an annual minimum purchase commitment of $3.1 million for the term of the agreement. The agreement expires five years from the first marketing authorization approval of LIQ861. This minimum commitment was waived for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We have operating lease obligations including rental amounts due on leases of certain laboratory, manufacturing and office space and equipment under the terms of non-cancelable operating leases. These leases expire at various times through October 2026. Minimum operating lease payments are $1.2 million in 2021, $1.2 million in 2022, $1.3 million in 2023, $1.3 million in 2024, $1.4 million in 2025 and $1.2 million in 2026.
We lease specialized laboratory equipment under finance leases expiring in 2022. Minimum finance lease payments are $1.0 million in 2021 and $0.3 million in 2022.
We from time-to-time are subject to claims and litigation in the normal course of business, none of which we believe represent a risk of material loss or exposure.
We also have employment agreements with certain employees which require the funding of a specific level of payments, if certain events, such as a change in control or termination without cause, occur.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Actual results could differ from those estimates and assumptions. Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements includes a summary of the significant accounting policies we used to prepare our consolidated financial statements. We have discussed the selection and disclosure of our critical accounting policies and estimates with our Audit Committee. The following is a review of our most significant policies and estimates.
Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net assets of businesses acquired. We acquired goodwill in the Merger Transaction of $3,903,282 which primarily represents the Liquidia PAH assembled workforce. On an annual basis and at various times throughout the year if impairment indicators are present, we make a qualitative assessment to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. If we determine that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we will perform a quantitative analysis; otherwise, no further evaluation is necessary. As of December 31, 2020, we determined there was no impairment of goodwill (see Note 2 to the Financial Statements for the Goodwill accounting policy).
Long-Lived Assets
We review long-lived assets, including definite-life intangible assets, for realizability on an ongoing basis. Changes in depreciation and amortization, generally accelerated depreciation and variable amortization, are determined and recorded when estimates of the remaining useful lives or residual values of long-term assets change. We also review for impairment when conditions exist that indicate the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable. In those circumstances, we perform undiscounted operating cash flow analyses to determine if an impairment exists. When testing for asset impairment, we group assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which cash flows are separately identifiable. Any impairment loss is calculated as the excess of the asset’s carrying value over its estimated fair value. Fair value is estimated based on the discounted cash flows for the asset group over the remaining useful life or based on the expected cash proceeds for the asset less costs of disposal. Any impairment losses would be recorded in the consolidated statements of operations. To date, no such impairments have occurred.
Revenue Recognition from Promotion Agreements
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). The core principle of Topic 606 is that a company should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
In order to identify the performance obligations in a contract with a customer, we assess the promised goods or services in the contract and identify each promised good or service that is distinct. If a good or service is not distinct, the good or service is combined with other promised goods or services until a bundle of goods or services is identified that is distinct.
The transaction price is the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring promised goods or services to a customer. The consideration promised in a contract with a customer may include fixed amounts, variable amounts, or both.
Variable consideration is included in the transaction price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. We evaluate any non-cash consideration, consideration payable to the customer, and whether consideration contains a significant financing element in determining the transaction price.
Revenue is measured based on consideration specified in a contract with a customer. We recognize revenue when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control over a service to a customer.
On August 1, 2018, we partnered with Sandoz in a Promotion Agreement (the “Promotion Agreement”) to launch the first-to-file generic of Treprostinil Injection for the treatment of patients with PAH. Under the Promotion Agreement, we provide certain promotional and nonpromotional activities on an exclusive basis for the product in the United States of America for the treatment of PAH, in exchange for a share of Sandoz’s “Net Profits”, as defined within the Promotion Agreement. In addition, we paid Sandoz $20 million at the inception of the Promotion Agreement, in consideration for the right to conduct the promotional activities for the product. In exchange for our services, we are entitled to receive a portion of net profits based on specified profit levels associated with the product.
We determined that certain activities within the contract are within the scope of ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements. The commercialization of the product is a joint operating activity where we will provide promotional activities for Sandoz’s intellectual property and Sandoz will be responsible for items such as supply of the product, distribution to customers, managing sales, returns, and regulatory matters, and protection of patents. Both parties are active participants, each carrying out its assigned responsibilities, and participating in the joint operating activity and will share in the risks and rewards of the commercialization through the profit-sharing arrangement.
In addition, we determined that the services provided under the Promotion Agreement fall within the scope of Topic 606. While this is our first income-generating contract, the promotional activities we perform are one of the services we expect to provide as part of our ordinary activities, and we are receiving consideration for this service from Sandoz in the form of a share of net profits. We have one combined performance obligation under the Promotion Agreement, which is to perform promotional and non-promotional activities to encourage the appropriate use of the product in accordance with the product labeling and applicable law. As such, and in accordance with ASU 2018-18: Clarifying the Interaction between Topic 808 and Topic 606, we account for the entire Agreement under Topic 606.
Commitments and Contingencies
We have certain commitments and contingencies including litigation and related costs as well as potential royalties for previous manufacturing consulting services rendered. We account for such commitments and contingencies under ASC 450, Contingencies. We review known commitments and contingencies on a quarterly basis and review for possible additional commitments and contingencies. We record liabilities for those matters if and when circumstances present loss contingencies that are both probable and estimable and would exceed the current amounts established on the balance sheet. When loss contingencies are not both probable and estimable, we do not record additional liabilities on the balance sheet.
We also have a commitment to issue contingent shares of common stock in connection with the future performance under the Merger Transaction. Such contingent consideration is accounted for under ASC 805, Business Combinations. Under ASC 805, the fair value of contingent consideration is considered to be part of the purchase price and is recorded on the balance sheet as a liability. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of contingent consideration was de minimis. Contingent consideration is remeasured each subsequent quarter to fair value and the change in fair value is recognized in the Statement of Operations as a gain or loss until such time the contingent consideration is resolved.
JOBS Act
As an “emerging growth company” under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, as amended (the “JOBS Act”), we can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected to “opt out” of this provision and, as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards when they are required to be adopted by public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
Subject to certain conditions, as an emerging growth company, we rely on certain of these exemptions, including without limitation:
●
reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements;
●
no advisory votes on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements; and
●
exemption from the auditor attestation requirement in the assessment of our internal control over financial reporting.
We may take advantage of these exemptions for up to five years or such earlier time that we are no longer an emerging growth company. We would cease to be an emerging growth company on the date that is the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; (ii) the last day of 2023; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years; or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC. We may choose to take advantage of some but not all of these exemptions. Accordingly, the information contained herein may be different from the information you receive from other public companies in which you hold stock.
Smaller Reporting Company
As a “smaller reporting company,” as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), in addition to providing reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements and business developments, among other reduced disclosure requirements available to smaller reporting companies, we present only two years of audited financial statements in addition to any required unaudited interim financial statements with correspondingly reduced “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” disclosure. Accordingly, the information contained herein may be different from the information you receive from other public companies in which you hold stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.