Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations contains forward-looking statements, which are subject to risks, uncertainties, and changes in condition, significance, value, and effect. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to those discussed in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this 2021 Form 10-K and other documents we file from time to time with the Securities and Exchange Commission. (See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in Part I of this 2021 Form 10-K.)
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) provides a description of our results of operations and should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K. MD&A consists of the following sections:
Executive Summary provides a summary of the key highlights of our results of operations and our management’s assessment of material trends and uncertainties relevant to our business.
Results of Operations provides an analysis of operating results.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates discusses accounting policies that reflect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources provides an analysis of cash flows, contractual obligations, and financial position.
Executive Summary
Lam Research Corporation is a global supplier of innovative wafer fabrication equipment and services to the semiconductor industry. We have built a strong global presence with core competencies in areas like nanoscale applications enablement, chemistry, plasma and fluidics, advanced systems engineering and a broad range of operational disciplines. Our products and services are designed to help our customers build smaller, faster, and better performing devices that are used in a variety of electronic products, including mobile phones, personal computers, servers, wearables, automotive vehicles, and data storage devices.
Our customer base includes leading semiconductor memory, foundry, and integrated device manufacturers that make products such as NVM, DRAM, and logic devices. We aim to increase our strategic relevance with our customers by contributing more to their continued success. Our core technical competency is integrating hardware, process, materials, software, and process control enabling results on the wafer.
Semiconductor manufacturing, our customers’ business, involves the complete fabrication of multiple dies or integrated circuits on a wafer. This involves the repetition of a set of core processes and can require hundreds of individual steps. Fabricating these devices requires highly sophisticated process technologies to integrate an increasing array of new materials with precise control at the atomic scale. Along with meeting technical requirements, wafer processing equipment must deliver high productivity and be cost-effective.
Demand from the Cloud, IoT, and other markets is driving the need for increasingly powerful and cost-efficient semiconductors. At the same time, there are growing technical challenges with traditional scaling. These trends are driving significant inflections in semiconductor manufacturing, such as the increasing importance of vertical 3D scaling strategies as well as multiple patterning to enable shrinks.
We believe we are in a strong position with our leadership and competency in deposition, etch, and clean to facilitate some of the most significant innovations in semiconductor device manufacturing. We have a broad portfolio of products that provide complementary processing steps used throughout semiconductor manufacturing. Our Customer Support Business Group focuses attention on delivering solutions that meet our customers’ technical requirements and productivity needs during the equipment lifecycle. Several factors create opportunity for sustainable differentiation for us: (i) our focus on research and development, with several on-going programs relating to sustaining engineering, product and process development, and concept and feasibility; (ii) our ability to effectively leverage cycles of learning from our broad installed base; (iii) our collaborative focus with ecosystem partners; and (iv) our focus on delivering our multi-product solutions with a goal to enhance the value of Lam’s solutions to our customers.
Throughout the 2021 fiscal year, there was an increase in wafer fabrication equipment spending by semiconductor manufacturers, driven by the robust secular demand for semiconductors in a number of markets including high-performance computing, personal computers, and 5G networks. Customer demand was strong, and we continued to increase our production output levels as we operated under COVID-19-related safety protocols. While we have seen improvements in both our own operations and those of our
Lam Research Corporation 2021 10-K 27
suppliers, we experienced higher costs of goods sold related to freight and logistics during the year. Risks and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic remain, which may continue to negatively impact our revenue and gross margin. Over the longer term, we believe that secular demand for semiconductors will continue to drive sustainable growth for our products and services, and that technology inflections in our industry, including 3D device scaling, multiple patterning, process flow, and advanced packaging chip integration, will lead to an increase in the served addressable market for our products and services in the deposition, etch, and clean businesses.
The following table summarizes certain key financial information for the periods indicated below:
Fiscal year 2021 revenue increased 46% compared to fiscal year 2020, reflecting stronger customer demand for semiconductor equipment. Gross margin as a percentage of revenue increased primarily due to customer and product mix, partially offset by higher costs incurred in freight and logistics as well as start-up expenses for our new Malaysia manufacturing facility. The increase in operating expenses in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 was mainly driven by higher employee-related costs as a result of increased headcount, outsourcing services, deferred compensation plan-related costs, and supplies, partially offset by lower travel expenses and miscellaneous costs.
Fiscal year 2020 revenue increased 4% compared to fiscal year 2019, reflecting stronger customer demand for semiconductor equipment. Gross margin as a percentage of revenue increased primarily due to customer and product mix as well as lower amortization expense related to intangibles acquired through business combinations, partially offset by lower factory and field utilization. The increase in operating expenses in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 was mainly driven by higher employee-related costs as a result of increased headcount and outsourcing services, partially offset by lower travel expense, miscellaneous costs and restructuring charges.
Our cash and cash equivalents, investments, and restricted cash and investments balances totaled approximately $6.0 billion as of June 27, 2021, compared to $7.0 billion as of June 28, 2020. Cash flow provided from operating activities was $3.6 billion for fiscal year 2021 compared to $2.1 billion for fiscal year 2020. Cash flow provided from operating activities in fiscal year 2021 was primarily used for $2.7 billion in treasury stock purchases, including net share settlement on employee stock-based compensation; $862 million of principal payments on debt instruments; $727 million in dividends paid to our stockholders; and $349 million of capital expenditures. These cash outflows were partially offset by $122 million of treasury stock reissuance and Common Stock issuance resulting from our employee equity-based compensation programs.
Results of Operations
Revenue
Revenue increased in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal years 2020 and 2019, primarily due to the increased investment by our customers in semiconductor capital equipment as well as higher revenue from our Customer Support Business Group for spares, services, upgrades and mature node equipment. The overall Asia region continued to account for a majority of our revenues as a substantial amount of the worldwide capacity investments for semiconductor manufacturing continued to occur in this region.
Lam Research Corporation 2021 10-K 28
The deferred revenue balance was $1.1 billion as of June 27, 2021 compared to $537 million as of June 28, 2020, driven by increases in volume purchases for our systems, customer down payments for future tool deliveries, and additional deferrals related to tools pending full delivery and future servicing of our existing installed base.
The following table presents our revenue disaggregated between system and customer support-related revenue:
Please refer to Note 4: Revenue of our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K for additional information regarding the composition of the two categories into which revenue has been disaggregated.
The percentage of leading- and non-leading-edge equipment and upgrade revenue to each of the markets we serve was as follows:
Gross Margin
The increase in gross margin as a percentage of revenue for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 was primarily related to customer and product mix, partially offset by increased spending on freight and logistics due in significant part to COVID-19 disruptions, start-up expenses for our Malaysia manufacturing facility, and deferred compensation plan-related costs.
The increase in gross margin as a percentage of revenue for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 was primarily due to customer and product mix as well as lower amortization expense related to intangibles acquired through business combinations, partially offset by lower factory and field utilization.
Research and Development
We continued to make significant R&D investments focused on leading-edge deposition, etch, clean, and other semiconductor manufacturing processes. The increase in R&D expense during fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 was mainly driven by an increase of $137 million in employee-related costs due in part to increased headcount, $49 million in outside service costs, $32 million in deferred compensation plan-related costs, and $27 million in spending for supplies.
The increase in R&D expense during fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 was mainly driven by an increase of $50 million in employee-related costs due to increased headcount, $19 million in outsourcing service costs, and $10 million in spending for supplies, partially offset by a decrease of $7 million in travel expense and $5 million in restructuring charges.
Lam Research Corporation 2021 10-K 29
Selling, General, and Administrative
The increase in SG&A expense during fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 was primarily due to a $97 million increase in employee-related costs due in part to increased headcount, $37 million in outside service costs, and $21 million in deferred compensation plan-related costs, partially offset by a $9 million decrease in travel and entertainment costs.
The decrease in SG&A expense during fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 was primarily due to a $17 million decrease in spending for customer-related sales costs, a $9 million decrease in spending for supplies, a $9 million decrease in restructuring charges, and a $6 million decrease in spending for travel and entertainment, partially offset by an increase of $25 million in spending for rent, repair and utilities.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net, consisted of the following:
Interest income decreased in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 as a result of lower yield. Interest income decreased in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 as a result of lower yield, offset by a higher cash balance.
Interest expense increased in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 primarily due to the full-year impact of the issuance of the $2.0 billion senior notes in fiscal year 2020. Interest expense increased in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to the full-year impact of the issuance of the $2.5 billion of senior notes in fiscal year 2019 and the issuance of $2.0 billion senior notes in fiscal year 2020.
Gains on deferred compensation plan related assets in the periods presented were driven by an improvement in the fair market value of the underlying funds.
The gains in other, net for the fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal years 2020 and 2019 were primarily driven by private equity investments.
Income Tax Expense
Our provision for income taxes and effective tax rate for the periods indicated were as follows:
The decrease in the effective tax rate in fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020 was primarily due to a cumulative income tax benefit reversal due to a court ruling in fiscal year 2020, as outlined below.
Lam Research Corporation 2021 10-K 30
The increase in the effective tax rate in fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019 was primarily due to a cumulative income tax benefit reversal due to a court ruling in fiscal year 2020, as outlined below.
In November 2019, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit (“Ninth Circuit”) rejected the en banc appeal petitioned by Altera Corporation (“Altera”) in July 2019. In that quarter, we evaluated the impact of the decision and viewed the denial as an indication that Altera’s position of excluding stock-based compensation expense in an intercompany cost-sharing arrangement was unlikely to be sustained upon further litigation. As a result, we reversed $75 million of net tax assets associated with stock-based compensation benefits related to previous years in the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in the three months ended December 29, 2019 and we no longer reflected a net tax benefit within our financial statements related to excluding stock-based compensation from our intercompany cost-sharing arrangement. In February 2020, Altera petitioned the Supreme Court of the United States ("SCOTUS") to hear their case. In June 2020, the SCOTUS denied the petition.
International revenues account for a significant portion of our total revenues, such that a material portion of our pre-tax income is earned and taxed outside the United States. International pre-tax income is taxable in the United States at a lower effective tax rate than the federal statutory tax rate. Please refer to Note 7 of our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K.
Deferred Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effect of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes, as well as the tax effect of carryforwards. Our gross deferred tax assets were $736 million and $575 million at the end of fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. These gross deferred tax assets were offset by gross deferred tax liabilities of $152 million and $196 million and a valuation allowance of $277 million and $245 million at the end of fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. The change in gross deferred tax assets, gross deferred tax liabilities, and valuation allowance between fiscal year 2021 and 2020 is primarily due to increases in gross deferred tax assets for outside basis differences of foreign subsidiaries, allowances and reserves, and tax credits, and decreases in gross deferred tax liabilities for convertible debt.
As of our fiscal year ended June 27, 2021, we continue to record a valuation allowance to offset the entire California deferred tax asset balance due to the single sales factor apportionment resulting in lower taxable income in California. The valuation allowances were $277 million and $245 million at the end of fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We evaluate if the deferred tax assets are realizable on a quarterly basis and will continue to assess the need for changes in valuation allowances, if any.
Uncertain Tax Positions
We re-evaluate uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, effectively settled issues under audit, and new audit activity. Any change in recognition or measurement would result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the tax provision.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
A critical accounting policy is defined as one that has both a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations and requires us to make difficult, complex and/or subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) requires management to make certain judgments, estimates and assumptions that could affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates and assumptions on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be applicable and evaluate them on an ongoing basis to ensure they remain reasonable under current conditions. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates, which could have a material impact on our business, results of operations, and financial condition. Our critical accounting estimates include:
•the recognition and valuation of revenue from arrangements with multiple performance obligations which impacts revenue;
•the valuation of inventory, which impacts gross margin;
•the valuation of warranty reserves, which impacts gross margin;
•the recognition and measurement of current and deferred income taxes, including the measurement of uncertain tax positions, which impact our provision for income tax expenses; and
•the valuation and recoverability of long-lived assets, which impacts gross margin and operating expenses when we record asset impairments or accelerate their depreciation or amortization.
We believe that the following critical accounting policies reflect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements regarding the critical accounting estimates indicated above. See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K for additional information regarding our accounting policies.
Lam Research Corporation 2021 10-K 31
Revenue Recognition: We recognize revenue when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services by following a five-step process, (1) identify the contract with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation, as further described below.
Identify the contract with a customer. We generally consider documentation of terms with an approved purchase order as a customer contract, provided that collection is considered probable, which is assessed based on the creditworthiness of the customer as determined by credit checks, payment histories, and/or other circumstances.
Identify the performance obligations in the contract. Performance obligations include sales of systems, spare parts, and services. In addition, our customer contracts contain provisions for installation and training services which have been deemed immaterial in the context of the contract.
Determine the transaction price. The transaction price for our contracts with customers consists of both fixed and variable consideration provided it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will not occur when the uncertainty related to variable consideration is resolved. Fixed consideration includes amounts to be contractually billed to the customer while variable consideration includes estimates for discounts and credits for future usage which are based on contractual terms outlined in volume purchase agreements and other factors known at the time. We generally invoice customers at shipment and for professional services either as provided or upon meeting certain milestones. Customer invoices are generally due within 30 to 90 days after issuance. Our contracts with customers typically do not include significant financing components as the period between the transfer of performance obligations and timing of payment are generally within one year.
Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract. For contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract on a relative standalone selling price basis. Standalone selling prices are based on multiple factors including, but not limited to historical discounting trends for products and services and pricing practices in different geographies.
Recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation. Revenue for systems and spares are recognized at a point in time, which is generally upon shipment or delivery. Revenue from services is recognized over time as services are completed or ratably over the contractual period of generally one year or less.
Inventory Valuation: Our policy is to assess the valuation of all inventories including manufacturing raw materials, work-in-process, finished goods, and spare parts in each reporting period. Obsolete inventory or inventory in excess of management’s estimated usage requirement is written down to its estimated net realizable value if less than cost. Estimates of market value include but are not limited to management’s forecasts related to our future manufacturing schedules, customer demand, technological and/or market obsolescence, general semiconductor market conditions, and possible alternative uses. If future customer demand or market conditions are less favorable than our projections, additional inventory write-downs may be required and would be reflected in cost of goods sold in the period in which the revision is made.
Warranty: We record a provision for estimated warranty expenses to cost of sales for each system when we recognize revenue. We periodically monitor the performance and cost of warranty activities, if actual costs incurred are different than our estimates, we may recognize adjustments to provisions in the period in which those differences arise or are identified. We do not maintain general or unspecified reserves; all warranty reserves are related to specific systems.
Income Taxes: Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effect of temporary differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes, as well as the tax effect of carryforwards. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Realization of our net deferred tax assets is dependent on future taxable income. We believe it is more likely than not that such assets will be realized; however, ultimate realization could be negatively impacted by market conditions and other variables not known or anticipated at this time. In the event that we determine that we will not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets, an adjustment will be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if we later determine that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized, then the previously provided valuation allowance will be reversed.
We recognize the benefit from a tax position only if it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon audit based solely on the technical merits of the tax position. Our policy is to include interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions as a component of income tax expense.
Long-lived Assets: We review goodwill at least annually for impairment during the fourth quarter of each fiscal year and if certain events or indicators of impairment occur between annual impairment tests. The process of evaluating the potential impairment of goodwill requires significant judgment. When reviewing goodwill for impairment, we first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. In performing a qualitative assessment, we consider business conditions and other factors including, but not limited to (i) adverse industry or economic trends, (ii) restructuring actions and lower projections that may impact future operating results, (iii) sustained decline in share price, and (iv) overall financial performance and other events affecting the reporting units. If we conclude that it is more likely
Lam Research Corporation 2021 10-K 32
than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then a quantitative impairment test is performed by estimating the fair value of the reporting unit and comparing it to its carrying value, including goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
We determine the fair value of our reporting units by using an income approach. Under the income approach, we determine fair value based on estimated future cash flows of each reporting unit, discounted by an estimated weighted-average cost of capital, which reflects the overall level of inherent risk of a reporting unit and the rate of return an outside investor would expect to earn.
In estimating the fair value of a reporting unit, we make estimates and judgments about the future cash flows of our reporting units, including estimated growth rates and assumptions about the economic environment. Although our cash flow forecasts are based on assumptions that are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying businesses, there is significant judgment involved in determining the cash flows attributable to a reporting unit. In addition, we make certain judgments about allocating shared assets to the estimated balance sheets of our reporting units. Changes in judgment on these assumptions and estimates could result in a goodwill impairment charge.
If after completing the quantitative assessment the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we would record an impairment charge equal to the excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit over its fair value, up to the amount of the goodwill assigned to the reporting unit.
For other long-lived assets, we review them whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. If such indicators are present, we determine whether the sum of the estimated undiscounted cash flows attributable to the assets is less than their carrying value. If the sum is less, we recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying amount of the assets over their respective fair values. Fair value is determined by discounted future cash flows, appraisals or other methods. We recognize an impairment charge to the extent the present value of anticipated net cash flows attributable to the asset is less than the asset’s carrying value. The fair value of the asset then becomes the asset’s new carrying value, which we depreciate over the remaining estimated useful life of the asset. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value. In addition, for fully amortized intangible assets, we de-recognize the gross cost and accumulated amortization in the period we determine the intangible asset no longer enhances future cash flows.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 3, “Recent Accounting Pronouncements,” of our Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Total gross cash, cash equivalents, investments, and restricted cash and investments balances were $6.0 billion at the end of fiscal year 2021 compared to $7.0 billion at the end of fiscal year 2020. This decrease was primarily due to Common Stock repurchases in connection with our stock repurchase program, dividends paid, and principal payments on long-term debt, partially offset by cash provided by operating activities.
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities of $3.6 billion during fiscal year 2021 consisted of (in thousands):
Significant changes in operating asset and liability accounts, net of foreign exchange impact, included the following uses of cash: increases in accounts receivable of $929 million, inventories of $793 million, and prepaid expenses and other assets of $59 million; partially offset by the following sources of cash: increases in deferred profit of $508 million, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $409 million, and accounts payable of $185 million.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities during fiscal year 2021 was $73 million, primarily consisting of net sales/maturities of available for sale securities of $465 million, partially offset by capital expenditures of $349 million.
Lam Research Corporation 2021 10-K 33
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Net cash used for financing activities during fiscal year 2021 was $4.2 billion, primarily consisting of $2.7 billion in Common Stock repurchases, including net share settlement on employee stock-based compensation; $862 million of principal payments on debt instruments; and $727 million of dividends paid; partially offset by $122 million of stock issuance and treasury stock reissuances associated with our employee stock-based compensation plans.
Liquidity
Given that the semiconductor industry is highly competitive and has historically experienced rapid changes in demand, we believe that maintaining sufficient liquidity reserves is important to support sustaining levels of investment in R&D and capital infrastructure. Anticipated cash flows from operations based on our current business outlook, combined with our current levels of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments as of June 27, 2021, are expected to be sufficient to support our anticipated levels of operations, investments, debt service requirements, capital expenditures, capital redistributions, and dividends through at least the next twelve months. However, uncertainty in the global economy and the semiconductor industry, as well as disruptions in credit markets, have in the past, and could in the future, impact customer demand for our products, as well as our ability to manage normal commercial relationships with our customers, suppliers, and creditors.
In the longer term, liquidity will depend to a great extent on our future revenues and our ability to appropriately manage our costs based on demand for our products and services. While we have substantial cash balances, we may require additional funding and need or choose to raise the required funds through borrowings or public or private sales of debt or equity securities. We believe that, if necessary, we will be able to access the capital markets on terms and in amounts adequate to meet our objectives. However, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has in the past caused disruption in the capital markets, and were it to do the same in the future, that could make any financing more challenging, and there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain such financing on commercially reasonable terms or at all.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
We have certain obligations to make future payments under various contracts, some of which are recorded on our balance sheet and some of which are not. Obligations that are recorded on our balance sheet in accordance with GAAP include our long-term debt, operating leases and finance leases which are outlined in the following table. Our off-balance sheet arrangements are presented as purchase obligations in the table. Our contractual obligations and commitments as of June 27, 2021, relating to these agreements and our guarantees are included in the following table based on their contractual maturity date.
The amounts in the table below exclude $527 million of net liabilities related to uncertain tax positions as we are unable to reasonably estimate the ultimate amount or time of settlement. See Note 7 of our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K for further discussion.
(1)We may choose to apply existing tax credits, thereby reducing the actual cash payment.
(2)Certain tax-related liabilities and post-retirement benefits classified as other non-current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet are included in the “More than 5 Years” category due to the uncertainty in the timing and amount of future payments. Additionally, the balance excludes contractual obligations recorded in our Consolidated Balance Sheet as current liabilities and the long-term portion of operating leases.
Operating Leases
We lease most of our administrative and regional sales/service offices as well as certain equipment under non-cancelable operating leases. Certain of our facility leases for buildings located in Fremont, California; Tualatin, Oregon; and certain other facility leases provide us with an option to extend the leases for additional periods or to purchase the facilities. Certain of our facility leases provide for periodic rent increases based on the general rate of inflation.
Lam Research Corporation 2021 10-K 34
Financing Leases
Financing leases reflect building and office equipment lease obligations. The amounts in the table above include the interest portion of payment obligations. Certain of our facility leases for buildings located in Fremont and Livermore, California provide us with an option to extend the leases for additional periods or to purchase the facilities. Certain of our facility leases provide for periodic rent increases based on the general rate of inflation. In addition to amounts included in the table above, we have guaranteed residual values for certain of our Fremont and Livermore facility leases of up to $298 million. See Note 15 to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K for further discussion.
Purchase Obligations
Purchase obligations consist of significant contractual obligations either on an annual basis or over multi-year periods related to our outsourcing activities or other material commitments, including vendor-consigned inventories. The contractual cash obligations and commitments table presented above contains our minimum obligations at June 27, 2021, under these arrangements and others. For obligations with cancellation provisions, the amounts included in the preceding table were limited to the non-cancelable portion of the agreement terms or the minimum cancellation fee. Actual expenditures will vary based on the volume of transactions and length of contractual service provided. On April 1, 2021 we entered into a $1.4 billion five-year electrostatic chuck supply contract (the “Supplier Contract”), under which we are obligated, in certain circumstances, to a minimum purchase penalty obligation not to exceed $180 million. Due to the uncertainty in the timing and amount of future payments, the cash obligations and commitments table presented above excludes the minimum purchase obligation under the Supplier Contract.
Capital Expenditure Requirements
We are in the process of expanding our global production footprint, with expansion of our Ohio manufacturing facility as well as construction of a manufacturing facility in Malaysia and a technology center in Korea. Anticipated capital expenditures associated with these projects for buildings and equipment for fiscal year 2022 are expected to be approximately $201 million. These capital expenditures will be funded through existing cash and cash equivalents, investments, and cash generated from operations.
Income Taxes
During the December 2017 quarter, a one-time transition tax on accumulated unrepatriated foreign earnings, estimated at $991 million, was recognized associated with the December 2017 U.S. tax reform. In accordance with SAB 118, we finalized the amount of the transition tax during the period ended December 23, 2018. The final amount was $868 million. We elected to pay the one-time transition tax over a period of eight years with 8% of the transition tax to be paid each September 15 for years 2018 through 2022, and 15%, 20%, and 25%, respectively, to be paid each September 15 for years 2023 through 2025.
Long-Term Debt
On May 5, 2020, we completed a public offering of $750 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s Senior Notes due June 15, 2030 (the “2030 Notes”), $750 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s Senior Notes due June 15, 2050 (the “2050 Notes”), and $500 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s Senior Notes due June 15, 2060 (the “2060 Notes”). We pay interest at an annual rate of 1.90%, 2.875%, and 3.125%, on the 2030, 2050, and 2060 Notes, respectively, on a semi-annual basis on June 15 and December 15 of each year.
On March 4, 2019, we completed a public offering of $750 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s Senior Notes due March 15, 2026 (the “2026 Notes”), $1 billion aggregate principal amount of the Company’s Senior Notes due March 15, 2029 (the “2029 Notes”), and $750 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s Senior Notes due March 15, 2049 (the “2049 Notes”). We pay interest at an annual rate of 3.75%, 4.00%, and 4.875%, respectively on the 2026, 2029 and 2049 Notes, on a semi-annual basis on March 15 and September 15 of each year.
On June 7, 2016, we completed a public offering of $800 million aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes due June 15, 2021, (the “2021 Notes”). During the year ended June 27, 2021, $800 million principal value of 2021 Notes were settled upon maturity.
On March 12, 2015, we completed a public offering of $500 million aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes due March 15, 2025 (the “2025 Notes”). We pay interest at an annual rate of 3.80% on the 2025 Notes, on a semi-annual basis on March 15 and September 15 of each year.
We may redeem the 2025, 2026, 2029, 2030, 2049, 2050, and 2060 Notes (collectively the “Senior Notes”) at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of such series (“par”), plus a “make whole” premium as described in the indenture in respect to the Senior Notes and accrued and unpaid interest before December 15, 2024 for the 2025 Notes, before January 15, 2026 for the 2026 Notes, before December 15, 2028 for the 2029 Notes, before March 15, 2030 for the 2030 Notes, before September 15, 2048 for the 2049 Notes, before December 15, 2049 for the 2050 Notes, and before December 15, 2059 for the 2060 Notes. We may redeem the Senior Notes at par, plus accrued and unpaid interest at any time on or after December 24, 2024 for the 2025 Notes, on or after January 15, 2026 for the 2026 Notes, on or after December 15, 2028 for the 2029 Notes, on or after March 15, 2030 for the 2030 Notes, on or after September 15, 2048 for the 2049 Notes, on or after December 15, 2049 for the 2050 Notes, and on or after December 15, 2059 for the 2060 Notes. In addition, upon the occurrence of certain events, as described in the indenture, we will be
Lam Research Corporation 2021 10-K 35
required to make an offer to repurchase the Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the respective note, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
In June 2012, with the acquisition of Novellus, we assumed $700 million in aggregate principal amount of 2.625% Convertible Senior Notes due May 2041. On May 21, 2021, the 2041 Notes then outstanding were redeemed pursuant to Section 6.01 of the underlying indenture at a price equal to outstanding principal plus accrued and unpaid interest.
During fiscal year 2021, 2020, and 2019, we made $859 million, $668 million, and $117 million, respectively, in principal payments on long-term debt and finance/capital leases.
Revolving Credit Arrangements
On March 12, 2014, the Company established an unsecured Credit Agreement. This agreement was amended on November 10, 2015 (the “Amended and Restated Credit Agreement”), October 13, 2017 (the “2nd Amendment”), February 25, 2019 (the “3rd Amendment”), and June 17, 2021 (the “Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement). Among other things, the Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement provides for a $250 million increase in the Company’s revolving credit facility, from $1.25 billion to $1.50 billion with a syndicate of lenders, along with an expansion option that will allow the Company, subject to certain requirements, to request an increase in the facility of up to an additional $600 million, for a potential total commitment of $2.10 billion. The facility matures on June 17, 2026.
Interest on amounts borrowed under the credit facility is, at our option, based on (1) a base rate, defined as the greatest of (a) prime rate, (b) Federal Funds rate plus 0.5%, or (c) one-month London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus 1.0%, plus a spread of 0.00% to 0.30%, or (2) a LIBOR rate plus a spread of 0.805% to 1.30%, in each case plus a facility fee, with such spread and facility fee determined based on the rating of our non-credit enhanced, senior unsecured long-term debt. Such spreads and such facility fees are further subject to sustainability adjustments as described in the Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, in each case based on the Company’s performance of certain energy savings and health and safety standards metrics. Principal and any accrued and unpaid interest is due and payable upon maturity. Additionally, we will pay the lenders a quarterly commitment fee that varies based on our credit rating. The Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement incorporates provisions for the replacement of LIBOR or other reference rates with alternative reference rates under certain circumstances, including when, or if, such reference rates cease to be available. The Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement contains affirmative covenants, negative covenants, financial covenants, and events of default. As of June 27, 2021, we had no borrowings outstanding under the Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement and were in compliance with all financial covenants.
Commercial Paper Program
On November 13, 2017, we established a commercial paper program (the “CP Program”) under which we may issue unsecured commercial paper notes on a private placement basis up to a maximum aggregate amount outstanding at any time of $1.25 billion. Individual maturities may vary but cannot not exceed 397 days from the date of issue. In July 2021, we amended the CP Program size to a maximum aggregate amount outstanding at any time of $1.5 billion. The net proceeds from the CP Program will be used for general corporate purposes, including repurchases of our Common Stock from time to time under our stock repurchase program. If at any time, funds are not available under favorable terms under the CP Program, we may utilize the Amended Credit Agreement for funding. Amounts available under the CP Program may be re-borrowed. The CP Program is backstopped by our Revolving Credit Arrangement. As of June 27, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under the CP Program.
Other Guarantees
We have issued certain indemnifications to our lessors for taxes and general liability under some of our agreements. We have entered into certain insurance contracts that may limit our exposure to such indemnifications. As of June 27, 2021, we had not recorded any liability on our Consolidated Financial Statements in connection with these indemnifications, as we do not believe, based on information available, that it is probable that we will pay any material amounts under these guarantees.
Generally, we indemnify, under pre-determined conditions and limitations, our customers for infringement of third-party intellectual property rights by our products or services. We seek to limit our liability for such indemnity to an amount not to exceed the sales price of the products or services subject to our indemnification obligations. We do not believe, based on information available, that it is probable that we will pay any material amounts under these guarantees.
We provide guarantees and standby letters of credit to certain parties as required for certain transactions initiated during the ordinary course of business. As of June 27, 2021, the maximum potential amount of future payments that we could be required to make under these arrangements and letters of credit was $74 million. We do not believe, based on historical experience and information currently available, that it is probable that any material amounts will be required to be paid.
We have entered into indemnification agreements with our officers and directors, consistent with our Bylaws and Certificate of Incorporation; and under local law, we may be required to provide indemnification to our employees for actions within the scope of their employment. Although we maintain insurance contracts that cover some of the potential liability associated with these indemnification agreements, there is no guarantee that all such liabilities will be covered. We do not believe, based on historical
Lam Research Corporation 2021 10-K 36
experience and information currently available, that it is probable that any material amounts will be required to be paid under such indemnification agreements or statutory obligations.