Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
Lattice Semiconductor Corporation and its subsidiaries (“Lattice,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our”) develop technologies that we monetize through differentiated programmable logic semiconductor products, system solutions, design services, and licenses. Lattice is the low power programmable leader. We solve customer problems across the network, from the Edge to the Cloud, in the growing communications, computing, industrial, automotive, and consumer markets. Our technology, long-standing relationships, and commitment to world-class support lets our customers quickly and easily unleash their innovation to create a smart, secure, and connected world.
Lattice has focused its strategy on delivering programmable logic products and related solutions based on low power, small size, and ease of use. We also serve our customers with IP licensing and various other services. Our product development activities include new proprietary products, advanced packaging, existing product enhancements, software development tools, soft IP, and system solutions for high-growth applications such as Edge Artificial Intelligence, 5G infrastructure, platform security, and factory automation.
This discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this report. Discussions of results for prior periods (fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018) are incorporated by reference from our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 28, 2019.
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused, and is expected to continue to cause, the global slowdown of economic activity (including the decrease in demand for goods and services), and significant volatility in and disruption to financial markets. Because the severity, magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its economic consequences are uncertain, rapidly changing, and difficult to predict, the pandemic’s impact on our operations and financial performance, as well as its impact on our ability to successfully execute our business strategy and initiatives, remains uncertain. We continue to take actions to safeguard the health and well-being of our employees and our business. We implemented social distancing policies at our locations around the world including working from home and eliminating virtually all travel. Furthermore, we continue to manage our cash position and liquidity needs in light of the rapidly changing environment, and we have additional resources available under our Current Credit Agreement, if needed. As a result of the accelerated debt payments we made during the second quarter of fiscal 2020 to reduce our future interest rate expense, we do not have any required debt payments until June 30, 2021.
As COVID-19 has spread globally and been declared a pandemic, the full extent of this outbreak, the related governmental, business and travel restrictions in order to contain this virus are continuing to evolve globally. We anticipate that these actions and the global health crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic will negatively impact business activity across the globe. We expect our demand to be impacted in Q1 and potentially beyond Q1 given the global reach and economic impact of the virus. For example, governmental actions or policies or other initiatives to contain the virus, could lead to reductions in our end customers’ demand under which we would expect to lose revenue. We have previously seen and could again see delays or disruptions in our supply chain due to governmental restrictions. If our suppliers experience similar impacts, we may have difficulty sourcing materials necessary to fulfill customer production requirements and transporting completed products to our end customers.
We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions altering our business operations that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners, suppliers, and stakeholders, or as required by federal, state, or local authorities. It is not clear what the potential effects of any such alterations or modifications may have on our business, including the effects on our customers, employees, and prospects, or on our financial results. The full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations and financial position is currently uncertain and will depend on many factors that are not within our control, including, but not limited to: the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business and individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the pandemic; general economic uncertainty in key global markets and financial market volatility; global economic conditions and levels of economic growth; and the pace of recovery when the COVID-19 pandemic subsides. See the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part I of this report for further information about related risks and uncertainties.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Critical accounting policies are those that are both most important to the portrayal of a company's financial condition and results, and that require management's most difficult, subjective, and complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and judgments affecting the amounts reported in our consolidated condensed financial statements and the accompanying notes. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, knowledge of current conditions, and our beliefs of what could occur in the future considering available information. While we believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgments are reasonable, they are based on information available when made, and because of the uncertainty inherent in these matters, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis.
We believe the following accounting policies and the related estimates are critical in the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations, and require management's most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments. See "Note 1 - Nature of Operations and Significant Accounting Policies" under Part II, Item 8 of this report for further information on the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
We recognize revenue upon satisfaction of performance obligations when control of promised goods or services has been transferred to our customers. We measure revenue based on the amount of consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for products or services. For revenue recognized on both sales to distributors and related to HDMI royalties, the amount of consideration we expect to be entitled to receive is based on estimates that require assumptions and judgments relating to trends in recent and historical activity. See "Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies" under Part II, Item 8 of this report for further information on our recognition of revenue. Sales to most distributors are made under terms allowing certain price adjustments upon sale to their end customers and limited rights of return of our products held in their inventory. The revenue recognized based on estimated price adjustments and stock rotation reserves may be materially different from the actual consideration received if the actual distributor price adjustments and stock rotation returns differ significantly from the historical trends used in the estimates.
Inventories and Cost of Revenue
Inventories are stated at the lower of actual cost (determined using the first-in, first-out method) or net realizable value. We review and set standard costs quarterly to approximate current actual manufacturing costs. Our manufacturing overhead standards for product costs are calculated assuming full absorption of actual spending over actual costs. The valuation of inventory requires us to estimate excess or obsolete inventory. Material assumptions we use to estimate necessary inventory carrying value adjustments can be unique to each product and are based on specific facts and circumstances. In determining provisions for excess or obsolete products, we consider assumptions such as changes in business and economic conditions, projected customer demand for our products, and changes in technology or customer requirements. The creation of such provisions results in a write-down of inventory to net realizable value and a charge to Cost of revenue. If in any period we anticipate a change in assumptions such as future market or economic conditions to be less favorable than our previous estimates, additional inventory write-downs may be required and would be reflected in Cost of revenue, resulting in a negative impact to our gross margin in that period. If in any period we are able to sell inventories that had been written down to a level below the ultimate realized selling price in a previous period, related revenue would be recorded with a lower or no offsetting charge to Cost of revenue resulting in a net benefit to our gross margin in that period.
Accounting for Income Taxes
Our provision for income tax is comprised of our current tax liability and changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements using enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the difference is expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are provided to reduce deferred tax assets to an amount that in management’s judgment is more-likely-than-not to be recoverable against future taxable income. The determination of a valuation allowance and when it should be released requires complex judgment. In assessing the ability to realize deferred tax assets, we regularly evaluate both positive and negative evidence that may exist and consider whether it is more-likely-than-not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible.
As part of our regular financial review process, we also assess the likelihood that our tax reporting positions will ultimately be sustained. To the extent it is determined it is more likely than not (a likelihood of more than 50 percent) that some portion or all of a tax reporting position will ultimately not be recognized and sustained, a provision for unrecognized tax benefit is provided by either reducing the applicable deferred tax asset or accruing an income tax liability. Our judgment regarding the sustainability of our tax reporting positions may change in the future due to changes in U.S. or international tax laws and other factors. These changes, if any, may require material adjustments to the related deferred tax assets or accrued income tax liabilities and an accompanying reduction or increase in income tax expense which may result in a corresponding increase or decrease in net income in the period when such determinations are made.
Results of Operations
Key elements of our Consolidated Statements of Operations, including as a percentage of revenue, are presented in the following table:
* The year ended January 2, 2021 was a 53-week year as compared to the other years presented, which were based on our standard 52-week year
Revenue
Revenue increased $4.0 million, or 1%, in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, primarily driven by increased demand for products used in computing solutions, 5G wireless infrastructure, and industrial applications, offset by broad market weakness and decreases in IP revenue.
Revenue by End Market
We sell our products globally to a broad base of customers in three primary end markets groups: Communications and Computing, Industrial and Automotive, and Consumer. We also provide Intellectual Property licensing and services to these end markets.
Within these end markets, there are multiple segment drivers, including:
•
Communications and computing: 5G infrastructure deployments, client computing platforms, and cloud and enterprise servers,
•
Industrial and automotive: industrial IoT, factory automation, and automotive electronics,
•
Consumer: smart home, and prosumer.
We also generate revenue from the licensing of our IP, the collection of certain royalties, patent sales, the revenue related to our participation in consortia and standard-setting activities, and services. While these activities may be associated with multiple markets, Licensing and services revenue is reported as a separate end market as it has characteristics that differ from other categories, most notably a higher gross margin.
The end market data below is derived from data provided to us by our customers. With a diverse base of customers who may manufacture end products spanning multiple end markets, the assignment of revenue to a specific end market requires the use of judgment. We also recognize certain revenue for which end customers and end markets are not yet known. We assign this revenue first to a specific end market using historical and anticipated usage of the specific products, if possible, and allocate the remainder to the end markets based on either historical usage for each product family or industry application data for certain product types.
The following are examples of end market applications for the fiscal years presented:
Communications and Computing
Industrial and Automotive
Consumer
Licensing and Services
Wireless
Security and Surveillance
Cameras
IP Royalties
Wireline
Machine Vision
Displays
Adopter Fees
Data Backhaul
Industrial Automation
Wearables
IP Licenses
Server Computing
Robotics
Televisions
Patent Sales
Client Computing
Automotive
Home Theater
Data Storage
Drones
The composition of our revenue by end market is presented in the following table:
Revenue from the Communications and Computing end market increased by 12% in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 primarily due to the continued adoption of our products used in servers and client computing platforms, as well as ongoing 5G infrastructure deployments.
Revenue from the Industrial and Automotive end market increased by 11% in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, primarily to increased demand for our products used in a broad range of applications including industrial automation and safety, robotics, embedded vision, and automotive electronics.
Revenue from the Consumer end market decreased by 39% in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. This segment has been impacted by lower end market demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the expected shift in the mix of revenue towards our other market segments.
Revenue from the Licensing and Services end market decreased by 9% in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 primarily due to lower HDMI revenue.
Revenue by Geography
We assign revenue to geographies based on ship-to location of the customer.
The composition of our revenue by geography is presented in the following table:
Revenue from Customers
We sell our products to independent distributors and directly to customers. Distributors have historically accounted for a significant portion of our total revenue, and the two distributors groups noted below accounted for more than 10% of our total revenue in the periods covered by this report.
The composition of our revenue by customer is presented in the following table:
Gross margin
The composition of our gross margin, including as a percentage of revenue, is presented in the following table:
Gross margin percentage increased 110 basis points from fiscal 2019 to fiscal 2020. Improved margins were driven by benefits from pricing optimization programs, product cost reductions, and product mix.
Because of its higher margin, the licensing and services portion of our overall revenue can have a disproportionate impact on Gross Margin.
Operating Expenses
Research and development expense
The composition of our Research and development expense, including as a percentage of revenue, is presented in the following table:
Research and development expense includes costs for compensation and benefits, stock compensation, engineering wafers, depreciation, licenses, and outside engineering services. These expenditures are for the design of new products, IP cores, processes, packaging, and software solutions.
The increase in Research and development expense for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was due primarily to increased expenses for stock compensation and increased headcount to support the expansion of our programmable logic product portfolio and acceleration of our new product introduction cadence.
We believe that a continued commitment to Research and development is essential to maintaining product leadership and providing innovative new product offerings and, therefore, we expect to continue to increase our investment in Research and development, particularly with expanded investment in the development of software solutions.
Selling, general, and administrative expense
The composition of our Selling, general, and administrative expense, including as a percentage of revenue, is presented in the following table:
Selling, general, and administrative expense includes costs for compensation and benefits related to selling, general, and administrative employees, commissions, depreciation, professional and outside services, trade show, and travel expenses.
The increase in Selling, general, and administrative expense for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was due primarily to increased expenses for stock compensation and salaries, partially offset by reduced commissions resulting from our restructuring under the Q2 2019 Sales Plan, as discussed in "Note 7 - Restructuring" to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
The composition of our Amortization of acquired intangible assets, including as a percentage of revenue, is presented in the following table:
The decrease in Amortization of acquired intangible assets for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was due to the end of the amortization period for the majority of our acquired intangible assets during the first quarter of fiscal 2020.
Restructuring charges
The composition of our Restructuring charges, including as a percentage of revenue, is presented in the following table:
Restructuring charges are comprised of expenses resulting from reductions in our worldwide workforce, consolidation of our facilities, removal of fixed assets from service, and cancellation of software contracts and engineering tools. Details of our restructuring plans and expenses incurred under them are discussed in "Note 7 - Restructuring" to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
The decrease in Restructuring charges in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was driven was driven by lower charges in the current year for facility closures implemented under an earlier restructuring plan adopted in June 2017, and by lower charges in the current year for severance under the Q1 2020 Plan compared to charges in the prior year period resulting from contract cancellations under the Q2 2019 Sales Plan.
Impairment of acquired intangible assets
The composition of our Impairment of acquired intangible assets, including as a percentage of revenue, is presented in the following table:
We had no Impairments of acquired intangible assets in fiscal 2020 or 2019.
Acquisition related charges
The composition of our Acquisition related charges, including as a percentage of revenue, is presented in the following table:
Acquisition related charges include legal and professional fees directly related to acquisitions. We incurred no Acquisition related charges in fiscal 2020 or 2019.
Interest Expense
The composition of our Interest expense, including as a percentage of revenue, is presented in the following table:
Interest expense is primarily related to our long-term debt, which is further discussed under the Credit Arrangements heading in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section, below. This interest expense is comprised of contractual interest and amortization of original issue discount and debt issuance costs based on the effective interest method.
The decrease in Interest expense for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was largely driven by the significant reduction in the effective interest rate on our long-term debt, coupled with the reduction in the principal balance of our long-term debt due to the additional principal payments made in the current and previous periods.
Other expense, net
The composition of our Other expense, net, including as a percentage of revenue, is presented in the following table:
For fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, Other expense, net decreased primarily due to the non-recurrence of the $2.2 million loss on refinancing charge taken to write off the remaining unamortized balance of debt costs and original issue discount related to the long-term debt refinanced during the prior year.
Income taxes
The composition of our Income tax expense is presented in the following table:
Our Income tax expense is composed primarily of foreign income and withholding taxes, partially offset by benefits resulting from the release of uncertain tax positions ("UTP") due to statute of limitation expirations that occurred in the respective periods. The decrease in expense in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 is primarily due to the release of uncertain tax positions due to statute of limitations expirations.
We are not currently paying U.S. federal income taxes and do not expect to pay such taxes until we fully utilize our tax net operating loss and credit carryforwards. We expect to pay a nominal amount of state income tax. We are paying foreign income taxes, which are primarily related to withholding taxes on income from foreign royalties, foreign sales, and the cost of operating offshore research and development, marketing, and sales subsidiaries. We updated our evaluation of the valuation allowance position in the United States through January 2, 2021 and concluded that we should continue to maintain a full valuation allowance against the net federal and state deferred tax assets. We will continue to evaluate both positive and negative evidence in future periods to determine if we will realize the deferred tax assets. We accrue interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense on our Consolidated Statements of Operations. The inherent uncertainties related to the geographical distribution and relative level of profitability among various high and low tax jurisdictions make it difficult to estimate the impact of the global tax structure on our future effective tax rate.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following sections discuss material changes in our financial condition from the end of fiscal 2019, including the effects of changes in our Consolidated Balance Sheets, and the effects of our credit arrangements and contractual obligations on our liquidity and capital resources.
We have historically financed our operating and capital resource requirements through cash flows from operations, and from the issuance of long-term debt to fund acquisitions. Cash provided by or used in operating activities will fluctuate from period to period due to fluctuations in operating results, the timing and collection of accounts receivable, and required inventory levels, among other things.
There is significant uncertaintyaround the extent and duration of the disruption to our business from the COVID-19 pandemic, and our liquidity and working capital needs may be impacted in future periods.
We believe that our financial resources, including current cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from operating activities, and our credit facilities, will be sufficient to meet our liquidity and working capital needs through at least the next 12 months. As of January 2, 2021, we did not have significant long-term commitments for capital expenditures. In the future, we may continue to consider acquisition opportunities to further extend our product or technology portfolios and further expand our product offerings. In connection with funding capital expenditures, acquisitions, securing additional wafer supply, increasing our working capital, or other operations, we may seek to obtain equity or additional debt financing, or advance purchase payments or similar arrangements with wafer manufacturers. We may also seek to obtain equity or additional debt financing if we experience downturns or cyclical fluctuations in our business that are more severe or longer than we anticipated when determining our current working capital needs. On May 17, 2019, we entered into a Credit Agreement with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent, and other lenders (our “Current Credit Agreement”) that is discussed under the "Credit Arrangements" heading, below.
Liquidity
Cash and cash equivalents
As of January 2, 2021, we had Cash and cash equivalents of $182.3 million, of which approximately $121.8 million in Cash and cash equivalents was held by our foreign subsidiaries.
We manage our global cash requirements considering, among other things, (i) available funds among our subsidiaries through which we conduct business, (ii) the geographic location of our liquidity needs, and (iii) the cost to access international cash balances. The repatriation of non-US earnings may require us to withhold and pay foreign income tax on dividends. This should not result in our recording significant additional tax expense as we have accrued expense based on current withholding rates. As of January 2, 2021, we could access all cash held by our foreign subsidiaries without incurring significant additional expense.
The net increase in Cash and cash equivalents of $64.3 million between December 28, 2019 and January 2, 2021 was primarily driven by cash flows from the following activities:
Operating activities - Cash provided by operating activities results from net income adjusted for certain non-cash items and changes in assets and liabilities. Cash provided by operating activities was $91.7 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $124.1 million in fiscal 2019. This $32.4 million decrease was driven by $45.7 million in changes in working capital, primarily the increase in cash used for inventories, prepaid expenses and other current assets, and accounts payable, partially offset by the cash provided by accrued expenses and accounts receivable. This was partially offset by an increase of $13.3 million provided by improved operating performance. We are using cash provided by operating activities to fund our operations.
Investing activities - Investing cash flows consist primarily of transactions related to capital expenditures and payments for software licenses, and, in the prior year, short-term marketable securities. Net cash used by investing activities in fiscal 2020 was $20.9 million compared to $15.5 million in fiscal 2019. This $5.4 million increase was primarily due to the non-recurrence of the $9.7 million provided by our liquidation of all short-term investments in the first quarter of fiscal 2019. Total cash used for capital expenditures and payments for software licenses decreased $4.3 million to $20.9 million in fiscal 2020 from $25.2 million in fiscal 2019 primarily due to lower expenditures for software enhancements, office consolidation, and test equipment.
Financing activities - Financing cash flows consist primarily of activity on our long-term debt, proceeds from the exercise of options to acquire common stock, tax payments related to the net share settlement of restricted stock units, and purchases of treasury stock. During fiscal 2020, we drew $50.0 million on our revolving loan facility to further strengthen our liquidity position, and we paid quarterly installments totaling $26.3 million on our long-term debt, which fulfilled the required quarterly installments through the first quarter of fiscal 2021. During fiscal 2019, we made a total of $117.0 million in principal payments in addition to the cash flows related to refinancing our long-term debt. Payments for tax withholdings on vesting of RSUs partially offset by employee exercises of stock options used net cash flows of $16.9 million in fiscal 2020, which is a change of approximately $24.0 million from the $7.1 million provided in fiscal 2019. During fiscal 2020, we also purchased $15.0 million of treasury stock, as further discussed below under "Share Repurchase Program."
Accounts receivable, net
Accounts receivable, net as of January 2, 2021 decreased by approximately $0.3 million, or approximately 1%, compared to December 28, 2019. This resulted primarily from the timing of shipments in December 2020 compared to December 2019. We calculate Days sales outstanding on the basis of a 365-day year as Accounts receivable, net at the end of the quarter divided by sales during the quarter annualized and then multiplied by 365.
Inventories
Inventories as of January 2, 2021 increased $9.6 million, or approximately 18%, compared to December 28, 2019 primarily to meet the increased demands of our customers.
The Days of inventory on hand ratio compares the inventory balance at the end of a quarter to the cost of sales in that quarter. We calculate Days of inventory on hand on the basis of a 365-day year as Inventories at the end of the quarter divided by Cost of sales during the quarter annualized and then multiplied by 365. Our Days of inventory on hand increased to 139 days at January 2, 2021 from 123 days at December 28, 2019. This increase resulted from inventory increases to meet the increased demands of our customers.
Credit Arrangements
On May 17, 2019, we entered into our Current Credit Agreement. The details of this arrangement are described in "Note 6 - Long-Term Debt" in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
As of January 2, 2021, we had no significant long-term purchase commitments for capital expenditures or existing used or unused credit arrangements beyond the secured revolving loan facility described above.
Share Repurchase Program
On February 14, 2020, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program pursuant to which up to $40.0 million of outstanding common stock could be repurchased from time to time. The duration of the repurchase program was twelve months. Under this program during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, approximately 0.4 million shares were repurchased for $15.0 million, or an average price paid per share of $38.98. All repurchased shares were retired by the end of the 2020 fiscal year. All repurchases were open market transactions funded from available working capital. The twelve-month 2020 program expired during the first quarter of fiscal 2021, during which no additional shares were repurchased.
Contractual Cash Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual cash obligations at January 2, 2021:
(1)
Certain of our facilities and equipment are leased under operating leases, which expire at various times through 2027.
(2)
Cash payments due for long-term debt include estimated interest payments, which are based on outstanding principal amounts, currently effective interest rates as of January 2, 2021, timing of scheduled payments, and the debt term. See Liquidity section of Item 7 for further discussion pertaining to our Credit Arrangements.
The table above does not include amounts related to uncertain tax positions because we cannot reliably estimate the timing of the settlement of such liabilities.
Our significant operating leases are for our facilities in Hillsboro and Portland, Oregon; San Jose, California; Muntinlupa City, Philippines; and Shanghai, China.
Our corporate headquarters is located in our facility in Hillsboro, Oregon, which is leased until November 2022. Annual rental costs are estimated at $0.6 million with 3% annual increases.
The lease for our former office space in Portland, Oregon expires in March 2025. Annual rental costs are estimated at $0.7 million with average annual increases of approximately 5%. Under a previously approved restructuring plan, we fully vacated the space in Portland, Oregon in early 2019 and subleased the vacated space.
Our lease in San Jose, California expires September 2026 with total annual rental costs estimated to be $2.4 million and annual increases of approximately 3%. Under a previously approved restructuring plan, we vacated approximately 50% or our facility in San Jose, California in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2018 and intend to sublease the vacated space.
Two of our leases in Muntinlupa City, Philippines expire in May 2025 and June 2025, with total annual rental costs estimated to be $0.7 million and annual increases of approximately 5%. Our lease in Shanghai expires in May 2021, with total annual rental costs estimated to be $1.8 million.
New Accounting Pronouncements
The information contained under the heading "New Accounting Pronouncements" in Note 1 - Nature of Operations and Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 is incorporated by reference into this Part II, Item 7.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of January 2, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements of the type described by Item 303(a)(4) of SEC Regulation S-K.