ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Laird Superfood is an emerging consumer products platform focused on manufacturing and marketing highly differentiated plant-based and functional foods. The core pillars of the Laird Superfood platform are currently Superfood Creamer coffee creamers, Hydrate hydration products and beverage enhancing supplements, and roasted and instant coffees, teas and hot chocolate. Consumer preferences within the evolving food and beverage industry are shifting away from processed and sugar-laden food and beverage products, as well as those containing significant amounts of highly processed and artificial ingredients. Laird Superfood’s long-term goal is to build the first scale-level and widely recognized brand that authentically focuses on natural ingredients, nutritional density and functionality, allowing the Company to maximize penetration of a multi-billion-dollar opportunity in the grocery market.
We have experienced strong sales growth since inception. Net sales increased to $26 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $13 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing net sales growth of 98%. The growth in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by a significant expansion of our customer base in both online and traditional wholesale channels.
Our omnichannel distribution strategy has three key components: online, wholesale and food service. In aggregate, this omnichannel strategy provides us with a diverse set of customers and wholesale partners, along with an opportunity to develop a direct relationship with our customers at lairdsuperfood.com. We believe that, along with a trusted brand name, extensive proprietary distribution is a critical long-term and sustainable barrier to entry in the food industry.
Our online business is two pronged and consists of lairdsuperfood.com and Amazon.com. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the online business made up 56% and 59% of our net sales, respectively. Lairdsuperfood.com is a platform that provides an authentic brand experience for our customers that drives engagement and provides feedback for future product development, while generating highly attractive margins. We view our growing proprietary database of customers ordering directly from our website as a strategic asset, as it enhances our ability to develop a long-term relationship with these customers. Content on our website allows Laird Superfood to educate consumers on the benefits of our products and ingredients, while providing a positive customer experience. We believe this experience leads to higher retention rates among repeat users and subscribers, as evidenced by repeat users and subscribers accounting for almost two-thirds of lairdsuperfood.com sales for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our wholesale business addresses the $759 billion grocery industry, specifically the $174 billion Natural, Organic and Functional Foods and Beverages sub-segment, which has been increasing its proportion of the grocery industry, as well as many non-grocery retail channels. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, wholesale made up 42% and 40% of our net sales, respectively. Laird Superfood products are sold through a diverse set of retail channels, including conventional, natural and specialty grocery, club, outdoor and drug stores. We currently estimate our products are in over 7,100 retail door locations across the United States and we believe the long-term potential store base exceeds 20,000 retail locations in the United States. The diversity of
our retail channel represents a strong competitive advantage for Laird Superfood and provides us with a larger total addressable market than would be considered normal for a food brand that is singularly focused on the grocery market.
Recent Developments
Initial Public Offering
On September 23, 2020, the Company completed its initial public offering (“IPO”), in which the Company issued and sold 3,047,500 shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $22 per share, including 397,500 shares of common stock upon the exercise of the underwriter’s option to purchase additional shares. After underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering costs, net proceeds from the IPO were approximately $61,966,237. Offering costs of approximately $1,268,765 were recognized as a reduction of additional-paid-in capital.
Upon the closing of the IPO, all outstanding shares of the Company’s preferred stock converted into shares of common stock, consisting of (i) 162,340 outstanding shares of Series A-1 convertible preferred stock converting into 324,680 aggregate shares of common stock, (ii) 152,253 outstanding shares of Series A-2 convertible preferred stock converting into 304,506 aggregate shares of common stock, and (iii) 383,142 outstanding shares of Series B-1 convertible preferred stock converting into 766,284 aggregate shares of common stock.
Concurrent Private Placement
Danone Manifesto Ventures, PBC (“DMV”) purchased $2,000,020 of our common stock in a private placement immediately subsequent to the consummation of the IPO, at a price per share of $22.
Capital Contribution
On December 3, 2020, the Company entered into an Agreement with DMV for an additional capital contribution as a participant in the DMV COVID-19 Relief Fund. The Agreement provisions the Company with cash consideration of $298,103 for the purpose of supporting three relief projects: (1) continual sanitation rotation, (2) spend on increased labor, material and maintenance costs in the face of adversity, and (3) new/existing hospitals relief initiative. The Company has reported the balance as restricted cash on the Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020.
Two-for-One Stock Split
Our board of directors and stockholders approved a two-for-one split of our common stock, which was effected on August 19, 2020. The split divided each outstanding share of our common stock into two shares of common stock and correspondingly adjusted the conversion prices of our convertible preferred stock. No fractional shares were issued in connection with the split. All references to common stock, options to purchase common stock, restricted stock, share data, per share data and related information have been retroactively adjusted, where applicable, in this Annual Report to reflect the split of our common stock, and the corresponding adjustment of the conversion prices of our preferred stock, as if it had occurred at the beginning of the earliest period presented.
Key Factors Affecting our Performance
We believe that our future performance will depend on many factors, including the following:
Ability to Grow Our Customer Base in both Online and Traditional Wholesale Distribution Channels
We are currently growing our customer base through both paid and organic online channels, as well as by expanding our presence in a variety of physical retail distribution channels. Online customer acquisitions typically occur at our direct website lairdsuperfood.com and Amazon.com. Our online customer acquisition program includes paid and unpaid social media, search, display and traditional media. Our products are also sold through a growing number of physical retail channels. Wholesale customers include grocery chains, natural food outlets, club stores, and drug stores, and food service customers include coffee shops, gyms, restaurants, hospitality venues and corporate dining services, among others. Customer acquisition in physical retail channels depends on, among other things, paid promotions through retailers, display and traditional media.
Ability to Acquire and Retain Customers at a Reasonable Cost
We believe an ability to consistently acquire and retain customers at a reasonable cost relative to projected life-time value will be a key factor affecting future performance. To accomplish this goal, we intend to balance advertising spend between online and offline channels, as well as balancing more targeted and measurable “direct response” marketing spend with advertising focused on increasing our long-term brand recognition, where success attribution is less directly measurable on a near-term basis.
Ability to Drive Repeat Usage of Our Products
We accrue substantial economic value from repeat users of our products who consistently re-order our products. The pace of our growth rate will be affected by the repeat usage dynamics of existing and newly acquired customers.
Ability to Expand Our Product Line
Our goal is to substantially expand our product line over time to increase our growth opportunity and reduce product-specific risks through diversification into multiple products each designed around daily use. Our pace of growth will be partially affected by the cadence and magnitude of new product launches over time.
Ability to Expand Gross Margins
Our overall profitability will be impacted by our ability to expand gross margins through effective sourcing of raw materials, controlling labor and shipping costs, as well as spreading other production-related costs over greater manufacturing volumes.
Ability to Expand Operating Margins
Our ability to expand operating margins will be impacted by our ability to cover fixed general and administrative costs and variable sales and marketing costs with higher revenues and gross profit dollars.
Ability to Manage Our Global Supply Chain and Expand Production In-line with Demand
Our ability to grow and meet future demand will be affected by our ability to properly plan for and source inventory from a variety of suppliers located inside and outside the United States.
Ability to Optimize Key Components of Working Capital
Our ability to reduce cash burn in the near-term and eventually generate positive cash flow will be partially impacted by our ability to effectively manage all the key working capital components that could influence our cash conversion cycle.
Components of Results of Operations
Sales, net
We sell our products indirectly to consumers through a broad set of physical wholesale channels. We also derive revenue from the sale of our products directly to consumers through our direct website, as well as third-party online channels.
Cost of Goods Sold
Our cost of goods sold consists primarily of raw material costs, labor costs directly related to producing our products, including wages and benefits, shipping costs, lease expenses and other factory overhead costs related to various aspects of production, warehousing and shipping.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of general and administrative, research and product development, and sales and marketing expenses.
We expect to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC and higher expenses for insurance, investor relations and professional services. We expect our general and administrative expenses will increase as our business grows.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of interest related to our additional rent owed to our landlord for landlord improvements. There was no interest expense incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Benefit from Income Taxes
Due to our history of operating losses and expectation of future operating losses, we do not expect any significant income tax expenses and benefits for the foreseeable future.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 (“FY2020”) and December 31, 2019 (“FY2019”)
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Sales, Net
Net sales increased by $13 million to $26 million in FY2020, compared to $13 million in FY2019. This increase was due to a combination of growth in our online and wholesale channels, primarily caused by an increase in sales volume. Products introduced after FY2019, including Liquid Creamers, Chai InstaFuel, Orange Guava Hydrate, Activate Daily Greens, Renew Protein, Mushroom Coffee, and four flavors of Pili Nuts, accounted for $4 million of gross sales in FY2020. Year-over-year gross sales growth in existing products accounted for $9 million of the increase in gross sales in FY2020 compared to FY2019. During FY2020, 36% of all online orders were repeat orders, compared to 34% in FY2019, and 30% of our direct website net sales in FY2020 came from subscription programs, compared to 32% in FY2019.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold increased by $11 million in FY2020 to $19 million from $8 million in FY2019, primarily due to sales growth in the 2020 period, elevated labor costs, increased co-packing costs primarily associated with our liquid creamer product line, elevated air shipping costs for additional raw materials in response to an unanticipated increase in demand associated with COVID-19, disposal costs related to the initial production and distribution of our liquid creamer product line and elevated outbound shipping costs combined with the launch of a free shipping initiative for direct online purchases made on lairdsuperfood.com.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased by $2 million in FY2020 to $7 million from $5 million in FY2019, primarily due to sales growth in FY2020, partially offset by a decrease in gross margins. Gross margin decreased to 26.2% in FY2020 compared to 38.8% in FY2019, due to elevated labor costs, increased co-packing costs primarily associated with our liquid creamer product line, elevated air shipping costs for additional raw materials in response to an unanticipated increase in demand associated with COVID-19, disposal costs related to the initial production and distribution of our liquid creamer product line and elevated outbound shipping costs combined with the launch of a free shipping initiative for direct online purchases made on lairdsuperfood.com.
Operating Expenses
General and administrative expense increased by $4 million in FY2020 to $9 million from $5 million in FY2019, primarily due to IPO related expenses for accelerated stock option vesting, discretionary bonuses, professional fees, as well as an asset impairment recorded during the second quarter.
Research and product development expense increased by $184 thousand to $508 thousand in FY2020 from $324 thousand in FY2019, primarily due to increased product development efforts and payroll expenses.
Sales and marketing expense increased by $2 million in FY2020 to $10 million from $8 million in FY2019, primarily due to increased advertising and payroll, as well as a stock option modification expense.
Other Income
Other income is composed of interest income, gain on sale of available-for-sale securities, dividend income, and grant income. Interest income, primarily related to interest income on investment securities available-for-sale, decreased to $65 thousand in FY2020 compared to $229 thousand in FY2019 due to lower interest rate on invested balances. Gain on the sale of available-for-sale securities was $14 thousand in FY2020 compared to $8 thousand in FY2019. There was no grant income in FY2020 compared to $50 thousand in FY2019.
Benefit from Income Taxes
Benefit from income taxes remained at $0 in FY2020 and FY2019, as we maintain a full valuation allowance related to our net deferred tax assets, primarily due to our historical net loss position. Due to our history of operating losses and expectation of future operating losses, we do not expect any significant income tax expenses or benefits for the foreseeable future.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had incurred accumulated net losses of $32 million, including operating losses of $13 million and $9 million for FY2020 and FY2019, respectively. We expect to incur additional operating losses as we continue efforts to grow our business, and we expect to incur additional expenses associated with being a public company. We have historically financed our operations and capital expenditures through private placements of our preferred stock and common stock, our Initial Public Offering, as well as lines of credit and term loans.
Our historical uses of cash have primarily consisted of cash used in operating activities to fund our operating losses and working capital needs.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $66 million of cash-on-hand and investments and $11 million of available borrowings under our lines of credit. As of December 31, 2019, we had $6 million of cash-on-hand and investments and $8 million of available borrowings under our lines of credit. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, we had $51 thousand outstanding under our forgivable loans with the City of Sisters, Oregon and no amounts were outstanding under our lines of credit.
We currently have an approximately 26,000 square foot warehouse under construction by a third party adjacent to our current buildings while we intend to lease and have purchased five adjoining lots providing opportunity for expansion of our campus if needed. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support research and development efforts, the continued expansion of sales and marketing activities, the enhancement of our product platforms, the introduction of new products and acquisition activity. We expect to continue to incur operating losses for the foreseeable future and may require additional capital resources to continue to grow our business. We believe that current cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operations and capital requirements for at least the next 12 months following the date of this report. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. In addition, if additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented:
Cash Flows used in Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities was $15 million for FY2020 as compared to $9 million in FY2019. In FY2020, there were increases in operational costs such as co-packing costs associated with our liquid creamer product line, elevated air shipping costs for additional raw materials in response to an unanticipated increase in demand associated with COVID-19, disposal costs related to the initial production and distribution of our liquid creamer product line, and elevated outbound shipping costs combined with the launch of a free shipping initiative for direct online purchases made on lairdsuperfood.com. In addition, to ensure we are able to keep up with growing customer demand with limited disruptions in distributions, we also made substantial increases to our inventory.
Cash Flows used in Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $4 million in FY2020 as compared to $8 million in FY2019. These changes were primarily due to investment in securities available-for-sale, and capital investments in a new manufacturing line to continue to meet increasing consumer demand.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $75 million in FY2020 compared to $1 million in FY2019. In FY2020 we completed our IPO, generating net proceeds of approximately $64 million from the IPO and concurrent private placement made by DMV. Offering costs of approximately $1 million were recognized as a reduction of additional-paid-in capital.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table sets forth the amounts of our significant contractual obligations and commitments with definitive payment terms as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Operating lease obligations related to our manufacturing facility leases dated March 1, 2018 and December 17, 2018.
Segment Information
We have one operating segment and one reportable segment, as our Chief Executive Officer reviews financial information on an aggregate basis for purposes of allocating resources and evaluating financial performance.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial
statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued expenses and share-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 1 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies are the most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), which we adopted January 1, 2019. Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue in accordance with a five-step model in which we evaluate the transfer of promised goods or services and recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for the arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (1) identify the contract(s) with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We have elected, as a practical expedient, to account for the shipping and handling as fulfillment costs, rather than as a separate performance obligation. Revenue is reported net of applicable provisions for discounts, returns and allowances. Methodologies for determining these provisions are dependent on customer pricing and promotional practices. We will record reductions to revenue for estimated product returns and pricing adjustments in the same period that the related revenue is recorded. These estimates will be based on industry-based historical data, historical sales returns, if any, analysis of credit memo data, and other factors known at the time.
Stock Incentive Plan
The compensation cost relating to share-based payment transactions is recognized in the financial statements. The cost is measured based on the grant date fair value of the equity or liability instruments issued. Compensation cost for all employee stock awards is calculated and recognized over the employees’ service period, generally defined as the vesting period. For awards with graded-vesting, compensation cost is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for the entire award. Compensation cost for all consultant stock awards is calculated and recognized over the consultant’s service period based on the grant date fair value of the equity or liability instruments issued. Upon exercise of stock awards, recipients are issued shares of common stock.
Income Taxes
Income taxes provide for the tax effects of transactions reported in the financial statements and consist of income taxes currently due and deferred tax assets and liabilities. We may also be subject to interest and penalties from taxing authorities on underpayment of income taxes. In such an event, interest and penalties are included in income tax expense. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for differences between the basis of assets and liabilities for financial statement and income tax purposes. The differences relate primarily to depreciable assets (use of different depreciation methods and lives for financial statement and income tax purposes) and net operating losses. The deferred tax assets and liabilities represent the future tax return consequences of those differences, which will either be taxable or deductible when the assets and liabilities are recovered or settled. Due to the historical net loss position of the Company, we recorded a full deferred tax valuation allowance as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements in Note 1 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for additional information.