ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company, originally incorporated in Delaware on September 18, 2020, and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination.
The registration statement for the IPO was declared effective on November 9, 2020. On November 13, 2020, we consummated the IPO of 30,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $300.0 million. Each unit consists of one share of our Class A common stock and one-third of one redeemable warrant.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 5,334,334 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $8.0 million.
Transaction costs of the IPO amounted to $17,063,769, consisting of $6,000,000 of cash underwriting fees, $10,500,000 of deferred underwriting fees, and $563,769 of other offering costs.
Following the closing of the IPO on November 13, 2020, $300,000,000 ($10.00 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the IPO and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants was placed in the Trust Account and invested only in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination, (ii) the redemption of any Public Shares properly submitted in connection with a stockholder vote to amend the Company’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation, and (iii) the redemption of the Company’s Public Shares if the Company is unable to complete the initial Business Combination by November 13, 2022, subject to applicable law. The proceeds deposited in the Trust Account could become subject to the claims of the Company’s creditors, if any, which could have priority over the claims of the Company’s public stockholders.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the IPO and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
Merger Agreement
On January 24, 2021, we and Merger Sub entered into the Merger Agreement with Latch. If (i) the Merger Agreement is adopted and the transactions contemplated thereby, including the Merger, are approved by the Company’s and Latch’s stockholders, (ii) the Merger Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, including the issuance of Class A common stock to be issued as the merger consideration, pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, and pursuant to the conversion of Class B common stock, are approved by the Company’s stockholders, and (iii) the Merger is subsequently completed, Merger Sub will merge with and into Latch, with Latch surviving the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company.
Latch is an enterprise technology company focused on revolutionizing the way people experience spaces by making spaces better places to live, work, and visit. Latch has created a full-building operating system, LatchOS, that addresses the essential needs of modern buildings by streamlining building operations, enhancing the resident experience, and enabling more efficient interactions with service providers. Latch’s product offerings are designed to optimize the resident experience and include smart access, delivery and guest management, smart home and sensors, connectivity, and resident experience. Latch combines hardware, software, and services into a holistic system believed to make spaces more enjoyable for residents, more efficient and profitable for building operators, and more convenient for service providers.
Under the terms of the Merger Agreement, immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger (the “Effective Time”), (i) Latch will cause each share of Latch preferred stock issued and outstanding to be automatically converted into a number of shares of Latch common stock in accordance with Latch’s certificate of incorporation (the “preferred stock conversion”) and (ii) Latch will cause the outstanding principal and accrued but unpaid interest due on Latch’s convertible notes immediately prior to the Effective Time to be automatically converted into a number of shares of Latch common stock in accordance with the terms of the applicable Latch convertible note (the “convertible note conversion”).
As part of the Merger, Latch equityholders will receive aggregate consideration of $1.0 billion, payable in newly issued shares of Class A common stock at a price of $10.00 per share and, solely with respect to holders of Latch vested stock options with respect to which an election to receive only cash has been properly made, the Cash Election Consideration (as defined below). At the Effective Time, (i) each share of Latch common stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the closing of the Merger (the “Closing”) (including shares of Latch common stock issued upon the preferred stock conversion and the convertible note conversion and upon any exercise of Latch warrants prior to the Closing, but excluding shares owned by Latch as treasury stock or dissenting shares) will be cancelled and converted into the right to receive a number of shares of Class A common stock equal to the Exchange Ratio (as defined below), (ii) each Latch vested stock option with respect to which a cash election has been properly made that is issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Closing (such option, a “Cash Elected Company Option”) will be cancelled and converted into the right to receive an amount of cash equal to the Exchange Ratio multiplied by $10.00 minus the exercise price applicable to the share of Latch common stock underlying such Latch vested stock option (the “Cash Election Consideration”), and (iii) each outstanding Latch stock option that is not a Cash Elected Company Option, whether vested or unvested, will be converted into an option to purchase a number of shares of Class A common stock equal to the product of (x) the number of shares of Latch common stock underlying such Latch stock option immediately prior to the Closing and (y) the Exchange Ratio, at an exercise price per share equal to (A) the exercise price per share of Latch common stock underlying such Latch stock option immediately prior to the Closing divided by (B) the Exchange Ratio. The “Exchange Ratio” is the quotient of (x) the aggregate merger consideration of 100,000,000 shares of Class A common stock, divided by (y) the number of shares of Latch common stock outstanding on a fully diluted net exercise basis.
Based on the number of shares of Latch capital stock outstanding and issuable upon the net exercise or conversion of outstanding stock options, warrants and convertible notes of Latch, in each case, as of March 1, 2021, (i) the estimated Exchange Ratio of shares of Class A common stock for each share of Latch common stock is 0.8984, (ii) the total number of shares of Class A common stock expected to be issued (on a fully diluted net exercise basis) in connection with the Closing is approximately 100,000,000, and (iii) holders of shares of Latch common stock (on a fully diluted net exercise basis) as of immediately prior to the closing of the Merger will hold, in the aggregate, approximately 64.2% of the issued and outstanding shares of Class A common stock immediately following the Closing.
The Merger also calls for additional agreements, including, among others, subscription agreements, as described in the Proxy Statement/Prospectus initially filed by the Company on March 10, 2021.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2020, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from September 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, relates to our formation and IPO, and, since the completion of the IPO, searching for a target to consummate a Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of a Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from the Public Offering and placed in the Trust Account (defined below).
For the period from September 18, 2020 (Inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $897,775. We incurred $900,030 of formation and operating costs (not charged against stockholders’ equity), consisting mostly of general and administrative expenses and interest income of $2,255.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash outside our trust account of $1,171,569, available for working capital needs. All remaining cash was held in the trust account and is generally unavailable for our use, prior to an initial business combination.
On November 13, 2020, we consummated the IPO of 30,000,000 units at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $300.0 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 5,334,334 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrants in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $8.0 million.
Following the IPO, and the sale of the Private Placement Warrant, a total of $300.0 million was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $17,063,769 in transaction costs, consisting of $6,000,000 of cash underwriting fees, $10,500,000 of deferred underwriting fees, and $563,769 of other offering costs.
In connection with the IPO, the underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the date of the prospectus to purchase up to 4,500,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any. On December 24, 2020, the over-allotment option expired without any exercise thereof.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (excluding deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay our taxes. We estimate our annual franchise tax obligations, based on the number of shares of our common stock authorized and outstanding after the completion of the IPO, to be $200,000, which is the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation per annum, which we may pay from funds from the IPO held outside of the Trust Account or from interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and released to us for this purpose. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the Trust Account will be sufficient to pay our income taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Further, our Sponsor, officers and directors or their respective affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been
determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. To date, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants of the post business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our Business Combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangement as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any long-term debt, capital or operating lease obligations.
We entered into an administrative services agreement pursuant to which we will pay an affiliate of our Sponsor for office space and secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team, in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per month.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of condensed financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A
common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 28,506,345 Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common stock is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding for each of the periods. The calculation of diluted income (loss) per common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) Initial Public Offering, and (ii) Private Placement Warrants since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
Our statements of operations include a presentation of income (loss) per share for Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per common stock. Net income per common stock, basic and diluted, for redeemable Class A common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, by the weighted average number of redeemable Class A common stock outstanding since original issuance. Net loss per common stock, basic and diluted, for non-redeemable Class B common stock is calculated by dividing the net income (loss), adjusted for income attributable to redeemable Class B common stock, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable Class B common stock outstanding for the periods. Non-redeemable Class B common stock include the Founder Shares as these common stocks do not have any redemption features and do not participate in the income earned on the Trust Account.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed financial statements.