ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
We are a pure-play, fully integrated lithium company, with a long, proven history of producing performance lithium compounds. Our primary products, namely battery-grade lithium hydroxide, lithium carbonate, butyllithium and high purity lithium metal are critical inputs used in various performance applications. Our strategy is to focus on supplying high performance lithium compounds to the rapidly growing EV and broader energy storage battery markets, while continuing to maintain our position as a leading global producer of butyllithium and high purity lithium metal. With extensive global capabilities, approximately 80 years of continuous production experience, applications and technical expertise and deep customer relationships, we believe we are well positioned to capitalize on the accelerating trend of electrification.
We produce lithium compounds for use in applications that have specific and constantly changing performance requirements, including battery-grade lithium hydroxide for use in high performance lithium-ion batteries. We believe the demand for our compounds will continue to grow as the electrification of transportation accelerates, and as the use of high nickel content cathode materials increases in the next generation of battery technology products. We also supply butyllithium, which is used in the production of polymers and pharmaceutical products, as well as a range of specialty lithium compounds including high purity lithium metal, which is used in the production of lightweight materials for aerospace applications and non-rechargeable batteries. It is in these applications that we have established a differentiated position in the market through our ability to consistently produce and deliver performance lithium compounds.
2020 Highlights
The following are the more significant developments in our business during the year ended December 31, 2020:
•Revenue of $288.2 million in 2020 decreased $100.2 million versus last year primarily due to lower average prices and lower sales volumes, largely as a result of COVID-19 reducing customer demand.
•Gross margin of $36.8 million in 2020 decreased $78.1 million versus the prior year primarily due to lower average prices, lower sales volumes and increased costs due to the financial impact of increased third-party lithium carbonate usage and incremental COVID-19 related costs to implement safety protocols.
•Adjusted EBITDA of $22.3 million decreased $77.5 million compared to the prior year amount of $99.8 million primarily due to lower average prices, lower sales volumes and increased costs due to the financial impact of increased third party lithium carbonate usage.
COVID-19 Impacts
Business and Operations
In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted our business, operations and financial performance. Worldwide government efforts to contain the spread and mitigate the impact of COVID-19 continued. We still face operational challenges and uncertainties related to the unprecedented global COVID-19 pandemic. The emergency measures imposed and re-imposed by governments on businesses and individuals, including quarantines, travel restrictions, social distancing, closure of non-essential businesses and schools, work from home requirements, and shelter in place orders, among other measures have impacted and may further impact our workforce and operations, and those of our customers and suppliers. The severity of the impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations, continues to evolve and has been varied across geographic regions, and will be dependent on how long the pandemic continues, which is currently unknown. The disruptions and duration may be impacted by the actions that governments, businesses and individuals take in relation to the pandemic, more contagious variants of the virus, vaccine resistance and delays in vaccine distribution.
We have manufacturing operations in the U.S., Argentina, China, the United Kingdom, and India, general operations in Singapore, and sales offices in the U.S., China, the United Kingdom, India and Japan. All of these countries have been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic to varying degrees. They have adopted measures to contain it, and they may adopt even stricter measures in the future. In China, the government imposed shutdown orders and travel restrictions, among other measures, which have subsequently been reduced. In the U.S., the President declared a national emergency, which was followed by the imposition of restrictions by governors, mayors and public officials, including in Pennsylvania and North Carolina where we
operate. The government of Argentina, where the Company’s primary lithium brine resource is located, enacted an emergency decree ordering a national mandatory quarantine requiring the temporary closure of the Company’s local brine operations for approximately two weeks. We expect government measures and restrictions globally to have a negative impact on demand for certain of our products and a negative impact on the operating cost and the efficient operation of our facilities, supply chains and logistics. We have already experienced disruptions and delays within our supply chain and logistics operations in China, Southeast Asia, Argentina and Europe. This includes problems at ports due to national quarantines, difficulties with scheduling cargo ships, additional warehouse costs due to shipment delays, and the restriction of movements by trucks within and between countries.
We have seen a slowdown in demand for certain of our products and global inventories remain elevated, which has had a downward pressure on prices for certain of our products. More customers are starting to protect their interests by diversifying among multiple suppliers. Some customers are hesitant to enter into longer term agreements while managing their own inventory levels in a more uncertain market environment, which further impacts prices adversely for certain of our products.
In the first quarter of 2020, because of the significant practical constraints resulting from actions being taken by authorities around the world in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we elected to suspend all capital expansion work globally. There can be no assurance of the timing for when capital expansion work will resume or that it will resume at all. Any significant delay or a failure to resume this work could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
The material operational challenges that management and the Board of Directors are monitoring include the health and safety of our employees, geographic quarantines, travel restrictions, social distancing, closure of non-essential businesses and schools, work from home requirements, shelter in place orders, and the restriction of movements within and between countries.
Liquidity, Financial Resources, 2025 Notes Issuance and Revolving Credit Facility Amendments
Our working capital was impacted by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020. We expect this to continue into 2021. The rapid and global spread of COVID-19 has resulted in the disruption and temporary shutdown of the businesses of certain of our customers, contract manufacturers and suppliers, and limits on access to the production facilities of our contract manufacturers and suppliers. Several of our customers, contract manufacturers and suppliers have experienced disruptions to their business due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Certain of our customers have canceled, postponed or delayed orders. To the extent that we are not able to reduce our incurrence of short-term obligations in proportion to the expected reduction in our cash flows, this would result in a further reduction in our working capital.
Our uses of cash were impacted by the effects of COVID-19 during 2020. We had an increased use of cash resulting from logistical supply disruptions, such as increased warehousing costs, higher sea shipping costs, and the use of air freight rather than cargo ships to meet more uncertain customer delivery deadlines. We also used cash to purchase additional personal protective equipment for our employees, such as masks and gloves, and for increased cleaning and disinfectant costs, wipes and hand sanitizer, additional medical personnel at our facilities, and increased personnel transportation costs due to social distancing guidelines.
On May 6, 2020, we entered into the First Amendment to the Credit Agreement with FMC Lithium USA Corp., the Guarantors, the Lenders and the Agent. Among other things, the First Amendment increased our maximum net leverage ratio for the fiscal quarters ending June 30, 2020, September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020 from 3.5 to 6.0.
On June 25, 2020, we issued $225 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.125% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 (the "2025 Notes") in a private offering. On July 7, 2020 we issued an additional $20.75 million of the 2025 Notes to the initial purchasers under the Over-Allotment Option. Total net proceeds received including Over-Allotment Option were $238.2 million. The Company used the net proceeds received to repay amounts outstanding under its Revolving Credit Facility. The 2025 Notes were issued under the International Capital Market Association's Green Bond framework and followed the Green Bond Principles.
On August 3, 2020, we entered into the Second Amendment with FMC Lithium USA Corp., the Guarantors, the Lenders and the Agent. The Second Amendment amended the Credit Agreement, as previously amended by the First Amendment, to replace our maximum total net leverage ratio of 6.0 for the fiscal quarters ending September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020 with a maximum first lien leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of 3.5. The maximum first lien leverage ratio of 3.5 will continue to apply for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2021 and for each fiscal quarter thereafter. The first lien leverage ratio as of any date is the ratio of financial covenant debt as of such date secured by a lien on any asset or property of Livent or its restricted subsidiaries on a pari passu or senior basis with the loans and commitments under the Credit Agreement, minus unrestricted cash and cash equivalents on our balance sheet as of such date, to Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization, as defined in the Credit Agreement, for the last four fiscal quarters ending on or before such date.
See Note 10 to our consolidated and combined financial statements included within this Form 10-K for details on the 2025 Notes, the First Amendment and the Second Amendment.
Corporate Efforts
We have responded to the COVID-19 pandemic in a number of ways. We assembled a Global Pandemic Response Team whose global members are taken from different functional areas, including Operations, Finance, Commercial, Legal, Human Resources and Health & Safety. The Global Pandemic Response Team meets on a regular basis, and provides reports to the Executive Leadership team. We have also assembled COVID-19 Response Teams at several of its regional locations, who have the responsibility to keep informed of local matters such as government policies and regulations. These Response Teams are helping to shape the Company’s policies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We have also worked to identify potential new suppliers and logistics providers for its operations in case of further supply chain disruptions. This includes suppliers of chemicals and packaging, and air freight companies. We have altered global production schedules to meet changes in customer demand. Future efforts will continue along these lines and be dictated by the particulars of the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue to plan for a return to more normalized business operations once the COVID-19 pandemic subsides.
Health & Safety
We are working diligently to protect the health and well-being of its employees, customers and other key stakeholders. As an essential business under the rules of the governments in the countries where we operate, our plant personnel continue to remain on the job at their respective facilities. We have instituted numerous safety procedures to protect the health of these plant personnel. This includes temperature checks before an employee enters any one of our facilities, screening questions, the use of masks and gloves where appropriate, and social distancing measures. We are no longer permitting visitors to any of our facilities and all third-party contractors must undergo a vigorous screening process. All workers who can work from home have been requested to do so, and business travel has been substantially reduced. Communications relating to all of these policies and COVID-19 preventative measures are regularly distributed to our employees.
We base our health and safety protocols on the advice provided by the White House, the Centers for Disease Control, the World Health Organization, and the local government authorities in the countries and regions where it operates.
We have implemented the paid sick leave policies under the Families First Coronavirus Response Act. These policies are supplemented by our own paid sick and other leave policies. We have not experienced any material employee absences as a result of COVID-19. However, if a significant number of our employees at any one location were to require leave as a result of COVID-19, this could pose a risk to the continued operation of the particular facility and could potentially disrupt our broader operations.
There has been no large-scale rejection of our products by customers due to fears over the transmission of COVID-19 through our products.
Government Programs
We continue to evaluate government support and tax relief programs in the countries where it operates. This includes support grants, loans, tax deferrals, and tax credits. We deferred the deposit and payment of the employer’s share of social security taxes for the period March 27 through December 31, 2020, pursuant to the CARES Act in accordance with Internal Revenue Service regulations on this matter. In Argentina, we postponed employer contributions to an employee social fund for the month of March 2020. In China, we obtained a waiver of local social security contributions. In Singapore, we received certain wage subsidies for the period October 2019 through June 2020, and benefited from a property tax rebate that was partially passed through by the lessor of its rented space.
Overall, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is uncertain and continues to evolve, and therefore, we cannot predict the extent to which our business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity will ultimately be impacted.
2021 Outlook
We expect higher volumes and slightly lower average pricing across our lithium products in 2021 versus the prior year. We also expect lower costs, driven in part by the reduced impact of third-party purchased lithium carbonate usage.
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, please refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Results of Operations - Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
In addition to net income, as determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we evaluate operating performance using certain non-GAAP measures such as EBITDA, which we define as net income plus interest expense, net, income tax expense/(benefit), and depreciation and amortization, and Adjusted EBITDA, which we define as EBITDA adjusted for certain Argentina remeasurement losses/(gains), restructuring and other charges/(income), separation-related costs, COVID-19 related costs and other losses/(gains). Management believes the use of these non-GAAP measures allows management and investors to compare more easily the financial performance of its underlying business from period to period. The non-GAAP information provided may not be comparable to similar measures disclosed by other companies because of differing methods used by other companies in calculating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. These measures should not be considered as a substitute for net income or other measures of performance or liquidity reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The following table reconciles EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA from net income.
____________________
(a) Represents impact of currency fluctuations on tax assets and liabilities and on long-term monetary assets associated with our capital expansion as well as significant currency devaluations. The remeasurement gains/(losses) are included within "Cost of sales" in our consolidated statement of operations but are excluded from our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA because of: i.) their nature as income tax related; ii.) their association with long-term capital projects which will not be operational until future periods; or iii.) the severity of the devaluations and their immediate impact on our operations in the country.
(b) We continually perform strategic reviews and assess the return on our business. This sometimes results in management changes or in a plan to restructure the operations of our business. As part of these restructuring plans, demolition costs and write-downs of long-lived assets may occur. Also includes legal fees related to IPO securities litigation, including a settlement accrual, net of insurance reimbursement, of $2.0 million as of December 31, 2020.
(c) Represents legal, professional, transaction related fees and other separation-related activity.
(d) Represents incremental costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic recorded in "Cost of sales" in the consolidated statement of operations, including but not limited to, incremental quarantine related absenteeism, incremental facility cleaning costs, pandemic related supplies and personal protective equipment for employees, among other costs; offset by economic relief provided by foreign governments.
(e) Represents the partial write off of deferred financing costs for the temporary reduction in borrowing capacity related to the First Amendment excluded from our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA because the loss is nonrecurring.
(f) Represents a portion of our nonrefundable prepaid research and development costs advanced to our unconsolidated affiliate in the fourth quarter 2019 and excluded from our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA in the same period because the costs represent research and development activities of the affiliate that had not occurred as of December 31, 2019. These costs were included with our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 when the costs were incurred at our unconsolidated affiliate.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue of $288.2 million for 2020 decreased by $100.2 million versus 2019, primarily due to lower average prices and lower sales volumes, driven by a decrease in customer demand related to COVID-19.
Gross Margin
Gross margin of $36.8 million for 2020 decreased by $78.1 million versus 2019. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to lower average prices, lower sales volumes and increased costs due to the financial impact of increased third-party lithium carbonate usage and incremental COVID-19 costs to implement safety protocols.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses of $44.6 million for 2020 increased by $4.1 million compared to 2019. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to a nonrecurring $2.3 million employee bonus adjustment credit received from FMC in the prior year, an increase in mark-to-market loss on Livent common stock held in the Livent NQSP of $0.9 million and accelerated depreciation of $0.9 million due to the exit of our Shanghai office lease.
Restructuring and other charges
Restructuring and other charges were $10.7 million and $6.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. 2020 costs include $6.2 million of severance-related costs compared to $3.5 million of severance-related costs in 2019. 2020 costs also include increased legal fees related to IPO securities litigation, including a settlement accrual, net of insurance reimbursement, of $2.0 million as of December 31, 2020 not incurred in the prior year. See Note 7 to our consolidated and combined financial statements of this Form 10-K for details.
Separation-related costs
Separation-related costs for 2020 decreased by $7.4 million compared to 2019. 2020 Separation-related costs consisted primarily of legal fees related to the Nemaska arrangement offset by a $2.0 million gain on the settlement of the Nemaska long-term supply agreement. See Note 15 to our consolidated and combined financial statements of this Form 10-K for details about the Nemaska settlement. We incurred less legal and professional fees associated with the IPO and other Separation-related activities in the current year. Higher prior year Separation-related costs primarily consisted of information technology infrastructure and software costs incurred by Livent as a standalone entity in preparation for the termination of the TSA.
Interest expense
Interest expense of $3.7 million for 2020 is noncash amortization of debt discount and transaction costs related to the 2025 Notes which represents the excess interest over the amount of interest capitalized in accordance with U.S. GAAP for 2020. All of our interest was capitalized in 2019.
Income tax (benefit)/expense
Income tax benefit of $(6.5) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and income tax expense of $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, resulted in effective tax rate of 25.6% and 13.1%, respectively. The decrease in provision for income taxes was primarily due to a reduction in income before taxes from $57.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to loss before income taxes of $25.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in provision for income taxes was partially offset by the tax impacts associated with fluctuations in foreign currency remeasurement in Argentina. Refer to Note 9 for further information.
Net (loss)/income
Net loss of $18.9 million for 2020, compared to net income of $50.2 million in 2019, a decrease of $69.1 million from 2019, was primarily due to lower average prices and lower sales volumes, driven by a decrease in customer demand related to COVID-19 and increased costs due to the financial impact of increased third-party lithium carbonate usage and incremental COVID-19 costs to implement safety protocols.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our prospective success in funding our cash needs will depend on the strength of the lithium market and our continued ability to generate cash from operations and raise capital from other sources. Our primary sources of cash are currently generated from operations and borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, were $11.6 million and $16.8 million, respectively. Of the cash and cash equivalents balance at December 31, 2020, $10.6 million was held by our foreign subsidiaries. The cash held by foreign subsidiaries for permanent reinvestment is generally used to finance the subsidiaries’ operating activities and future foreign investments. We have not provided additional income taxes for any additional outside basis differences inherent in our investments in subsidiaries because the investments are essentially permanent in duration or we have concluded that no additional tax liability will arise upon disposal. We have concluded the Tax Act has not altered our assertion of identifying reinvested earnings. See Note 9 to the consolidated and combined financial statements included within this Form 10-K for more information.
2025 Notes
On June 25, 2020, we issued $225 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.125% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 in a private offering. On July 7, 2020 we issued an additional $20.75 million of the 2025 Notes to the initial purchasers under the Over-Allotment Option. Total net proceeds received including Over-Allotment Option were $238.2 million. The Company used the net proceeds received to repay amounts outstanding under its Revolving Credit Facility. The 2025 Notes were issued under the International Capital Market Association's Green Bond framework and followed the Green Bond Principles. See Note 9 to the consolidated and combined financial statements included within this Form 10-K for more details on the 2025 Notes.
Revolving Credit Facility
On September 28, 2018, we entered into a credit agreement among us and all of our U.S. subsidiaries as borrowers (the “Borrowers”), certain of our wholly owned subsidiaries as guarantors, the lenders party thereto (the “Lenders”), Citibank, N.A., as administrative agent, and certain other financial institutions party thereto, as joint lead arrangers (the “Credit Agreement”). The Credit Agreement provides for a $400 million senior secured revolving credit facility, $50 million of which is available for the issuance of letters of credit for the account of the Borrowers, with an option, subject to certain conditions and limitations, to increase the aggregate amount of the revolving credit commitments to $600 million (the “Revolving Credit Facility”). The issuance of letters of credit and the proceeds of revolving credit loans made pursuant to the Revolving Credit Facility are available, and will be used, for general corporate purposes, including capital expenditures and permitted acquisitions, of the Borrowers and their subsidiaries. See Note 9 to the consolidated and combined financial statements included within this Form 10-K for more information.
Amounts under the Revolving Credit Facility may be borrowed, repaid and re-borrowed from time to time until the final maturity date of the Revolving Credit Facility, which will be the fifth anniversary of the Revolving Credit Facility’s effective date. Voluntary prepayments and commitment reductions under the Revolving Credit Facility are permitted at any time without any prepayment premium upon proper notice and subject to minimum dollar amounts.
Revolving loans under the Credit Agreement will bear interest at a floating rate, which will be either a base rate or a Eurocurrency borrowing plus applicable margin. Base rate borrowings are defined as the greatest of the rate of interest announced publicly by Citibank, N.A. in New York City from time to time as its “base rate”; the federal funds effective rate plus 0.5%; or a Eurodollar rate for a one-month interest period plus 1%. The Eurocurrency borrowing will be defined as a Eurodollar rate for one, two, three or six months. The applicable margins for the two types of loans are set by reference to Livent’s leverage ratio, calculated by dividing our debt by our cash flows. Both the debt and cash flows used in this calculation are terms defined in the Credit Agreement. Each Borrower on a joint and several basis is required to pay a commitment fee quarterly in arrears on the average daily unused amount of each Lender’s revolving credit commitment at a rate equal to an applicable percentage based on the leverage ratio, as determined in accordance with the provisions of the Credit Agreement. The applicable margin and the commitment fee are subject to adjustment as provided in the Credit Agreement.
The Borrowers’ domestic material subsidiaries (the “Guarantors”) will guarantee the obligations of the Borrowers under the Revolving Credit Facility. The obligations of the Borrowers and the Guarantors are secured by all of the present and future assets of the Borrowers and the Guarantors, including the Borrowers’ facility and real estate in Bessemer City, North Carolina, subject to certain exceptions and exclusions as set forth in the Credit Agreement and other security and collateral documents.
Amendments to our Revolving Credit Facility
On May 6, 2020, we entered into the First Amendment to the Credit Agreement (the "First Amendment") with FMC Lithium USA Corp., the Guarantors, the Lenders and the Agent. Among other things, the First Amendment amended and restated the Original Credit Agreement to (i) increase our maximum net leverage ratio for the fiscal quarters ending June 30, 2020, September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020 from 3.5 to 6.0, (ii) put a cap of $325 million on our overall borrowings under the
Revolving Credit Facility until March 31, 2021, (iii) amend our negative covenant on indebtedness to permit unsecured indebtedness (including convertible debt) up to $350 million, (iv) amend our negative covenants on investments to permit additional investments in Minera del Altiplano S.A., our Argentine subsidiary, (v) restrict our ability to declare or pay cash dividends until March 31, 2021 and (vi) increase the applicable margin on our borrowings by 25 basis points, in each case as described in the First Amendment.
The foregoing description of the First Amendment does not purport to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the First Amendment, including the amended and restated Credit Agreement attached thereto, which is filed as Exhibit 10.1 to our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the three months ended March 31, 2020.
On August 3, 2020, we entered into the Second Amendment with FMC Lithium USA Corp., the Guarantors, the Lenders and the Agent. The Second Amendment amended the Credit Agreement, as previously amended by the First Amendment to replace our maximum total net leverage ratio of 6.0 for the fiscal quarters ending September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020 with a maximum first lien leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of 3.5. The maximum first lien leverage ratio of 3.5 will continue to apply for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2021 and for each fiscal quarter thereafter. The first lien leverage ratio as of any date is the ratio of financial covenant debt as of such date secured by a lien on any asset or property of Livent or its restricted subsidiaries on a pari passu or senior basis with the loans and commitments under the Credit Agreement, minus unrestricted cash and cash equivalents on our balance sheet as of such date, to Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization, as defined in the Credit Agreement, for the last four fiscal quarters ending on or before such date.
The foregoing description of the Second Amendment does not purport to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the Second Amendment and the Credit Agreement, which Second Amendment is filed as Exhibit 10.2 to our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the three months ended June 30, 2020.
We had $281.4 million and $154.6 million debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The Credit Agreement contains certain affirmative and negative covenants that are binding on the Borrowers and their subsidiaries, including, among others, restrictions (subject to exceptions and qualifications) on the ability of the Borrowers and their subsidiaries to create liens, to undertake fundamental changes, to incur debt, to sell or dispose of assets, to make investments, to make restricted payments such as dividends, distributions or equity repurchases, to change the nature of their businesses, to enter into transactions with affiliates and to enter into certain burdensome agreements. Among other restrictions, our Revolving Credit Facility contains financial covenants applicable to Livent and its consolidated subsidiaries related to leverage (measured as the ratio of debt to adjusted earnings) and interest coverage (measured as the ratio of adjusted earnings to interest expense). Our maximum allowable first lien leverage ratio is 3.5 as of December 31, 2020. Our minimum allowable interest coverage ratio is 3.5. We were in compliance with all covenants at December 31, 2020.
Statement of Cash Flows
Cash provided by operating activities was $6.3 million and $58.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The decrease in cash provided by operating activities for 2020 as compared to the cash provided by operating activities for 2019 was primarily driven by lower net income and a decrease in our accounts payables, partially offset by increased collections of our trade receivables in and a $23.7 million payment in the first quarter of 2019 to FMC related to Separation matters.
Cash required by investing activities of operations was $131.1 million and $190.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The decrease in cash required by investing activities for 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily due to the Company's election to suspend all capital expansion work globally in March 2020, resulting in decreased capital expenditures for production capacity of lithium carbonate and hydroxide.
Cash provided by financing activities was $119.1 million and $120.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
For the first half of 2020 and 2019, net cash proceeds for financing activities were provided primarily by net draws on our Revolving Credit Facility which were used for capital expenditures for production capacity of lithium carbonate and hydroxide. In the second half of 2020, the Company used the $238.2 million total net proceeds received for the 2025 Notes including Over-Allotment Option to repay amounts outstanding under its Revolving Credit Facility.
Other potential liquidity needs
We plan to meet our liquidity needs through available cash, cash generated from operations, borrowings under the committed Revolving Credit Facility, and other potential working capital financing strategies that may be available to us. At December 31, 2020, our remaining borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility, subject to meeting our debt covenants, was
$275.0 million, including letters of credit utilization. The First Amendment puts a cap of $325 million on our overall borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility until March 31, 2021.
We expect COVID-19 pandemic uncertainties and lithium market challenges to continue in 2021. Our net leverage ratio may increase during the next 12 months as it will continue to be determined, in large part, by our ability to manage the timing and amount of our capital expenditures, which is within our control; achieve forecasted operating results and to pursue other working capital financing strategies that may be available to us, which is less certain and outside our control. In March 2020, because of the significant practical constraints resulting from actions being taken by authorities around the world in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company elected to suspend all capital expansion work globally. Livent remains committed to its long-term expansion plans. The restart of its capital projects will be driven by improved pricing dynamics or firm long-term commitments from customers coupled with the absence of COVID-19 related restrictions.
The company remains focused on maintaining its financial flexibility and will continue to manage its cash flow and capital allocation decisions to navigate through this challenging environment.
We believe that our available cash and cash from operations, together with our borrowing availability under the Revolving Credit Facility and other potential working capital financing strategies that may be available to us, will provide adequate liquidity for the next 12 months. Access to capital and the availability of financing on acceptable terms in the future will be affected by many factors, including our credit rating, economic conditions, the COVID-19 pandemic and the overall liquidity of capital markets.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
As of December 31, 2020, our total significant committed contracts that we believe will affect cash over the next five years and thereafter are as follows:
_________________
(1) Represents certain of our raw material commercial contract purchase obligations that are enforceable and legally binding requirements contracts with specified quantities, pricing and timing of transactions.
(2) Represents the balance, as of December 31, 2020, of the Company's Revolving Credit Facility which matures in 2023 and the 2025 Notes which mature in 2025.
See Note 15 to our consolidated and combined financial statements included in this Form 10-K for more information.
Climate Change
The potential physical impacts of climate change on our operations are highly uncertain, and are specific to the geographic circumstances of areas in which we operate. These may include changes in rainfall and storm patterns and intensities, water shortages, changing sea levels and changing temperatures. These changes may have a material adverse effect on our operations, including brine production and transportation of raw materials.
A number of governmental bodies have introduced or are contemplating legislative and regulatory change in response to the potential impacts of climate change. Such legislation or regulation, if enacted, potentially could include provisions for a “cap and trade” system of allowances and credits or a carbon tax, among other provisions. There is also a potential for climate change legislation and regulation to adversely impact the cost of purchased energy and electricity.
The growing concerns about climate change and related increasingly stringent regulations may provide us with new or expanded business opportunities. We provide solutions to companies pursuing alternative fuel products and technologies (such as renewable fuels, gas-to-liquids and others), emission control technologies (including mercury emissions), alternative transportation vehicles and lithium-ion battery technologies and other similar solutions. As demand for, and legislation mandating or incentivizing the use of, alternative fuel technologies that limit or eliminate greenhouse gas emissions increases, we will continue to monitor the market and offer solutions where we have appropriate technology.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements and Regulatory Items
See Note 3 "Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements and Regulatory Items" to our consolidated and combined financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated and combined financial statements are prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. We have described our accounting policies in Note 2 "Principal Accounting Policies and Related Financial Information" to our consolidated and combined financial statements included in this Form 10-K. We have reviewed these accounting policies, identifying those that we believe to be critical to the preparation and understanding of our consolidated financial statements. We have reviewed these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. Critical accounting policies are central to our presentation of results of operations and financial condition in accordance with U.S. GAAP and require management to make estimates and judgments on certain matters. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, current conditions and other reasonable factors.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been uncertainty and disruption in the global economy and financial markets. The estimates used for, but not limited to, revenue recognition and the collectability of trade receivables, impairment and valuation of long-lived assets, and income taxes could be impacted. We have assessed the impact and are not aware of any specific events or circumstances that required an update to our estimates and assumptions or materially affected the carrying value of our assets or liabilities as of the date of issuance of this Form 10-K. These estimates may change as new events occur and additional information is obtained. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue recognition and trade receivables
Sale of Goods
Revenue from product sales is recognized when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring the promised goods to a customer, that is, when control of the good transfers to the customer. The customer is then invoiced at the agreed-upon price with payment terms generally ranging from 30 to 180 days.
In determining when the control of goods is transferred, we typically assess, among other things, the transfer of risk and title and the shipping terms of the contract. The transfer of title and risk typically occurs either upon shipment to the customer or upon receipt by the customer. As such, we typically recognize revenue when goods are shipped based on the relevant incoterm for the product order, or in some regions, when delivery to the customer’s requested destination has occurred. When we perform shipping and handling activities after the transfer of control to the customer (e.g., when control transfers prior to delivery), they are considered fulfillment activities, and accordingly, the costs are accrued for when the related revenue is recognized. For FOB shipping point terms, revenue is recognized at the time of shipment since the customer gains control at this point in time.
We record amounts billed for shipping and handling fees as revenue. Costs incurred for shipping and handling are recorded as costs of sales. Amounts billed for sales and use taxes, value-added taxes, and certain excise and other specific transactional taxes imposed on revenue-producing transactions are presented on a net basis and excluded from revenue in the consolidated and combined statements of operations. We record a liability until remitted to the respective taxing authority.
Variable Consideration
As a part of our customary business practice, we may offer sales incentives to our customers, such as volume discounts or rebates. Variable consideration given can differ by product. For all such contracts that include any variable consideration, we estimate the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price utilizing either the expected value method or the most likely amount method depending on the nature of the variable consideration. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will not occur. Although determining the transaction price requires significant judgment, we have significant historical experience with incentives provided to customers and estimating the expected consideration considering historical patterns of incentive payouts. These estimates are re-assessed each reporting period as required.
In addition to the variable consideration described above, in certain instances, we may require our customers to meet certain volume thresholds within their contract term. We estimate what amount of variable consideration should be included in the transaction price at contract inception and continually reassess this estimation each reporting period to determine situations when the minimum volume thresholds will not be met. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will not occur. In those circumstances, we apply the guidance on breakage and estimate the amount of the shortfall and recognize it over the remaining performance obligations in the contract.
Right of Return
We warrant to our customers that our products conform to mutually agreed product specifications. This offering is accounted for as a right of return and the transaction price is adjusted for an estimate of expected returns.
Contract Asset and Contract Liability Balances
We satisfy our obligations by transferring goods and services in exchange for consideration from customers. The timing of performance sometimes differs from the timing the associated consideration is received from the customer, thus resulting in the recognition of a contract liability. We recognize a contract liability if the customer’s payment of consideration is received prior to completion of our related performance obligation.
We periodically enter into prepayment arrangements with customers and receive advance payments for product to be delivered in future periods. These advance payments are recorded as deferred revenue and classified as “Advance payments from customers” on the consolidated balance sheet. Revenue associated with advance payments is recognized as shipments are made and title, ownership and control pass to the customer.
Trade Receivables
Trade receivables consist of amounts owed from customer sales and are recorded when revenue is recognized. The allowance for trade receivables represents our best estimate of the probable losses associated with potential customer defaults. In developing our allowance for trade receivables, we use a two stage process which includes calculating a general formula to develop an allowance to appropriately address the uncertainty surrounding collection risk of our entire portfolio and specific allowances for customers where the risk of collection has been reasonably identified either due to liquidity constraints or disputes over contractual terms and conditions.
Our method of calculating the general formula consists of estimating the recoverability of trade receivables based on historical experience, current collection trends, and external business factors such as economic factors, including regional bankruptcy rates, and political factors. Our analysis of trade receivable collection risk is performed quarterly, and the allowance is adjusted accordingly.
Impairments and valuation of long-lived assets
Our long-lived assets primarily include property, plant and equipment and intangible assets. The Company has no goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets as of December 31, 2020.
We test for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the net book value of our property, plant and equipment may not be recoverable from the estimated undiscounted expected future cash flows expected to result from their use and eventual disposition. In cases where the estimated undiscounted expected future cash flows are less than net book value, an impairment loss is recognized equal to the amount by which the net book value exceeds the estimated fair value of assets, which is based on discounted cash flows at the lowest level determinable. The estimated cash flows reflect our assumptions about selling prices, volumes, costs and market conditions over a reasonable period of time.
Income taxes
We have recorded a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets in certain jurisdictions to the amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized. In assessing the need for this allowance, we have considered a number of factors including future taxable income, the jurisdictions in which such income is earned and our ongoing tax planning strategies. In the event that we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would be charged to income in the period such determination was made. Similarly, should we conclude that we would be able to realize certain deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would increase income in the period such determination was made.
Additionally, we file income tax returns in the United States and various state and foreign jurisdictions, as part of a FMC legal entity for the period ended February 28, 2019. Certain income tax returns for FMC entities taxable in the U.S. and significant foreign jurisdictions are open for examination and adjustment. We assess our income tax positions and record a liability for all years open to examination based upon our evaluation of the facts, circumstances and information available at the reporting date.
For those tax positions where it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, we have recorded the largest amount of tax benefit with a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. We adjust these liabilities, if necessary, upon the completion of tax audits or changes in tax law.
See Note 9 to our consolidated and combined financial statements included in this Form 10-K for additional discussion surrounding income taxes.