Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and plan of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in Item 1A titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biotechnology company, focused on leveraging artificial intelligence (“A.I.”), machine learning and genomic data to streamline the drug development process and to identify the patients that will benefit from our targeted oncology therapies. Our portfolio of therapies consists of small molecules that others have tried, but failed, to develop into an approved commercialized drug, as well as new compounds that we are developing with the assistance of our proprietary A.I. platform and our biomarker driven approach. Our A.I. platform, known as RADR® , currently includes more than 1.2 billion data points, and uses big data analytics (combining molecular data, drug efficacy data, data from historical studies, data from scientific literature, phenotypic data from trials and publications, and mechanistic pathway data) and machine learning to rapidly uncover biologically relevant genomic signatures correlated to drug response, and then identify the cancer patients that we believe may benefit most from our compounds. This data-driven, genomically-targeted and biomarker-driven approach allows us to pursue a transformational drug development strategy that identifies, rescues or develops, and advances potential small molecule drug candidates at what we believe is a fraction of the time and cost associated with traditional cancer drug development.
Our strategy is to both develop new drug candidates using our RADR® platform, and other machine learning driven methodologies, and to pursue the development of drug candidates that have undergone previous clinical trial testing or that may have been halted in development or deprioritized because of insufficient clinical trial efficacy (i.e., a meaningful treatment benefit relevant for the disease or condition under study as measured against the comparator treatment used in the relevant clinical testing) or for strategic reasons by the owner or development team responsible for the compound. Importantly, these historical drug candidates appear to have been well-tolerated in many instances, and often have considerable data from previous toxicity, tolerability and ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion) studies that have been completed. Additionally, these drug candidates may also have a body of existing data supporting the potential mechanism(s) by which they achieve their intended biologic effect, but often require more targeted trials in a stratified group of patients to demonstrate statistically meaningful results. Our dual approach to both develop de-novo, biomarker-guided drug candidates and “rescue” historical drug-candidates by leveraging A.I., recent advances in genomics, computational biology and cloud computing is emblematic of a new era in drug development that is being driven by data-intensive approaches meant to de-risk development and accelerate the clinical trial process. In this context, we intend to create a diverse portfolio of oncology drug candidates for further development towards regulatory and marketing approval with the objective of establishing a leading A.I.-driven, methodology for treating the right patient with the right oncology therapy.
A key component of our strategy is to target specific cancer patient populations and treatment indications identified by leveraging our RADR®platform, a proprietary A.I. enabled engine created and owned by us. We believe the combination of our therapeutic area expertise, our A.I. expertise, and our ability to identify and develop promising drug candidates through our collaborative relationships with research institutions in selected areas of oncology gives us a significant competitive advantage. Our RADR® platform was developed and refined over the last four years and integrates millions of data points immediately relevant for oncology drug development and patient response prediction using artificial intelligence and proprietary machine learning algorithms. By identifying clinical candidates, together with relevant genomic and phenotypic data, we believe our approach will help us design more efficient pre-clinical studies, and more targeted clinical trials, thereby accelerating our drug candidates’ time to approval and eventually to market. Although we have not yet applied for or received regulatory or marketing approval for any of our drug candidates, we believe our RADR® platform has the ability to reduce the cost and time to bring drug candidates to specifically targeted patient groups. We believe we have developed a sustainable and scalable biopharma business model by combining a unique, oncology-focused big-data platform that leverages artificial intelligence along with active clinical and preclinical programs that are being advanced in targeted cancer therapeutic areas to address today’s treatment needs.
Our current portfolio consists of four compounds in active development: two drug candidates in clinical phases, one in preclinical studies and one in research optimization. All of these drug candidates are leveraging precision oncology, A.I. and genomic driven approaches to accelerate and direct development efforts. We currently have two drug candidates in clinical development, LP-100 and LP-300, where we are leveraging data from prior preclinical studies and clinical trials, along with insights generated from our A.I. platform, to target the types of tumors and patient groups that would be most responsive to the drug. Both LP-100 and LP-300 showed promise in important patient subgroups, but failed pivotal Phase III trials when the overall results did not meet the predefined clinical endpoints. We believe that this was due to a lack of biomarker-driven patient stratification. Additionally, we have one new drug candidate, LP-184, in preclinical development for two potentially distinct indications where we are leveraging machine learning and genomic data to streamline the drug development process and to identify the patients and cancer subtypes that will best benefit from the drug, if approved. As part of our antibody drug conjugate (ADC) program commenced in early 2021, we have initiated the optimization and evaluation of an antibody drug conjugate aimed at leveraging our LP-184 molecule in combination with an antibody for select solid tumors.
Our development strategy is to pursue an increasing number of oncology focused, molecularly targeted therapies where artificial intelligence and genomic data can help us provide biological insights, reduce the risk associated with development efforts and help clarify potential patient response. We plan on strategically evaluating these on a program-by-program basis as they advance into clinical development, either to be done entirely by us or with our licensing partners to maximize the commercial opportunity and reduce the time it takes to bring the right drug to the right patient
To date, except for a research grant in 2017, we have not generated any revenue, we have incurred net losses and our operations have been financed primarily by sales of our equity securities. Our net losses were approximately $5,908,000 and $2,428,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our net losses have primarily resulted from costs incurred in licensing and developing the drug candidates in our pipeline, planning, preparing and conducting preclinical studies, early stage clinical testing and general and administrative activities associated with our operations. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and corresponding increased operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue to develop our pipeline. Our costs may further increase as we conduct preclinical studies and clinical trials and potentially seek regulatory clearance for and prepare to commercialize our drug candidates. We expect to incur significant expenses to continue to build the infrastructure necessary to support our expanded operations, preclinical studies, clinical trials, commercialization, including manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution functions. We have experienced and will continue to experience increased costs associated with operating as a public company.
Our operations, including the development of our drug candidates, could be disrupted and materially adversely affected in the future by a pandemic, epidemic or outbreak of an infectious disease like the outbreak of COVID-19. For example, as a result of measures imposed by the governments in regions affected by COVID-19, businesses and schools have been suspended due to quarantines or “stay at home” orders intended to contain this outbreak. The spread of COVID-19 from China to other countries has resulted in the Director General of the World Health Organization declaring the outbreak of COVID-19 as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC), based on the advice of the Emergency Committee under the International Health Regulations (2005). On March 12, 2020, the President of the United States imposed international travel restrictions between the U.S. and Europe to supplement the existing international travel restrictions between the US and certain Asian countries and, on March 13, 2020, declared a national emergency in response to the likely spread of COVID-19. COVID-19 continues to spread globally and, as of December 31, 2020, has spread to over 150 countries, including the United States. U.S. and international stock markets continue to experience fluctuations and to be impacted from time to time by uncertainty associated with the impact of COVID-19 on the U.S., Chinese, European and other economies and the reduced levels of international travel experienced since early 2020. The Dow Industrial Average and other domestic and international stock indices experienced substantial fluctuations during 2020 largely attributed to assessments and expectations regarding the adverse effects of the pandemic on the world’s economies. We are continuing to assess our business plans and the impact COVID-19 may have on our operations and plans, including the ability to advance the development of our drug candidates, but no assurances can be given that this analysis will enable us to avoid part or all of any impact from the spread of COVID-19 or its consequences, including downturns in business sentiment generally or in our sector in particular. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our operations and plans will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the outbreak, new information which may emerge concerning the severity and treatment of COVID-19, and preventative or protective actions that governments, businesses, and organizations performing research and clinical trials may take in respect of COVID-19, among others. The existence and spread of an infectious disease, including COVID-19, may also result in the inability of our suppliers to deliver components or raw materials on a timely basis or materially and adversely affect our collaborators and out-license partner’s ability to perform and advance preclinical and nonclinical studies and clinical trials. For example, Allarity Therapeutics (formerly known as Oncology Venture) has informed us that continuing enrollment in the Phase II clinical trial for LP-100 (Irofulven) has slowed during the pandemic. The timing of non-clinical research studies for our drug candidates by collaborators and service providers also slowed during the second and third quarters of 2020 in connection with the pandemic.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenues
We did not recognize revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of our operating expenses that are not included in the direct costs of production or cost of goods sold which include:
● corporate office overhead expenses such as salaries of administrative staff and corporate officers;
● legal expenses;
● accounting expenses; and
● rent, utilities and supplies.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the research and development of our preclinical and clinical candidates, which include:
● expenses incurred towards consultants, laboratories and investigators that conduct our preclinical or clinical research activities; and
● the cost of acquiring and developing preclinical study materials and lab supplies. We expense research and development costs to operations as incurred.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred an aggregate of approximately $2,243,000 and $953,000, respectively, in research and development expenses related to the development of LP-100, LP- 184, LP 300 and our RADR®platform. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase as we plan for and commence our clinical trials of LP-184 and LP-300.
Our research and development costs by project category for the year ended December 31, 2020 are as follows:
*As a private company, we did not track our research and development costs by project category primarily because research and development salary expenses were not further allocated to each project. As a result, our tracking of research and development costs by project category commenced during the three months ended June 30, 2020 in connection with the Company’s IPO.
We expect that our research and development expenses will increase as we plan for and commence our clinical trials of LP-184 and LP-300.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we cannot determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of these or other current or future clinical trials of LP-184 and LP-300 or our other therapeutic candidates. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for LP-184 and LP-300 or any of our other drug candidates. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our therapeutic candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including the uncertainties of future clinical and preclinical studies, uncertainties in clinical trial enrollment rate and significant and changing government regulation. In addition, the probability of success for each drug candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for employees in executive, finance and administration, corporate development and administrative support functions, including stock-based compensation expenses and benefits. Other significant general and administrative expenses include accounting and legal services, the cost of various consultants, occupancy costs and information systems costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase as we continue to operate as a public company. We expect increased administrative costs resulting from our anticipated clinical trials and the potential commercialization of our drug candidates. We believe that these increases will likely include increased costs for director and officer liability insurance, hiring additional personnel to support future market research and future product commercialization efforts and increased fees for outside consultants, attorneys and accountants. We also expect to continue to incur increased costs to comply with corporate governance, internal controls, investor relations and disclosures and similar requirements applicable to a public company.
Financial Operations Overview and Analysis for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
To date, except for a research grant in 2017, we have not generated any revenue since our inception.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $2,189,965 or 149%, from $1,475,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $3,664,965 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in corporate insurance expense of approximately $1,077,000, an increase in general and administrative related stock option compensation expense of approximately $604,000, an increase in general and administrative labor expense of $512,000, an increase in business development expense of $128,000, increases in NASDAQ and othering filing fees of $73,000, and an increase in other professional services of $70,000. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in travel and relocation expense of approximately $147,000 and a decrease in legal and patent fees of approximately $146,000.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $1,290,040, or 135%, from $953,185 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $2,243,225 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in research and development labor expense of approximately $489,000, an increase in research and development related stock option compensation expense of approximately $470,000, an increase in research study expenses of approximately $194,000, an increase in product candidate manufacturing expense of approximately $70,000, and an increase in non-manufacturing consulting expense of approximately $43,000.
On September 3, 2018, Lantern Pharma Limited, our wholly owned subsidiary, was awarded a grant by the UK government in the form of state aid under the Commission Regulations (EU) No. 651/2014 of 17 June 2014 (the “General Block Exemption”), Article 25 Aid for research and development projects, state aid notification no. SA.40154. The grant was awarded to conduct research and development activities for the prostate cancer biomarker analysis of our LP-184 drug candidate. Following our research and development activities in Northern Ireland, the grant will reimburse 50% of our research and development expenses not exceeding GBP 24,215 of vouched and approved expenditures within specific categories and will remain in force for a period of five years. No revenue has been recognized from this grant through December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, our operations have been financed primarily through the sale of equity securities, and, to a lesser extent, a grant received by us from Massachusetts Life Sciences Center in 2017. We have not yet generated any revenues from operations, other than revenues from a research grant in 2017, and we have not yet achieved profitability. We expect that general and administrative expenses and our research and development expenses will continue to increase and, as a result, we will need to generate significant product revenues to achieve profitability.
We incurred net losses of $5,908,190 and $2,428,185 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had working capital of approximately $19,685,000 and $744,000, respectively.
On May 1, 2020 (the “Origination Date”), we received $108,500 in aggregate loan proceeds (the “PPP Loan”) from JPMorgan Chase Bank (the “Lender”) pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act. As of December 31, 2020, we expect to meet the requirements of loan forgiveness under the stipulations of the program. We plan to file for forgiveness under this loan within the first half of 2021. In the event we do not meet the requirements of loan forgiveness, the PPP Loan bears interest at a fixed rate of 1.0% per annum. Payments of principal and interest were deferred for the first six months following the Origination Date, with the PPP Loan to mature two years after the Origination Date. The guidance under the Paycheck Protection Program was later updated so that deferral of payments of principal and interest were extended to ten months after completion of the covered period of 24 weeks and maturity was extended past two years. We continue to monitor further development and guidance related to the Paycheck Protection Program terms.
On June 15, 2020, we completed an initial public offering of 1,750,000 shares of our common stock at $15.00 per share, for gross proceeds of $26,250,000, before deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses, which substantially contributed to our liquidity.
As of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $19,229,000 and $1,232,000, respectively. In January of 2021, we completed an additional offering with gross proceeds of approximately $69,000,000. We believe that proceeds from this offering, based on the sale of 4,928,571 shares of common stock at the public offering price of $14.00 per share, together with our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020, and our anticipated expenditures and capital commitments for the calendar year 2021 and the first half of 2022, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least 12 months from the date of this report.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flow for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $5,651,621 compared to $2,127,923 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was primarily the result of the increase in the net loss together with increases in prepaid expenses.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $16,137, compared to $5,717 used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $23,664,960 during the year ended December 31, 2020, attributable primarily to net proceeds from our initial public offering. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $2,920,507, attributable to the sale of 658,571 shares of Series A preferred stock and warrants to purchase Series A preferred stock for proceeds of approximately $3,455,000, of which approximately $2,920,000 consisted of cash and $535,000 consisted of the conversion of Simple Agreement for Future Equity (“SAFE”) agreements to Series A Preferred Stock.
Operating Capital and Capital Expenditure Requirements
We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing operating losses at least for the next several years as we commence our clinical trials of LP-184 and LP-300, pursue development of our other drug candidates, and seek potential future marketing approval for our drug candidates which could be several years in the future, if at all. We do not expect to generate revenue, other than possible license revenue, unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for our therapeutic candidates. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our planned clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities.
We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all of our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we:
● continue the development of our drug candidates;
● initiate preclinical studies and clinical trials for any additional indications for our current drug candidates and any future drug candidates that we may pursue;
● continue to build our portfolio of drug candidates through the acquisition or in-license of additional drug candidates or technologies;
● continue to develop, maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● pursue regulatory approvals for those of our current and future drug candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
● ultimately establish a sales, marketing, distribution and other commercial infrastructure to commercialize any drug candidate for which we may obtain marketing approval;
● hire additional clinical, regulatory, scientific and accounting personnel;
● incur additional legal, accounting and other expenses in operating as a public company; and
● continue to develop, maintain, and expand our RADR® platform.
We expect that we will need to obtain substantial additional funding in order to complete our clinical trials. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of common stock, convertible securities or other equity securities, the ownership interests of our existing stockholders may be materially diluted and the terms of these securities could include liquidation or other preferences that could adversely affect the rights of our existing stockholders. In addition, debt financing, if available, would result in increased fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we could be forced to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or commercialization of LP-184 and LP-300 and/or other drug candidates, seek collaborators at an earlier stage than otherwise would be desirable or on terms that are less favorable than might otherwise be available, and relinquish or license, potentially on unfavorable terms, our rights to LP-184 and LP-300 or other drug candidates that we otherwise would seek to develop or commercialize ourselves.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC rules.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting standards in the United States of America. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included as part of this report. We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent liabilities at the dates of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Significant areas of estimation include determining the deferred tax asset valuation allowance and the inputs in determining the fair value of equity-based awards and warrants issued. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses are expensed as incurred. Costs to acquire technologies, including licenses, that are utilized in research and development and that have no alternative future use are expensed when incurred.
Stock-based Compensation
We have granted stock options to our employees under our equity incentive plan. Stock-based compensation expense from awards granted under our plan is allocated over the required service period over which those stock option awards vest.
The stock option awards are valued at fair value on the date of grant and that fair value is recognized over the requisite service period. The estimated fair value of these stock option awards was determined using the Black Scholes option pricing model on the date of grant. Some of these grants occurred at a time when we were not a public company. Significant judgment and estimates were used to estimate the fair value of these awards, as they occurred when our stock was not publicly traded.
Our estimation of fair value of the awards considered our recent transactions, relevant industry and comparable public company data. Since, at the time of many of the grants, we were a non-public entity, the majority of the inputs used to estimate the fair value of the common stock option awards are considered level 3 due to their unobservable nature. Each option award is subject to specified vesting schedules and requirements. Compensation expense is charged to us over the required service period to earn the award which is expected to be up to four years, subject to the achievement of time and event-based vesting requirements. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we have incurred share-based compensation expense related to equity awards totaling approximately $1,192,000 and $118,000, respectively.
Accounting Pronouncements
New Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
Current Expected Credit Loss
In June 2016 the FASB issued Accounting Standard Update (ASU) 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (Topic 326). This introduces new methodology for recognition of credit losses - the current expected credit loss (“CECL”) method. The CECL method requires the recognition of all losses expected over the life of a financial instrument upon origination or purchase of the instrument, unless the company elects to recognize such instruments at fair value with changes in profit and loss. CECL is effective for the Company on January 1, 2023. The Company does not anticipate a material impact from the adoption of this new standard on its financial statements.
Income Taxes
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12: Income Taxes (Topic 740) - Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. This ASU simplifies accounting for income taxes by removing the exception to the incremental approach for intraperiod tax allocation when there is a loss from continuing operations and income or gain for other items, the exception to the requirement to recognize a deferred tax liability for equity method investments when a foreign subsidiary becomes an equity method investment, exception to the ability not to recognize a deferred tax liability for a foreign subsidiary when a foreign equity method investment becomes a subsidiary, and the exception to the general methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period when a year-to-date loss exceeds the anticipated loss for the year. This ASU also includes other requirements related to franchise tax, goodwill as part of a business combination, consolidations, changes in tax laws, and affordable housing projects. ASU 2019-12 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within that fiscal year. Early adoption is permitted for periods in which financial statements have not yet been issued. We do not anticipate a material impact from the adoption of this new standard on our financial statements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
Leases
In February 2016 the FASB issued ASU 2016-02: Leases. The ASU introduces a lessee model that results in most leases impacting the balance sheet. The ASU addresses other concerns related to the current lease model. Under ASU 2016-02, lessees will be required to recognize for all leases with terms longer than 12 months, at the commencement date of the lease, a lease liability, which is a lessee’s obligation to make lease payments arising from a lease measured on a discounted basis, and a right-to-use (ROU) asset, which is an asset that represents the lessee’s right to use or control the use of a specified asset for the lease term. Leases will be classified as either finance or operating, with classification affecting the pattern of expense recognition.
In July 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-10 “Codification Improvements to Topic 842, Leases.” This ASU affects narrow aspects of the guidance issued in the amendments in ASU 2016-02 including those regarding residual value guarantees, rate implicit in the lease, lessee reassessment of lease classification, lessor reassessment of lease term and purchase option, variable lease payments that depend on an index or a rate, investment tax credits, lease term and purchase option, transition guidance for amounts previously recognized in business combinations, certain transition adjustments, transition guidance for leases previously classified as capital leases under Topic 840, transition guidance for modifications to leases previously classified as direct financing or sales-type leases under Topic 840, transition guidance for sale and leaseback transactions, impairment of net investment in the lease, unguaranteed residual asset, effect of initial direct costs on rate implicit in the lease, and failed sale and leaseback transactions.
We adopted ASC 2018-10 Topic 842 effective January 1, 2019 and elected the short-term lease recognition exemption for all leases that qualify. For those leases that qualify, the Company will not recognize ROU assets or lease liabilities, and this includes not recognizing ROU assets or lease liabilities for existing short-term leases of those assets in transition. This practical expedient was elected to not separate lease and non-lease components for its office space leases. The adoption of this new standard did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements as the Company did not have any leases that have terms of longer than 12 months.
Compensation - Stock Compensation
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-07: Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share- Based Payment Accounting. This ASU expands the scope of Topic 718 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from non-employees, and as a result, the accounting for share-based payments to non-employees will be substantially aligned. ASU 2018-07 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within that fiscal year, early adoption is permitted but no earlier than an entity’s adoption date of Topic 606. We do not believe there has been a material impact from the adoption of this new accounting guidance on our consolidated financial statements and related footnote disclosures.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure About Market Risk
Our primary exposure to market risk is interest expense sensitivity, which is affected by changes in the general level of U.S. interest rates. Historically, we have raised capital through the issuance of equity securities. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no long-term debt outstanding, other than our PPP Loan Agreement entered into in May 2020.
We do not believe that our cash has significant risk of default or illiquidity. While we believe our cash does not contain excessive risk, we cannot provide absolute assurance that in the future our investments will not be subject to adverse changes in market value. In addition, we maintain significant amounts of cash at one or more financial institutions that are in excess of federally insured limits.
We do not participate in any foreign currency hedging activities and we do not have any other derivative financial instruments.
Inflation generally affects us by increasing our cost of labor and clinical trial costs. We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our results of operations during the periods presented.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies.
We have chosen to opt out of the extended transition periods available to emerging growth companies under the JOBS Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that our decision to opt out of the extended transition periods for complying with new or revised accounting standards is irrevocable.
Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we have elected to rely on the other exemptions available under the JOBS Act, including without limitation, (i) providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and (ii) complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; (ii) the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of the completion of our initial public offering, or December 31, 2025; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years; or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC.