Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on March 17, 2016 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to utilize cash derived from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the private placement of the Private Units, our securities, debt or a combination of cash, securities and debt, in effecting our Business Combination.
Recent Developments
Proposed Business Combination with Lottery.com
On February 21, 2021, we entered into a business combination agreement (the “Merger Agreement”) with Trident Merger Sub II Corp. (“Merger Sub”) and AutoLotto, Inc. (“Lottery.com”). Upon the closing (the “Closing”) of the business combination with Lottery.com, Merger Sub will merge with and into Lottery.com, with Lottery.com as the surviving company, continuing as our wholly owned subsidiary, following the transaction and the separate existence of Merger Sub shall cease. At the Closing, each share of Lottery.com common stock issued and outstanding as of immediately prior to the Closing shall be converted into the right to receive the Per Share Merger Consideration. “Per Share Merger Consideration” means the quotient obtained by dividing (a) 40,000,000 shares of our common stock by (b) the aggregate number of shares of Lottery.com common stock (including shares issued upon the conversion or exercise of Lottery.com convertible securities) issued and outstanding as of immediately prior to the Closing (the “Lottery.com Shares”). The Per Share Merger Consideration shall be reduced by the number of shares of our common stock equal to the quotient of (i) the amount by which Net Indebtedness exceeds $10,000,000, as mutually agreed between us and Lottery.com (each acting reasonably), divided by (ii) 11.00. “Net Indebtedness” means the amount equal to Lottery.com’s Indebtedness, less cash and cash equivalents. For the avoidance of doubt, Lottery.com’s Indebtedness shall not include current liabilities or any intercompany Indebtedness between or among Lottery.com and any of its subsidiaries.
The holders of the Lottery.com Shares (the “Sellers”) will also be entitled to receive up to 6,000,000 additional shares of our common stock (the “Seller Earnout Shares”) that may be issuable from time to time as set forth below. The aggregate value of the consideration to be paid by us in the business combination (excluding the Seller Earnout Shares) is approximately $444 million (calculated as follows: 40,000,000 shares of our common stock to be issued to the Sellers, multiplied by $11.00). Upon the Closing, we will change our name to “Lottery.com.”
If, at any time on or prior to December 31, 2021, the daily volume-weighted average price of shares of our common stock equals or exceeds $13.00 per share for 20 of any 30 consecutive trading days commencing after the Closing, each Seller shall receive its pro rata portion of 3,000,000 Seller Earnout Shares and Vadim Komissarov, Ilya Ponomarev and Marat Rosenberg (the “Founder Holders”) shall receive an aggregate of 2,000,000 shares of our common stock. If, at any time on or prior to December 31, 2022, the daily volume-weighted average price of shares of our common stock equals or exceeds $16.00 per share for 20 of any 30 consecutive trading days commencing after the Closing, each Seller shall receive its pro rata portion of 3,000,000 Seller Earnout Shares and the Founder Holders shall receive an aggregate of 2,000,000 shares of our common stock. The Seller Earnout Shares then earned and issuable shall be issued to the Sellers on a pro-rata basis based on the percentage of the Lottery.com Shares owned by them immediately prior to the Closing.
The parties agreed that immediately following the Closing, our board of directors will consist of five directors, four of which will be designated by Lottery.com and one of which will be designated by us, such appointment by us to be an independent director. The boards of directors of each of us and Lottery.com have unanimously approved this business combination. The transaction will require the approval of our stockholders and of Lottery.com, the effectiveness of a registration statement on Form S-4 to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) in connection with the transaction, satisfaction of the conditions stated in the Merger Agreement and other customary closing conditions.
Extensions of Time Period to Complete a Business Combination
On November 26, 2019, we held our Annual Meeting of the Stockholders (the “Annual Meeting”) at which the stockholders approved a proposal to amend our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation (the “Charter Amendment”) to extend the period of time for which we are required to complete a Business Combination two times for an additional 90 days each time to June 1, 2020 (the termination date as so extended, the “Extended Termination Date”). Our stockholders were able to elect to redeem their shares in connection with the Annual Meeting for a pro rata portion of the amount then on deposit in the trust account ($10.00 per share, plus any pro rata interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay franchise and income taxes). With respect to public shares not redeemed in connection with the Annual Meeting, we agreed to make a cash contribution of $500,000 to the trust account for each 90-day extension. As of March 31, 2020, we had contributed an aggregate of $1,000,015 to the trust account and extended the time to complete a Business Combination to June 1, 2020.
In connection with the approval of the Charter Amendment, stockholders elected to redeem an aggregate of 13,081,434 shares of our common stock. As a result, an aggregate of approximately $137,130,484 (or approximately $10.48 per share) was removed from our trust account to pay such stockholders, and 13,224,816 shares of common stock were then issued and outstanding following such redemption.
On May 28, 2020, we held a Special Meeting of the Stockholders at which the stockholders approved a proposal to amend our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation (the “Second Charter Amendment”) to extend the period of time for which we are required to complete a Business Combination to September 1, 2020 (the “Second Extended Date”). We made a cash contribution of $962,476 to the trust account for the three-month extension period. In addition, the stockholders elected to redeem an aggregate of 627,059 shares of our common stock. As a result, an aggregate of $6,666,775 (or approximately $10.63 per share) was removed from our trust account to pay such stockholders and 12,597,757 shares of common stock were then issued and outstanding following such redemption.
On August 28, 2020, we held a Special Meeting of the Stockholders at which the stockholders approved a proposal to amend our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation (the “Third Charter Amendment”) to extend the period of time for which we are required to complete a Business Combination to December 1, 2020 (the “Third Extended Date”). We made a cash contribution of $867,971 to the trust account for the three-month extension period. In addition, the stockholders elected to redeem an aggregate of 630,037 shares of our common stock. As a result, an aggregate of $6,781,851 (or approximately $10.76 per share) was removed from our trust account to pay such stockholders and 11,967,720 shares of common stock were issued and outstanding following such redemption as of December 31, 2020.
On November 30, 2020, we held a Special Meeting of Stockholders, pursuant to which the stockholders approved the extension to the Third Extended Date from December 1, 2020 to March 1, 2021, with an ability to further extend for an additional three months to June 1, 2021 (the “Fourth Extended Date”) if approved by our board of directors. We agreed to contribute $0.05 for each Public Share outstanding that was not redeemed for each month of the extension going forward. On December 1, 2020, we contributed an aggregate of $289,323 to the trust account. On February 26, 2021, our board of directors approved the extension of the Fourth Extended Date to June 1, 2021 to permit sufficient time for us to consummate our proposed business combination with Lottery.com, including filing a registration statement on Form S-4 that will include a proxy statement.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering and, after our Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination and activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of Lottery.com. Following the Initial Public Offering, we do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $809,047, which consists of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $348,425, refund of the tender bid of subsidiary of $11,180, and a provision for income taxes of $217,086, offset by operating costs of $1,385,738.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had net income of $2,533,106, which consists of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $4,324,060 offset by operating costs of $1,100,138 and a provision for income taxes of $690,816.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $63,405,336 (including approximately $1,537,000 of interest income). Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used to pay taxes. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we withdrew $490,865 of interest earned on the trust account to pay our tax obligations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $1,848,754. Net loss of $809,047 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $348,425 and a deferred tax benefit of $217,086, offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities which provided $474,196 of cash for operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $1,525,377. Net income of $2,533,106 was the result of interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $4,324,060 and a deferred tax provision of $851, principally offset by cash used in operating activities and taxes payable. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $266,428 of cash for operating activities.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account to acquire a target business or businesses and to pay our expenses relating thereto, including a deferred underwriting fee payable to our underwriters. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to effect a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account as well as any other net proceeds not expended will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $972,787 held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
On December 17, 2019, Viktoria Group, LLC, a company owned by Vadim Komissarov, loaned us $180,000 to fund our working capital requirements and finance transaction expenses in connection with a Business Combination. The loan was non-interest bearing and payable on December 2, 2020. We repaid the loan on June 18, 2020.
On January 30, 2020, VK Consulting loaned us $425,000 to fund our working capital requirements and finance transaction expenses in connection with a Business Combination. The promissory note is non-interest bearing and currently payable on demand.
On February 7, 2020, May 15, 2020 and August 27, 2020, BGV Group Limited loaned us an aggregate of $3,400,000 to fund our working capital requirements and finance transaction expenses in connection with a Business Combination. The promissory notes are non-interest bearing and currently payable on demand.
On November 27, 2020, one of our affiliates loaned us an aggregate of $150,000 to fund the our working capital requirements and finance transaction expenses in connection with a Business Combination. The loans are non-interest bearing and payable on May 27, 2021.
On November 30, 2020 and December 28, 2020, one of our affiliates loaned us an aggregate of $1,100,000 to fund our working capital requirements and finance transaction expenses in connection with a Business Combination. The loans are non-interest bearing and are currently payable on demand.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, certain of our initial stockholders, our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds from time to time or at any time as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amount, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used to repay such loaned amounts. Up to $200,000 of such loans may be convertible into Private Units at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Private Units. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans.
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our initial stockholders, officers or directors. Our initial stockholders, officers or directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through June 1, 2021, the date that we will be required to cease all operations, except for the purpose of winding up, if a Business Combination is not consummated. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay VK Consulting an aggregate monthly fee of $7,500 for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us. We began incurring these fees on May 30, 2018 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination or our liquidation.
The underwriter is entitled to a deferred fee of two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, or $5,031,250. The deferred fee will be paid in cash upon the closing of a Business Combination from the amounts held in the trust account, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
In addition, we have agreed to pay the underwriter a warrant solicitation fee of five percent (5%) of the exercise price of each Public Warrant exercised during the period commencing thirty days after the consummation of the Business Combination, including warrants acquired by security holders in the open market, but excluding warrants exercised during the 30 day period following notice of a proposed redemption. The warrant solicitation fee will be payable in cash. There is no limitation on the maximum warrant solicitation fee payable to the underwriter, except to the extent it is limited by the number of Public Warrants outstanding.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net (Loss) Income Per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net (loss) income per common share, basic and diluted for common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the trust account, net of applicable taxes, if any, by the weighted average number of shares of common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding for the period. Net (loss) income per common share, basic and diluted for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net loss less income attributable to common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.