Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in this Annual Report. This Annual Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, such statements are subject to the “safe harbor” created by those sections and involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements are based on our management’s beliefs and assumptions and on information available to our management as of the date hereof. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements, accordingly, you should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update these forward-looking statements publicly, or to update the reasons actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements, even if new information becomes available in the future. Such factors may be amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impact on our business and the global economy.
Overview
Lumos Pharma, Inc. is a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company. References in this report to “us,” “we,” “our,” “the Company,” or “Lumos” are to Lumos Pharma, Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. With our principal executive offices located in Austin, Texas and additional executive and administrative offices located in Ames, Iowa, we are engaged in advancing our clinical program and focused on identifying, acquiring, developing, and the commercialization of novel products and new therapies for people with rare diseases on a global level, for which there is currently a significant unmet need for safe and effective therapies. Our common stock is listed on the Nasdaq and trades under the ticker symbol “LUMO”.
We entered into the Merger between the Company, formerly known as NewLink, Merger Sub, and Private Lumos, which has since been renamed “Lumos Pharma Sub, Inc.” The Merger closed on March 18, 2020, and Merger Sub merged with and into Private Lumos, with Private Lumos surviving as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. Immediately prior to the closing of the Merger, the shares of NewLink common stock were adjusted with a reverse split ratio of 1-for-9. Under the terms of the Merger, Private Lumos stockholders received an aggregate of 4,146,398 shares of our common stock (after giving effect to the reverse split). Immediately following the reverse stock split and the completion of the Merger, there were 8,292,803 shares of our common stock outstanding, of which approximately 50% was held by each of Private Lumos and NewLink security holders.
The Merger was accounted for as a reverse asset acquisition as NewLink did not meet the definition of a business pursuant to Topic 805, Business Combinations, because NewLink did not have the ability to generate outputs. Private Lumos was deemed to be the accounting acquirer because immediately following the Merger: (i) Lumos stockholders owned approximately 50% of outstanding common stock of the Company, (ii) the board of directors (the “Board”) consists of three members designated by Private Lumos, three members designated by NewLink and a seventh independent member unanimously appointed by the Board and (iii) the Company is led by Private Lumos’ then current chief executive officer and chief scientific officer, with other current members of senior management from both Private Lumos and NewLink. Accordingly, for accounting purposes: (i) the assets acquired and liabilities assumed were recorded based on their estimated fair values on the Merger date (ii) the reported historical operating results of the combined company prior to the Merger will be those of Private Lumos and not of NewLink after retroactively giving effect to the common stock exchange ratio, reverse stock split and change in par value for all periods presented, and (iii) for periods prior to the transaction, shareholders’ authorized capital of the combined company is presented based on the historical authorized capital of NewLink.
Since the consummation of the Merger, we have focused our efforts on the development of Private Lumos’ sole product candidate, LUM-201, a potential oral therapy for PGHD and other rare endocrine disorders.
PGHD is a rare endocrine disorder occurring in approximately one in 3,500 persons aged birth to 17 years. Causes of PGHD can be congenital (children are born with the condition), acquired (brain tumor, head injuries or other causes), iatrogenic (induced by medical treatment) or idiopathic (of unknown cause). Children with untreated PGHD will have significant growth failure (potential adult heights significantly less than five feet and may have abnormal body composition with decreased bone mineralization, decreased lean body mass and increased fat mass).
The main therapeutic goal in PGHD is to restore growth, enabling short children to achieve normal height and prevent complications that could involve metabolic abnormalities, cognitive deficiencies and reduced quality of life. Current treatment of PGHD is limited to daily subcutaneous injections of rhGH with a treatment cycle lasting up to an average of seven years. Poor compliance with daily rhGH injections during treatment can result in an adverse impact on growth.
LUM-201 Growth Hormone Secretagogue
Our pipeline is focused on the development of an orally administered small molecule, LUM-201, which is a GH secretagogue, also called ibutamoren, for rare endocrine disorders where injectable rhGH is currently approved. LUM-201 is a tablet formulation that will be administered orally once daily and potentially provides a new therapeutic approach to the 35-year old standard of care (subcutaneous injectable rhGH) for treating rare endocrine disorders associated with GH deficiencies.
LUM-201 is intended to provide an oral treatment to stimulate the release of endogenous GH in PGHD patients who have a functional but reduced hypothalamic pituitary GH axis and are expected to respond to LUM-201. We believe this group represents 50% to 60% of PGHD patients. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we launched our OraGrowtH Trials program to study the effects of LUM-201 in PGHD and initiated our Phase 2b Trial with the opening of the initial sites participating in this study. We anticipate data read out for the OraGrowtH210 Trial mid-year 2022.
We also plan to initiate a second concurrent trial of LUM-201 in PGHD during the second quarter of 2021, exploring the effects of the mechanism of action of LUM-201 in amplifying the pulsatile secretion of growth hormone. In February 2021, we were notified of a fire at the San Borja Arriaran Hospital in Santiago, Chile. This location is the clinical site for the OraGrowtH212 Trial. This will delay the timing of the initiation of the OraGrowtH212 Trial, however, we continue to work with our local partners to advance the trial. While estimates of the potential delay are not yet available as cleanup and restoration work continues, we antucuoate\ the trial will be initiated during the second quarter of 2021. As we have previously stated, this trial is not on the critical path for regulatory approval of LUM-201 and we do not anticipate the fire will cause any delays to our previously stated regulatory approval timeline. We are exploring alternate sites to conduct the trial in the event that the original site is unable to proceed in a timely manner.
We are also in the planning stages for developing LUM-201 for two additional indications. Depending on the outcome of data developed and identification of the most efficacious dose in the Phase 2b Trial and the timing of such data, we plan to initiate separate Phase 2 clinical trials to study the effects of LUM-201 for Turner Syndrome and SGA in a certain subset of affected patients.
On August 12, 2020, we entered into the Lumos Merck Agreement Amendment with Merck, pursuant to which we obtained from Merck a worldwide, non-exclusive, sublicensable (subject to Merck’s consent in the United States, specified major European countries and Japan, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld) license under the specified patents and know-how that are the subject of our exclusive license to develop, manufacture and commercialize LUM-201 for diagnostic purposes, excluding Autism Spectrum Disorders. Additionally, we and Merck agreed that, among other things, (a) our sublicensees have the right to grant further sublicenses (subject to Merck’s prior written consent, not to be unreasonably withheld), and (b) if we provide Merck with a notice that we intend to enter into a development or commercial arrangement with a third party with respect to LUM-201 for the treatment or prevention of any and all indications (excluding Autism Spectrum Disorders) in the United States, specified European countries or Japan, and either Merck does not submit terms for such arrangement within a specified period of time or we and Merck do not (despite good faith negotiations) enter into a definitive agreement with Merck for such arrangement within a specified period of time after Merck’s submission of such terms, then we have the right, for a specified period of time thereafter, to enter into a development or commercial arrangement with any third party with respect to LUM-201, without having to submit a new notice to Merck with respect to such arrangement, and if any such third party agreement is entered into, such third party may hire a contract sales force for LUM-201 without Merck’s prior written consent.
NewLink’s Legacy Oncology Candidates
In connection with the Merger, we acquired NewLink’s small-molecule product candidates. These product candidates, indoximod, NLG802 (a prodrug of indoximod) and NLG919 (a direct IDO1 enzymatic inhibitor) are indoleamine-2, 3-dioxygenase pathway inhibitors. We also acquired an additional small molecule product candidate, NLG207, which is a nanoparticle-drug conjugate consisting of a cyclodextrin-based polymer backbone linked to camptothecin, a topoisomerase 1 inhibitor, which was out-licensed to Ellipses Pharma Limited, effective December 17, 2019.
Two U.S. patents covering both the salt and prodrug formulations of indoximod were issued in the United States on August 15, 2017 and February 19, 2019, respectively, providing exclusivity until at least 2036. We are continuing to pursue international patent coverage for these formulations in some countries, and we are exploring the potential for further development and licensing opportunities but currently do not have any active program for these acquired small molecule product candidates.
Ebola Vaccine
In November 2014, NewLink entered into the NewLink Merck Agreement with Merck to develop and potentially commercialize its Ebola vaccine rVSV∆G-ZEBOV that it licensed from PHAC. rVSV∆G-ZEBOV was also eligible to receive a PRV if approval was granted by the FDA, with the Company entitled to 60% of the PRV value obtained through sale, transfer or other disposition of the PRV. On December 20, 2019, Merck announced that the FDA approved its application for ERVEBO® (Ebola Zaire Vaccine, Live) for the prevention of disease caused by Zaire Ebola virus in individuals 18 years of age and older. As a result of the asset purchase agreement, whereby we and Merck each agreed that Merck would purchase the PRV from us for $100.0 million, entered into with Merck on July 27, 2020 (the “PRV Asset Purchase Agreement”). Merck will pay us $60.0 million, representing our share of the purchase price in two installments. The first installment of $34.0 million was received by us at the closing during the three months ended September 30, 2020 and the second installment of $26.0 million was received on January 11, 2021 and is recorded within other receivables on the consolidated balance sheets.
We also have the potential to earn royalties on sales of the vaccine in certain countries, if the vaccine is successfully commercialized by Merck. However, we believe that the market for the vaccine will be limited primarily to areas in the developing world that are excluded from royalty payment or where the vaccine is donated or sold at low or no margin and therefore we do not expect to receive material royalty payments from Merck in the foreseeable future.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. In the future, we may generate revenue from product sales, royalties on product sales, or license fees, milestones, or other upfront payments if we enter into any collaborations or license agreements. We expect that our future revenue will fluctuate from quarter to quarter for many reasons, including the uncertain timing and amount of any such payments and sales.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred to advance our product candidate, LUM-201. Our research and development expenses include internal personnel expenditures along with external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as contract research and manufacturing organizations, consultants, and our scientific advisors.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are capitalized as an asset and expensed when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received. We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to conduct our clinical trial programs for our product candidates develop our pipeline and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of professional fees for legal, auditing, tax and business consulting services, personnel expenses and travel costs. We expect that general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we expand our operating activities. In addition, we expect to incur significant additional costs associated with being a SEC registrant. These increases will likely include legal fees, costs associated with Sarbanes-Oxley compliance, accounting fees, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance premiums, and other expenses.
COVID-19
The pandemic caused by an outbreak of COVID-19 has resulted, and is likely to continue to result, in significant national and global economic disruption and may adversely affect our operations. We are actively monitoring the potential impact of COVID-19, if any, on the carrying value of certain assets and its continued operations. To date, we have experienced limited delays related to clinical trials as clinical sites adapt their procedures to caring for patients during a pandemic, however, we have not incurred impairment of any assets as a result of COVID-19. The extent to which these events may impact our business, clinical development, regulatory efforts, and the value of our common stock, will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. The duration and intensity of these impacts and resulting disruption to our operations is uncertain and we will continue to evaluate the impact that these events could have on our operations, financial position, and results of operations and cash flows during fiscal year 2021.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues. Revenues increased by $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to the work we performed in relation to ERVEBO® as a subcontractor of Merck.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses increased by $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to increases of $2.4 million in clinical trial expenses, $1.4 million in personnel-related and stock compensation expenses, $0.8 million in supplies and other expenses and $0.4 million in write-off of the acquired NewLink's in-process research and development costs, offset by a decrease of $1.5 million in contract manufacturing expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses increased by $13.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to increases of $7.0 million in personnel-related and stock compensation expenses, $4.2 million in expenses for insurance, rent, supplies and depreciation expenses, $1.6 million due to the Merger related expenses and $0.6 million in legal and consulting expenses, offset by a decrease of $0.3 million in travel expenses.
Other Income, net. Other income, net increased by $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to a gain of $6.3 million recognized upon sale of the PRV in July 2020.
Income Tax Benefit. Income tax benefit increased by $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to recording of $4.5 million of current tax benefit related to carry back of NOL under the CARES Act and $9.5 million for the tax benefit of current year tax losses and certain historical tax attributes realized as of the date of the Merger, both benefited from the deferred tax liability recorded for the step up in book basis over tax basis for the net value of the PRV and its subsequent sale and taxable gain.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically devoted substantially all our efforts toward research and development and have never earned revenue from commercial sales of our products. We expect to continue to incur additional substantial losses in the foreseeable future as a result of our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations. However, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents of approximately $98.7 million as of December 31, 2020 and the second and final installment of $26.0 million received on January 11, 2021 related to sale of the PRV will be sufficient to allow us to fund our operations through read out of the Phase 2b Trial for a subset of patients with PGHD indication under our LUM-201 product candidate and for at least 12 months from the filing date of this Annual Report.
We may seek to sell additional equity or debt securities or obtain a credit facility if our available cash and cash equivalents are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements or if we develop additional opportunities to do so. The sale of additional equity and debt securities may result in additional ownership dilution to our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt securities or preferred stock, these securities could have rights senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. We may require additional capital beyond our currently forecasted amounts. Any such required additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all. If we were unable to obtain additional financing, we may be required to reduce the scope of, delay or eliminate some or all of our planned research and development activities, which could harm our business.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the research and development of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amounts of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the scope, progress, results, and costs of clinical trials for our product candidates, and discovery and development activities related to new product candidates;
•the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
•the cost of commercialization activities if any of our product candidates are approved for sale, including marketing, sales, facilities, and distribution costs;
•the cost of manufacturing our product candidates and any products we commercialize;
•our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
•whether, and to what extent, we are required to repay our outstanding government provided loans;
•the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation;
•the impact of public health crises such as the current COVID-19 pandemic or similar outbreaks, and
•the timing, receipt and amount of sales of, or royalties on, our future products, if any.
On December 30, 2020, we entered into a Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., as agent (the “Agent”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell from time to time through the Agent up to $50.0 million of shares of our common stock (the “Shares”). The offering and sale of the Shares has been registered under the Securities Act. Under the Sales Agreement, the Agent may sell the Shares by any method permitted by law and deemed to be an “at-the-market” offering as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) promulgated under the Securities Act, including sales made directly on or through the Nasdaq, on any other existing trading market for the Shares, in negotiated transactions at market prices prevailing at the time of sale or at prices related to such prevailing market prices and/or any other method permitted by law. We will notify the Agent of the number of Shares to be issued, the time period during which sales are requested to be made, any limitation on the number of Shares that may be sold in any one day and any minimum price below which sales may not be made. We intend to use the net proceeds from this offering for working capital and general corporate purposes, which include, but are not limited to, expanding clinical development opportunities for our product candidate into potential additional indications, and general and administrative expenses. We may also use a portion of the net proceeds to invest in future strategic transactions to expand and diversify our product pipeline through the acquisition or licensing of product candidates or technologies that are complementary to our own. We will pay the Agent a commission of up to 3.0% of the gross sales price of the Shares sold through it under the Sales Agreement. In addition, we have agreed to reimburse certain expenses incurred by the Agent in connection with the offering. The Sales Agreement may be terminated by the Agent or by us at any time upon notice to the other party, as set forth in the Sales Agreement, or by the Agent at any time in certain circumstances, including the occurrence of a material and adverse change in our business or financial condition that makes it impractical or inadvisable to market the shares or to enforce contracts for the sale of the Shares. As of December 31, 2020, no shares have been issued under the Sales Agreement.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods set forth below (in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our operating activities used cash of $23.0 million and $9.1 million, respectively. The increase was primarily due to an increase in losses from operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 our investing activities provided cash of $116.7 million compared to cash use of $2,000 for the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to $84.2 million in cash acquired in connection with the Merger and $32.5 million received upon sale of the PRV in July 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our financing activities provided cash of $75,000 and $22,000, respectively. The increase was primarily due to higher stock option exercises during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements which have prepared our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments. We based our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could, therefore, differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. We believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Asset Acquisition
A key provision within Topic 805, Business Combinations, is the single or similar asset threshold. When substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or group of similar identifiable assets, the acquired set is not a business. In evaluating the Merger, we concluded that virtually all the value was concentrated in the acquired PRV value and accounted for the transaction as an asset acquisition.
Acquired in-process research and development (“IPR&D”) expense consists of the initial up-front payments incurred in connection with the acquisition or licensing of product candidates that do not meet the definition of a business under ASC 805, Business Combinations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we expensed the acquired in-process research and development asset of $426,000 acquired as part of the Merger as there is no future economic benefit.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, which include salaries, bonuses, benefits and share-based compensation; manufacturing-related costs; clinical trial expenses which include expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, investigative sites and consultants that conduct our clinical trials; facilities, depreciation of fixed assets and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of research facilities and equipment; license fees for and milestone payments related to in-licensed products and technology; and costs associated with non-clinical activities and regulatory approvals. Advance payments for goods or services to be rendered in the future for use in research and development activities are deferred and recorded as a prepaid asset. The deferred amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Expenses Accrued Under Contractual Arrangements with Third Parties; Accrued Clinical Expenses
We estimate our accrued expenses through a process of reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with personnel to identify services that have been performed and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service that may not be invoiced from the provider. The estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date are based on facts and circumstances known at that time. Such estimates are periodically confirmed with the service providers to verify accuracy.
We base our expenses related to clinical trials on estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and contract research organizations that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. Invoicing from third-party contractors for services performed can lag several months. We accrue the costs of services rendered in connection with third-party contractor activities based on our estimate of management fees, site management and monitoring costs and data management costs as contracted. Differences between actual clinical trial costs and estimated clinical trial costs are adjusted in the period in which they become known through operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.