ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this report. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
Business Overview
We are a leader in advanced optical technology, providing high performance fiber optic test, measurement and control products for the telecommunications and photonics industries; and distributed fiber optic sensing solutions that measure, or “sense,” the structures for industries ranging from aerospace, automotive, energy, oil and gas, security and infrastructure.
Our communications test and control products help customers test their fiber optic networks and assemblies with speed and precision in both lab and production environments, accelerating the development of fiber optic products and assuring accurate testing of optical components like photonic integrated circuits (PICs) and coherent receivers, which are both critical elements of meeting the world’s exponentially growing demand for bandwidth. Our distributed fiber optic sensing products help designers and manufacturers more efficiently develop new and innovative products by measuring stress, strain, and temperature at a high resolution for new designs or manufacturing processes. In addition, our distributed fiber optic sensing products ensure the safety and structural integrity or operational health of critical assets in the field, by monitoring stress, strain, and vibration in large civil and industrial infrastructure such as bridges, roads, pipelines and borders. We also provide applied research services, typically under research programs funded by the U.S. government, in areas of sensing and instrumentation, advanced materials, optical technologies and health sciences.
We are organized into two reporting segments, our Lightwave segment and our Luna Labs segment. Our Lightwave segment consists of our fiber optics testing, measurement and sensing solutions. Our Lightwave segment revenues represented approximately 71% and 70% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our Luna Labs segment performs applied research principally in the areas of sensing and instrumentation, advanced materials and health sciences. Our Luna Labs segment comprised approximately 29% and 30% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Most of the government funding for our Luna Labs segment is derived from the Small Business Innovation Research ("SBIR"), program coordinated by the U.S. Small Business Administration. Within the Luna Labs segment, we have historically had a backlog of contracts for which work has been scheduled, but for which a specified portion of work has not yet been completed. We define backlog as the dollar amount of obligations payable to us under negotiated contracts upon completion of a specified portion of work that has not yet been completed, exclusive of revenues previously recognized for work already performed under these contracts, if any. Total backlog includes funded backlog, which is the amount for which money has been directly authorized by the U.S. government and for which a purchase order has been received by a commercial customer, and unfunded backlog, representing firm orders for which funding has not yet been appropriated. Indefinite delivery and quantity contracts and unexercised options are not reported in total backlog. The approximate value of our Lightwave segment backlog was $35.9 million and $16.1 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The approximate value of our Luna Labs segment backlog was $19.0 million and $21.8 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Revenues from product sales are mostly derived from the sales of our communications test, measurement, control and sensing products that make use of light-transmitting optical fibers, or fiber optics. We continue to invest in product development and commercialization, which we anticipate will lead to increased product sales growth. Although we have been successful in licensing certain technologies in past years, we do not expect license revenues to represent a significant portion of future revenues. Over time we intend to gradually increase such revenues. In the near term, we expect revenues from product sales to continue to be primarily in areas associated with our communications test, measurement, control and sensing fiber optic test platforms. In the long term, we expect that revenues from product sales will represent a larger portion of our total revenues. As we develop and commercialize new products, our revenues will reflect a broader and more diversified mix of products.
We realized net income attributable to common stockholders of approximately $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and net income attributable to common stockholders of approximately $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We realized net income from continuing operations of $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and net income from continuing operations of $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We may incur increasing expenses as we seek to expand our business, including expenses for research and development, sales and marketing and manufacturing capabilities. We may continue to grow our business in part through acquisitions of
additional companies and complementary technologies, which could cause us to incur transaction expenses, amortization or write-offs of intangible assets and goodwill and other acquisition-related expenses. As a result, we may incur net losses in future periods, and these losses could be substantial.
Acquisitions
OptaSense Holdings Limited
On December 3, 2020, we acquired OptaSense Holdings Limited ("OptaSense") for $38.9 million (£29.0 million) in cash. OptaSense, formerly owned by QinetiQ Holdings Limited, is a market leader in fiber optic distributed monitoring solutions for pipelines, oilfield services, security, highways and railways, and in power and utilities monitoring systems. The acquisition of OptaSense provided us with important distributed acoustic sensing ("DAS") intellectual property and products. OptaSense's technology and products and geographic footprint are highly complementary to our Lightwave segment which we believe will accelerate our technology and overall growth roadmap.
General Photonics Corporation
On March 1, 2019, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of General Photonics Corporation ("GP"), a leading provider of innovative components, modules and test equipment focused on the generation, measurement and control of polarized light critical in fiber optic-based applications for aggregate consideration of $20.0 million, inclusive of $19.0 million paid at closing and $1.0 million of contingent consideration in 2020 related to certain earn-out provisions.
Description of Our Revenues, Costs and Expenses
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The broader impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations and overall financial performance remains uncertain. The COVID-19 pandemic has affected how we interact with our customers by reducing face-to-face meetings and increasing our on-line and virtual presence. While increasing our on-line and virtual presence has proven effective, we are unsure of the impact if these conditions continue for an extended period. In addition, we have experienced minor impacts on our supply chain that we have managed. For example, in cases where there were delays we relied on our inventory of components to continue production. There is no guarantee we will be able to manage through future delays in our supply chain. See “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the potential adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Revenues
We generate revenues from product sales, commercial product development and licensing and technology development activities. Our Lightwave segment revenues reflect amounts that we receive from sales of our products or development of products for third parties and, to a lesser extent, fees paid to us in connection with licenses or sub-licenses of certain patents and other intellectual property.
We derive Luna Labs segment revenues from providing research and development services to third parties, including government entities, academic institutions and corporations, and from achieving milestones established by some of these contracts. In general, we complete contracted research over periods ranging from six months to three years and recognize these revenues over the life of the contract as costs are incurred.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues associated with Lightwave segment revenues consists of license fees for use of certain technologies, product manufacturing costs including all direct material and direct labor costs, amounts paid to our contract manufacturers, manufacturing, shipping and handling, provisions for product warranties and inventory obsolescence, as well as overhead allocated to each of these activities.
Cost of revenues associated with Luna Labs segment revenues consists of costs associated with performing the related research activities including direct labor, amounts paid to subcontractors and overhead allocated to Luna Labs segment activities.
Operating Expense
Operating expense consists of selling, general and administrative expense, as well as expenses related to research, development and engineering, depreciation of fixed assets and amortization of intangible assets. These expenses also include compensation for employees in executive and operational functions including certain non-cash charges related to expenses from
equity awards, facilities costs, professional fees, salaries, commissions, travel expense and related benefits of personnel engaged in sales, marketing, and administrative activities; costs of marketing programs and promotional materials; salaries, bonuses and related benefits of personnel engaged in our own research and development beyond the scope and activities of our Luna Labs segment; product development activities not provided under contracts with third parties; and overhead costs related to these activities.
Investment Income
Investment income consists of amounts earned on our cash equivalents. We sweep on a daily basis a portion of our cash on hand into a fund invested in U.S. government obligations.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense is composed of interest paid under our term loans as well as interest accrued on our finance lease obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Lightwave Revenues
To determine the proper revenue recognition method for Lightwave contracts, we evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as one single contract and whether the combined or single contract should be accounted for as more than one performance obligation. We recognize revenue when the performance obligation has been satisfied by transferring the control of the product or service to the customer. For tangible products that contain software that is essential to the tangible product’s functionality, we consider the product and software to be a single performance obligation and recognize revenue accordingly. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation based on their relative stand-alone selling prices. In such circumstances, we use the observable price of goods or services which are sold separately in similar circumstances to similar customers. If these prices are not observable, then we will estimate the stand-alone selling price using information that is reasonably available. For the majority of our standard products and services, price list and discount structures related to customer type are available. For products and services that do not have price list and discount structures, we may use one or more of the following: (i) adjusted market assessment approach, (ii) expected cost plus a margin approach, and (iii) residual approach. The adjusted market approach requires us to evaluate the market in which we sell goods or services and estimate the price that a customer in that market would be willing to pay for those goods or services. The expected cost-plus margin approach requires us to forecast our expected costs of satisfying the performance obligation and then add a reasonable margin for that good or service. The residual approach decreases the total transaction price by the sum of the observable standalone selling prices if either the company sells the same good or services to different customers for a broad range of amounts or the company has not established a price for the good or service and that good or service has not been sold on a standalone basis. Shipping and handling activities primarily occur after a customer obtains control and are considered fulfillment cost rather than separate performance obligations. Similarly, sales and similar taxes assessed by a governmental authority that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction and collected by the entity from a customer are excluded from the measurement of the transaction price.
For standard products, we recognize revenue at a point in time when control passes to the customer. Absent substantial product acceptance clauses, this is based on the shipping terms. For custom products that require engineering and development based on customer requirements, we will recognize revenue over time using the output method for any items shipped and any finished goods or work in process that is produced for balances of open sales orders. For any finished goods or work in process that has been produced for the balance of open sales orders we recognize revenue by applying the average selling price for such open order to the lesser of the on-hand balance in finished goods or open sales order quantity which we present as a contract asset on the balance sheet. Cost of sales is recognized based on the standard cost of the finished goods and work in process associated with this revenue and inventory balances are reduced accordingly. For extended warranties and product rentals, revenue is recognized over time using the output method based on the time elapsed for the warranty or service period. In the case of warranties, we record a contract liability for amounts billed but that are not recognized until subsequent periods. A separate contract liability is recorded for the cost associated with warranty repairs based on our estimate of future expense. For testing services where we are performing testing on an asset the customer controls, revenue is recognized over time by the output method using the performance to date. For training, where the customer is receiving the benefit of training as it is occurring, and for repairs to a customer-controlled asset, revenue is recognized over time by the output method using the
performance to date. For royalty revenue, we apply the practical expedient “royalty exception” recognizing revenue based on the royalty agreement which specifies an amount based on sales or minimum amount, whichever is greater.
In some product rental contracts, a customer may be offered a discount on the purchase of an item that would provide for a material right. When a material right has been provided to a customer, a separate performance obligation is established, and a portion of the rental revenue will be deferred until the future product is purchased or the option expires. This deferred revenue is recognized as a contract liability on the balance sheet.
Luna Labs Revenues
We perform research and development for U.S. Federal government agencies, educational institutions and commercial organizations. We account for a research contract when a contract has been executed, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance, and collectability of the contract price is considered probable. Revenue is earned under cost reimbursable, time and materials and fixed price contracts. Direct contract costs are expensed as incurred.
Our contracts with agencies of the U.S. government are subject to periodic funding by the respective contracting agency. Funding for a contract may be provided in full at inception of the contract or ratably throughout the contract as the services are provided. In evaluating the probability of funding for purposes of assessing collectability of the contract price, we consider our previous experience with our customers, communication with our customers regarding funding status and our knowledge of available funding for the contract or program. If funding is not assessed as probable, revenue recognition is deferred until realization is reasonably assured.
Under the typical payment terms of our U.S. government contracts, the customer pays us either performance-based payments ("PBPs") or progress payments. PBPs, which are typically used in the firm fixed price contracts, are interim payments based on quantifiable measures of performance or on the achievement of specified events or milestones. Progress payments, which are typically used in our cost type contracts, are interim payments based on costs incurred as the work progresses. For our U.S. government cost-type contracts, the customer generally pays us during the performance period for 80%-90% of our actual costs incurred. Because the customer retains a small portion of the contract price until completion of the contract and audit of allowable costs, cost type contracts generally result in revenue recognized in excess of billings which we present as contract assets on the balance sheet. Amounts billed and due from our customers are classified as receivables on the balance sheet. For non-U.S. government contracts, we typically receive interim payments as work progresses, although for some contracts, we may be entitled to receive advance payments. We recognize a liability for these advance payments and PBPs paid in advance which are in excess of the revenue recognized and present these amounts as contract liabilities on the balance sheet.
To determine the proper revenue recognition method for research and development contracts, we evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as one single contract and whether the combined or single contract should be accounted for as more than one performance obligation. For instances where a contract has options that were bid with the initial contract and awarded at a later date, we combine the options with the original contract when options are awarded. For most of our contracts, the customer contracts for research with multiple milestones that are interdependent. Consequently, the entire contract is accounted for as one performance obligation. The effect of the combined or modified contract on the transaction price and measure of progress for the performance obligation to which it relates, is recognized as an adjustment to revenue (either as an increase in or a reduction of revenue) on a cumulative catch-up basis.
Contract revenue recognition is measured over time as we perform because of continuous transfer of control to the customer. For U.S. government contracts which are typically subject to the Federal Acquisition Regulation, this continuous transfer of control to the customer is supported by clauses in the contract that allow the customer to unilaterally terminate the contract for convenience, pay us for cost incurred plus a reasonable profit and take control of any work in process. From time to time, as part of normal management processes, facts may change, causing revisions to estimated total costs or revenues expected. The cumulative impact of any revisions to estimates and the full impact of anticipated losses on any type of contract are recognized in the period in which they become known.
Because of control transfers over time, revenue is recognized over time based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. The selection of the method to measure progress towards completion requires judgment and is based on the nature of the services to be provided. We generally use the input method, more specifically the cost-to-cost measure of progress for our contracts because it best depicts the transfer of control to the customer which occurs as we incur costs on our contracts. Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is
measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation. The underlying bases for estimating our contract research revenues are measurable expenses, such as labor, subcontractor costs and materials, and data that are updated on a regular basis for purposes of preparing our cost estimates. Our research contracts generally have a period of performance of six months to three years, and our estimates of contract costs have historically been consistent with actual results. Revisions in these estimates between accounting periods to reflect changing facts and circumstances have not had a material impact on our operating results, and we do not expect future changes in these estimates to be material. The cumulative impact of any revisions to estimates and the full impact of anticipated losses on any type of contract are recognized in the period in which they become known.
Under cost reimbursable contracts, we are reimbursed for costs that are determined to be reasonable, allowable and allocable to the contract and paid a fixed fee representing the profit negotiated between us and the contracting agency. Revenue from cost reimbursable contracts is recognized as costs are incurred plus an estimate of applicable fees earned. We consider fixed fees under cost reimbursable contracts to be earned in proportion to the allowable costs incurred in performance of the contract.
Revenue from time and materials contracts is recognized based on direct labor hours expended at contract billing rates plus other billable direct costs.
Fixed price contracts may include either a product delivery or specific service performance throughout a period. For fixed price contracts that are based on the proportional performance method and involve a specified number of deliverables, we recognize revenue based on the proportion of the cost of the deliverables compared to the cost of all deliverables included in the contract as this method more accurately measures performance under these arrangements. For fixed price contracts that provide for the development and delivery of a specific prototype or product, revenue is recognized based upon the percentage of completion method.
Whether certain costs under government contracts are allowable is subject to audit by the government. Certain indirect costs are charged to contracts using provisional or estimated indirect rates, which are subject to later revision based on government audits of those costs. Management is of the opinion that costs subsequently disallowed, if any, would not likely have a significant impact on revenues recognized for those contracts.
Income Taxes
We estimate our tax liability through calculating our current tax liability, together with assessing temporary differences resulting from the different treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which we record on our balance sheet. Management then assesses the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be recovered in future periods. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance against the net deferred tax asset, management considers factors such as future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, taxable income in prior carry back years, whether carry back is permitted under the tax law, tax planning strategies and estimated future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards. To the extent that we cannot conclude that it is more likely than not that the benefit of such assets will be realized, we establish a valuation allowance to reduce their net carrying value.
As we assess our projections of future taxable income or other factors that may impact our ability to generate taxable income in future periods, our estimate of the required valuation allowance may change, which could have a material impact on future earnings or losses.
We recognize tax benefits from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by taxing authorities. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome of timing of the resolution of any particular tax matter, we establish a liability at the time we determine it is probable we will be required to pay additional taxes related to certain matters. These liabilities are recorded in accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. We adjust this provision, including any impact on the related interest and penalties, in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the progress of a tax audit. A number of years may elapse before a particular matter for which we have established a liability is audited and finally resolved. The number of years with open tax audits varies depending on the tax jurisdiction. Settlement of any particular issue would usually require the use of cash. We recognize favorable resolutions of tax matters for which we have previously established liabilities as a reduction to our income tax expense when the amounts involved become known.
Due to differences between federal and state tax law, and accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP") certain items are included in the tax return at different times than when those items are reflected in the consolidated financial statements. Therefore, the annual tax rate reflected in our consolidated financial statements is different than that reported in our tax return. Some of these differences are permanent, such as expenses that are not deductible in our tax
return. Some differences, such as depreciation expense, reverse over time and create deferred tax assets and liabilities. The tax rates used to determine deferred tax assets or liabilities are the enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Based on the evaluation of all available information, we recognize future tax benefits, such as net operating loss ("NOL") carryforwards, to the extent that realizing these benefits is considered more likely than not.
Because we have NOLs carried over from a previously acquired company that are limited under Section 382, the deferred tax assets of $1.2 million as of December 31, 2020 are expected to be realized over an extended period of time (with continued earnings realized ratably through 2033).
Following our acquisition of OptaSense, the deferred taxes include loss carry forwards in the United Kingdom, and the United States. Given cumulative three years of losses for each of the entities, we have concluded that it is more-likely-than-not that the net deferred tax assets from the UK and US entities will not be realized, and have recorded a full valuation allowance against them.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation expense based upon the fair value of the underlying equity award on the date of the grant. The calculation of the fair value of our awards requires certain inputs that are subjective and changes to the estimates used will cause the fair values of our stock awards and related stock-based compensation expense to vary. We have elected to use the Black-Scholes-Merton ("Black-Scholes") option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options. The fair value of a stock option award is affected by our stock price on the date of the grant as well as other assumptions used as inputs in the valuation model including the estimated volatility of our stock price over the term of the awards, the estimate period of time that we expect employees to hold their stock options and the risk-free interest rate assumption. In addition, we are required to reduce stock-based compensation expense for the effects of actual forfeitures of unvested awards in the period they occur.
Long-lived and Intangible Assets
Long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset might not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future un-discounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value, less cost to sell.
Goodwill
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. We have established October 1 as our specified annual date for impairment testing.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting, in accordance with ASC 805 - Business Combinations. Under ASC 805, the total estimated purchase consideration is allocated to the acquired tangible and intangible assets and assumed liabilities based on their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. Any excess of the fair value of acquisition consideration over the fair value of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill.
Results of Operations
The following table shows information derived from our consolidated statements of operations expressed as a percentage of total revenues for the periods presented.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
Our Lightwave segment included revenues from sales of test and measurement systems, primarily representing sales of our Optical Backscatter Reflectometer, ODiSI, and Optical Vector Analyzer platforms, optical components and sub-assemblies and sales of our Hyperion and Terahertz sensing platforms. Our Lightwave segment revenues increased $10.0 million to $59.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $49.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase resulted primarily from the incremental revenues associated with the acquired operations of GP and OptaSense as well as increased revenues from our sensing products during the year ended December 31, 2020. Continued growth in sales of our fiber-optic sensing products, including our ODiSI products directed toward the expanding use of composite materials and the need for improved means of testing their structural integrity, and our communications test instruments also contributed to this increase.
Our Luna Labs segment revenues increased $2.2 million to $23.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $21.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenues within this segment increased due to additional contract awards, including higher value Phase 2 SBIR contracts. The increase continues a growth trend experienced over the past few years largely driven by successes in Phase 2 SBIR awards. The increase was realized primarily in our advanced materials research group. As Phase 2 SBIR contracts generally have a performance period of a year or more, we currently expect Luna Labs segment revenues to remain at a similar level for the near term.
Cost of Revenues
Our Lightwave segment costs increased $3.1 million to $23.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $20.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase primarily resulted from the incremental costs associated with the inclusion of approximately one month of operations from OptaSense, which was acquired in December 2020, as well as an increase in sales volume in our sensing and communications testing products.
Our Luna Labs segment costs increased $2.0 million, to $17.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The overall increase in Luna Labs segment costs was driven by increases in additional headcount and the increased spending on other direct costs to support the growth in our research contracts and was consistent with the rate of revenue growth for this business segment.
Operating Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense increased $4.3 million to $27.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $23.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Selling, general and administrative expense increased primarily due to the additional selling related expenses as a result of increased revenues, increased depreciation on acquired fixed assets and share-based compensation related to employee participation in our ESPP which began during the third quarter.
Research, development and engineering expenses decreased $0.8 million to $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to additional expenses related to product improvements in our Lightwave segment for the year ended December 31, 2019 that did not reoccur during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Acquisition related expense consists primarily of investment banking, legal and consulting fees incurred in connection with our acquisition of OptaSense for the year ended December 31, 2020. Acquisition related expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 consists of fees incurred in connection with our acquisition of GP.
The loss on sale of property and equipment was primarily due to the sale of one of our buildings and other fixed assets in order to consolidate operations in our Luna Labs operating segment.
Investment Income
Investment income was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we invested a portion of our cash in funds holding U.S. treasury securities. The decrease in investment income is primarily related to lower returns on our cash balance held in U.S. treasury securities.
Income Tax Expense/(Benefit)
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded income tax expense of $0.3 million, compared to an income tax benefit of $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The income tax expense recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 was driven mostly by not having the benefit of a partial release of our valuation allowance partially offset by research and development tax credits received in 2020.
Net Income From Continuing Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized income from continuing operations before income taxes of $5.1 million, compared to $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. After tax, our net income from continuing operations was $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Loss from Discontinued Operations
For the year ended December 31,2020, we recognized loss from discontinued operations, net of income taxes, of $1.4 million which represented the after-tax loss on sale of our High Speed Optical Receiver ("HSOR") business. In March 2020, we settled the notice of claim dispute with Macom Technology Solutions, Inc. ("Macom") resulting in us receiving $0.6 million and Macom receiving $1.9 million. There were no results from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Preferred Stock Dividend
In January 2010, we issued 1,321,514 shares of our newly designated Series A Convertible Preferred Stock to Carilion. The Series A Convertible Preferred Stock carried an annual cumulative dividend of 6%, or approximately 79,292 shares of common stock per year. During 2019, we accrued $0.3 million for the dividends payable to Carilion. During 2019, the total accrued dividend of 770,454 shares of common stock were issued to Carilion as shown on our consolidated statements of changes in stockholders' equity. There were no additional shares of common stock accrued or issued during 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, our total cash and cash equivalents were $15.4 million.
On December 1, 2020 (the “Effective Date”), we entered into a Loan Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with PNC Bank, National Association, as lender (the “Lender”) and our domestic subsidiaries as guarantors. The Loan Agreement provides a $12.5 million term loan facility (the “Term Loan”) and a $15.0 million revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Line”), which include a $3.0 million letter of credit sublimit. On the Effective Date, we borrowed the full amount of the Term Loan from the Lender pursuant to a term note (the “Term Note”) and a $7.6 million revolving loan (the “Revolving Loan”) pursuant to a revolving line of credit note (the “Revolving Line of Credit Note”). We may repay and reborrow advances under the Revolving Line from time to time pursuant to the Revolving Line of Credit Note.
We used the proceeds from the Term Loan and the Revolving Loan to pay, in part, the consideration for the acquisition of OptaSense.
The Term Loan matures on December 1, 2023. The Term Loan is due and payable in 12 equal quarterly payments of principal and interest. The Term Loan bears interest at a floating per annum rate equal to the sum of (a) LIBOR plus (b) a margin ranging from 1.75% to 2.25% depending on the Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Loan Agreement). We may prepay the Term Loan without penalty or premium.
The Revolving Line expires on December 1, 2023. Borrowings under the Revolving Line will bear interest at a floating per annum rate equal to the sum of (a) LIBOR plus (b) a margin ranging from 1.75% to 2.25% depending on the Net Leverage Ratio. Accrued interest will be due and payable on the first day of each month and the outstanding principal balance and any accrued but unpaid interest will be due and payable on December 1, 2023. The unused portion of the Revolving Line will accrue a fee equal to 0.20% per annum multiplied by the quarterly average unused amount.
The Loan Agreement includes a number of affirmative and restrictive covenants, including, among others, financial covenants regarding minimum net leverage and fixed charge coverage, affirmative covenants regarding delivery of financial statements, payment of taxes, and maintenance of government compliance, and restrictive covenants regarding dispositions of property, acquisitions, incurrence of additional indebtedness or liens, investments and transactions with affiliates. We are also restricted from paying dividends or making other distributions or payments on our capital stock, subject to limited exceptions. Our obligations under the Loan Agreement are secured by a first priority perfected security interest in substantially all of our and the guarantors’ assets.
Upon the occurrence of certain events, including our failure to satisfy its payment obligations under the Loan Agreement, failure to adhere to the financial covenants, the breach of certain of its other covenants under the Loan Agreement, cross defaults to other indebtedness or material agreements, judgment defaults and defaults related to failure to maintain governmental approvals, the Lender will have the right, among other remedies, to declare all principal and interest immediately due and payable, and to exercise secured party remedies.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 in addition to amounts available to us under our Revolving Line will provide adequate liquidity for us to meet our working capital needs over the next twelve months from the date of issuance of the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Additionally, we believe that should we have the need for increased capital spending to support our planned growth, we will be able to fund such growth through either third-party financing on competitive market terms or through our available cash. However, these estimates are based on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect, including as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impacts on our business. If we require additional capital beyond our current balances of cash and cash equivalents and borrowing capacity under the Revolving Line described above, this additional capital may not be available when needed, on reasonable terms, or at all. Moreover, our ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to and volatility in the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Discussion of Cash Flows
During 2020, the $2.9 million of net cash provided by operating activities consisted of our net income of $3.3 million, and included non-cash charges for depreciation and amortization of $3.0 million, and stock-based compensation of $2.1 million, net loss on sale of fixed assets of $0.6 million, and a net loss from discontinued operations of $1.4 million offset by a net cash outflow of $7.2 million from changes in working capital. The changes in working capital were principally driven by an increase in accounts receivable of $3.3 million, an increase in inventory of $1.5 million, an increase in contract assets of $1.5 million, an increase in other assets of $2.2 million, and an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $1.1 million.
In 2019, the $4.8 million of net cash provided by operating activities consisted of our net income of $5.3 million and included non-cash charges for depreciation and amortization of $2.5 million and stock-based compensation of $1.5 million, offset by a net cash outflow of $1.8 million from changes in working capital. The changes in working capital were principally driven by an increase in inventory of $0.7 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $2.2 million, an increase in contract assets of $0.4 million, and an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $0.6 million, all partially offset by a $0.2 million decrease in other assets.
Cash used in investing activities in 2020 consisted primarily of the $34.1 million payment for acquisitions, $0.7 million of fixed asset additions and $0.4 million of capitalized intellectual property costs partially offset by $0.4 million from the proceeds from the sale of property and equipment and $0.6 million from the sale of discontinued operations, net of fees.
Cash used in the investing activities in 2019 consisted primarily of $19.0 million for our acquisition of GP, $0.5 million of fixed asset additions and $0.3 million of capitalized intellectual property costs.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $21.6 million, compared to $2.4 million of cash used in financing activities in 2019. During 2020, we received proceeds of $20.0 million from our term loan and revolving loan, received $1.7 million from exercises of stock options and received $0.5 million from purchases pursuant to our employee stock purchase plan. These payments were partially offset by $0.5 million to repurchase our common stock under our stock repurchase program. During 2019, we repaid $0.6 million on our outstanding term loan with SVB and used $2.2 million to repurchase our common stock under our stock repurchase program. These payments were partially offset by $0.4 million received from exercises of stock options and warrants.
Summary of Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth information concerning our known contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 that are fixed and determinable.
(1)In December 2020, we entered into a Loan Agreement with the Lender which provided us with a $12.5 million Term Loan and a $15.0 million Revolving Line. We have borrowed the full amount of the Term Loan and $7.6 million against the Revolving Line. The Term Loan matures in December 2023 and the Revolving Line expires in December 2023.
(2)We lease our facilities for all of our locations under operating leases that as of December 31, 2020, are scheduled to expire between March 2021 and September 2030. Upon expiration of our office leases, we may exercise certain renewal options as specified in the leases. Rental payments associated with these option periods are not included in the table above.
(3)In January 2019 and December 2020, we executed leases in the amounts of $14,500 and $247,500, respectively, for office equipment. These equipment leases expire in 2021 and 2025, respectively.
(4)Purchase order obligations included outstanding orders for inventory purchases. In 2020, our Luna Technologies subsidiary executed non-cancelable purchase orders for a total amount of $3.0 million for multiple shipments of tunable lasers to be delivered over a 12-month period beginning in July 2020 and October 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations.