ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion And Analysis Of Financial Condition And Results Of Operations
The information contained in this section should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report. Except where the context otherwise requires, all references in this Annual Report to the “Company”, “we”, “us”, “our” or similar words or phrases are to Crescent Acquisition Corp, a Delaware company, and references to the “Sponsor” refer to CFI Sponsor, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company.
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward looking statements. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings. Such forward looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this Annual Report on Form 10-K should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this Annual Report. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
OVERVIEW
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate an initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants and the forward purchase securities, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The issuance of additional shares of our stock in a business combination, including the forward purchase securities:
•
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in our Initial Public Offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Founder Shares resulted in the issuance of Class A shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Founder Shares;
•
may subordinate the rights of holders of common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
•
could cause a change of control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
•
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
•
may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant indebtedness, it could result in:
•
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
•
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
•
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
•
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
•
our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
•
using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
•
limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
•
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
•
limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, we had cash of $306,626 as of December 31, 2020. We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure that our plans to raise capital or to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
Agreement for Business Combination
On January 13, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with Function Acquisition I Corp, a Delaware corporation and our direct, wholly owned subsidiary (“First Merger Sub”), Function Acquisition II LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and our direct, wholly owned subsidiary (“Second Merger Sub”), LiveVox Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“LiveVox”), and GGC Services Holdco, Inc., a Delaware corporation, solely in its capacity as the representative, agent and attorney-in-fact of the stockholder of LiveVox (in such capacity, the “Stockholder Representative”). The Merger Agreement provides for, among other things, (i) the merger of First Merger Sub with and into LiveVox, with LiveVox continuing as the surviving corporation (the “Surviving Corporation”) and becoming our direct, wholly owned subsidiary as a consequence (the “First Merger”) and (ii) immediately following the First Merger and as part of the same overall transaction as the First Merger, the merger of the Surviving Corporation with and into Second Merger Sub with Second Merger Sub continuing as the surviving entity, which will be renamed such name as LiveVox shall designate no later than five business days prior to the closing of the transaction (the “Second Merger” and, together with the First Merger, the “Mergers” and, together with the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, the “Business Combination”), in each case, in accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Merger Agreement. Following the closing of the Business Combination, we will own, directly or indirectly, all the stock of LiveVox and its direct and indirect subsidiaries and LiveVox TopCo, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and the sole stockholder of LiveVox as of immediately prior to the effective time of the First Merger (the “LiveVox Stockholder”) will hold a portion of the Company’s stock.
LiveVox is a next-generation contact center platform that powers more than 14 billion transactions a year. By seamlessly integrating omnichannel communications, CRM, and WFO, LiveVox delivers exceptional agent and customer experiences, while helping to reduce compliance risk. LiveVox’s reliable, easy-to-use technology enables effective engagement strategies on channels of choice to help drive contact center performance.
For additional information regarding LiveVox, the Merger Agreement and the Business Combination, see the Proxy Statement/Prospectus initially filed by the Company on February 11, 2021.
Extension Meeting
We mailed to our shareholders of record as of January 22, 2021, a definitive proxy statement for a special meeting of shareholders to be held on February 17, 2021 (the “Special Meeting”) to approve an extension of time for us to complete an initial business combination through June 30, 2021. The Charter Extension and Trust Extension Proposals were approved, providing our shareholders with more time to evaluate our Business Combination.
In connection with the vote to approve the Charter Extension and Trust Extension Proposals, the holders of 12,238 Class A ordinary shares properly exercised their right to redeem their shares for cash at a redemption price of approximately $10.14 per share, for an aggregate redemption amount of $124,138. As such, only approximately 0.05% of the Class A ordinary shares were redeemed and approximately 99.95% of the Class A ordinary shares remain outstanding. After the satisfaction of such redemptions, the balance in our trust account will be $253,467,308.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND KNOWN TRENDS OR FUTURE EVENTS
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our primary activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our Initial Public Offering which was consummated on March 12, 2019. Since March 12, 2019, our activities have included activities associated with our search for a business combination candidate and our costs have included the professional, insurance and other costs associated with operating a public company.
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization officially declared the outbreak of the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) a “pandemic.” A significant outbreak of COVID-19 and other infectious diseases could result in a widespread health crisis that could adversely affect the economies and financial markets worldwide, and the business of any potential target business with which we consummate an initial business combination could be materially and adversely affected. Furthermore, we may be unable to complete an initial business combination if continued concerns relating to COVID-19 restrict travel, limit the ability to have meetings with potential investors or the target company’s personnel, vendors and services providers are unavailable to negotiate and consummate a transaction in a timely manner. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our search for an initial business combination will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others. If the disruptions posed by COVID- 19 or other matters of global concern continue for an extensive period of time, our ability to consummate an initial business combination, or the operations of a target business with which we ultimately consummate an initial business combination, may be materially adversely affected.
Included in general and administrative expenses on the accompanying consolidated statements of operations, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our principal operating expenses included $2,795,651 and $189,670, respectively, for professional, insurance and regulatory costs, $200,000 and $200,000, respectively, in franchise taxes, $149,164 and $38,890, respectively, in consulting and travel costs and $120,000 and $98,065, respectively, in administrative fees to an affiliate of the Sponsor. Further, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we generated $910,070 and $4,472,458, respectively, of interest income on the U.S. Treasury bills in the Trust Account. Such interest income is currently taxable and results in a provision for income taxes of $136,730 and $1,195,607 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, since the majority of our operating expenses are considered start-up costs and are not currently deductible. We will periodically withdraw funds from the Trust Account to fund the payment of income and franchise taxes.
Following the closing of our Initial Public Offering in March 2019, we have not generated, and will not generate, any operating revenues until after completion of an initial business combination. As discussed above, we currently generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents after our Initial Public Offering and such income generates a currently payable provision for income taxes on such income since our operating expenses are considered start-up expenses and are not currently deductible. In addition to our taxes, administrative fees to an affiliate of the Sponsor and costs associated with our public reporting, we expect to incur increased expenses for our due diligence and other costs of identifying, documenting and closing a business combination and such costs are expected to be very significant and will vary with the stage of development of a business combination. We intend to pay our income and franchise taxes from the income of the Trust Account.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Prior to the completion of our Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied through receipt of $25,000 from the sale of the Founder Shares to our Sponsor, $300,000 in note payable and $118,323 in advances from an affiliate of the Sponsor.
The net proceeds from (i) the sale of the Units in our Initial Public Offering, after deducting offering expenses of approximately $900,000 and underwriting commissions of $5,000,000 (excluding deferred underwriting fees of $8,750,000), and (ii) the sale of the Private Placement Warrants for a purchase price of $7,000,000, were approximately $251,100,000. Of this amount, $250,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account, which includes up to $8,750,000 of deferred underwriting fees. The remaining approximately $1,100,000 was available to us for working capital and is not held in the Trust Account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting fees) to complete an initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. Delaware franchise tax is based on our authorized shares or on our assumed par and non-par capital, whichever yields a lower result. Our annual franchise tax obligation is expected to be capped at the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation of $200,000. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete an initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had available to us $306,626 and $1,126,200, respectively, of cash held outside the Trust Account as well as certain amounts we may draw from the Trust Account to fund our taxes (as described above). We believe that such sources of liquidity are adequate to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. We will use these funds primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination, pay our professional and other costs of being a public company and pay taxes to the extent the interest earned on the Trust Account is not sufficient to pay our taxes. We do not expect to have any capital expenditures during 2021, except as may be incurred in connection with an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants issued to our Sponsor, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period. The terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account.
Unless and until we complete an initial business combination, we expect our primary liquidity requirements until the Extension Date to include legal, accounting, due diligence, travel and other expenses associated with structuring, negotiating and documenting successful business combinations; legal and accounting fees related to regulatory reporting requirements; NASDAQ and other regulatory fees; office space, administrative, consulting and support services provided under an agreement with our Sponsor and other working capital needs. In addition, we expect to use a portion of the funds not being placed in our Trust Account to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed business combination. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific business combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business for the next 12 months from the date of this filing. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Founder Shares
On November 29, 2017, the Sponsor purchased 8,625,000 Founder Shares for $25,000. In January 2018, the Sponsor surrendered 1,437,500 Founder Shares to the Company for no consideration, resulting in an aggregate of 7,187,500 Founder Shares outstanding. Up to 937,500 Founder Shares were subject to forfeiture to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised by the underwriters within 45 days from the effective date of the registration statement, March 7, 2019. In April 2019, the Underwriters’ over-allotment option expired and as a result the Sponsor forfeited 937,500 shares of Class F common stock, resulting in an aggregate of 6,250,000 Founder Shares outstanding.
The holders of the Founder Shares have agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of an initial business combination or (B) subsequent to an initial business combination, (x) if the last sale price of the Company’s Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after an initial business combination, or (y) the date on which the Company completes a liquidation, merger, stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of the Company’s stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
The Sponsor purchased an aggregate of 7,000,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant for an aggregate purchase price of $7,000,000 in a private placement that occurred simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering. Each Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one whole share of the Company’s Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share (subject to adjustment for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like and for certain issuances of equity or equity-linked securities). $5,000,000 of the proceeds of the Private Placement Warrants were added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering to be held in the Trust Account such that, at the closing of the Initial Public Offering, $250,000,000 was held in the Trust Account. If an initial business combination is not completed by the Extension Date from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants held in the Trust Account will be used to fund the redemption of the Public Shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless. The Private Placement Warrants will be non-redeemable and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by the Sponsor or its permitted transferees. On February 17, 2021, our shareholders approved to extend the date by which we must consummate an initial business combination from March 12, 2021 to June 30, 2021.
The Sponsor and the Company’s officers and directors will agree, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Private Placement Warrants until 30 days after the completion of an initial business combination. In April 2019, the Underwriters’ over-allotment option expired and as a result the Sponsor’s agreement to purchase up to an additional 750,000 Private Placement Warrants also expired.
Forward Purchase Agreement
On February 26, 2019, the Company entered into the Forward Purchase Agreement, which was subsequently amended on January 13, 2021, pursuant to which Crescent, in its capacity as investment advisor on behalf of the Crescent Funds, has committed on behalf of the Crescent Funds, to purchase, subject to the terms and conditions set forth the Forward Purchase Agreement, including obtaining fund-level approvals by the relevant investment committee and/or other governing body of such funds, the Forward Purchase Units, each consisting of one share of the Company’s Class A common stock (such shares of Class A common stock to be issued pursuant to the Forward Purchase Agreement, the “Forward Purchase Shares”) and one-third of one warrant to purchase one share of the Company’s
Class A common stock (such warrants to be issued pursuant to the Forward Purchase Agreement, the “Forward Purchase Warrants”), for $10.00 per unit, or an aggregate amount of $25,000,000, in a private placement that will close immediately prior to the closing of an initial business combination. The Forward Purchase Warrants will have the same terms as the Private Placement Warrants so long as they are held by the Crescent Fund Purchaser or its permitted transferees, and the Forward Purchase Shares will be identical to the Public Shares sold in the Initial Public Offering, except the Forward Purchase Shares will be subject to transfer restrictions and certain registration rights. Any Forward Purchase Warrant held by a holder other than a Crescent Fund Purchaser or its permitted transferees will have the same terms as the Warrants included in the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering.
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and Warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, if any, will be entitled to registration rights (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion of such shares to shares of Class A common stock) pursuant to a registration rights agreement dated March 7, 2019. The holders of these securities will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. However, the registration rights agreement provides that the Company will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period for the securities to be registered. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Related Party Loans and Advances
On November 21, 2017, the Sponsor agreed to loan the Company an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to an unsecured promissory note (the ‘‘Note’’). This Note was amended and restated on November 6, 2018. This Note was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of June 30, 2019 or the closing of the Initial Public Offering. On March 13, 2019, the Note balance of $300,000 was repaid in full.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, an affiliate of the Company paid administrative expenses of $624,013 and $454,757, respectively, of which $623,520 and $333,063 were repaid, respectively, for a net of $493 and $121,694, respectively, which are reflected in the accompanying balance sheets. These amounts are due on demand and are non-interest bearing.
Administrative Support Agreement
On March 7, 2019, the Company entered into an agreement to pay $10,000 a month for office space, utilities, administrative and support services to an affiliate of the Sponsor and will terminate the agreement upon the earlier of an initial business combination or the liquidation of the Company. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company incurred expenses of $120,000 and $98,065, respectively, which are included in general and administrative expenses on the consolidated statements of operations, of which $0 and $60,000 were payable as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and included in accounts payable and accrued expenses on the accompanying balance sheets.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Changes in the economic environment, financial markets and any other parameters used in determining such estimates could cause actual results to differ materially.
In addition to the discussion below, our critical accounting policies are further described in Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s
Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and will adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable Class A common stock will be affected by charges against additional paid-in capital. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, 23,762,298 and 24,011,445, respectively, of the 25,000,000 Public Shares were classified outside of permanent equity.
Emerging Growth Company
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of the Company’s consolidated financial statements with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
New Accounting Standards
We do not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have an effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations other than obligations disclosed herein. No unaudited quarterly operating data is included in this prospectus, as we have conducted no operations to date.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company”, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of the Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.