Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Information regarding forward-looking statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains certain statements, statistics and projections that are, or may be, forward-looking. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other factors that could cause our actual results of operations, financial condition, liquidity, performance, prospects, opportunities, achievements or industry results, as well as those of the markets we serve or intend to serve, to differ materially from those expressed in, or suggested by, these forward-looking statements. The accuracy and completeness of all such statements, including, without limitation, statements regarding our future financial position, strategy, plans and objectives for the management of future operations, is not warranted or guaranteed. These statements typically contain words such as "believes," "intends," "expects," "anticipates," "estimates," "may," "will," "should" and words of similar import. By their nature, forward-looking statements involve risk and uncertainty because they relate to events and depend on circumstances that will occur in the future. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in such statements are reasonable, no assurance can be given that such expectations will prove to be correct. There are a number of factors that could cause actual results and developments to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. These factors include, but are not limited to, factors identified in "Business," "Risk factors," and "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations," or elsewhere in this Annual Report, as well as:
•general economic conditions, or conditions affecting demand for the services offered by us in the markets in which we operate, both domestically and internationally, being less favorable than expected;
•worldwide economic and business conditions and conditions in the industries in which we operate;
•ongoing impact of COVID-19 and future pandemics;
•fluctuations in the cost of raw materials and utilities;
•currency fluctuations and other financial risks;
•our ability to protect our intellectual property;
•the significant amount of indebtedness we have incurred and may incur, and the obligations to service such indebtedness and to comply with the covenants contained therein;
•relationships with our customers and suppliers;
•increased competition from other companies in the industries in which we operate;
•changing technology;
•our ability to execute and integrate new acquisitions;
•claims for personal injury, death or property damage arising from the use of products produced by us;
•the occurrence of accidents or other interruptions to our production processes;
•changes in our business strategy or development plans, and our expected level of capital expenditure;
•our ability to attract and retain qualified personnel;
•restrictions on the ability of Luxfer Holdings PLC to receive dividends or loans from certain of its subsidiaries;
•regulatory, environmental, legislative and judicial developments; and
•our intention to pay dividends.
Please read the sections "Business," "Risk factors," and "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations," of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a more complete discussion of the factors that could affect our performance and the industries in which we operate, as well as those discussed in other documents we file or furnish with the SEC.
About Luxfer
Luxfer Holdings PLC ("Luxfer," "the Company," "we") is a global producer of highly-engineered industrial materials focused on sustained value creation using its broad array of technical knowhow and proprietary materials technologies. The Company specializes in the design and manufacture of high-performance products for transportation, defense and emergency response, healthcare, and general industrial purposes. Luxfer customers include both end-users of its products and manufacturers that incorporate Luxfer products into finished goods.
Key trends and uncertainties regarding our existing business
Impact of COVID-19 on operations
Luxfer’s top priority during this global pandemic is the health and well-being of our employees, customers, shareholders, and the communities in which we operate. The Company continues to monitor the COVID-19 situation closely, while simultaneously executing business continuity plans. These business continuity plans include, but are not limited to, (i) retooling operations to maintain social distance and maximize employee safety; (ii) increasing resources and efforts to satisfy demand from the most impactful parts of our business; (iii) expanding flexible work arrangements and policies, where practical, to maximize employee safety; (iv) increased monitoring of short-term cash flow, including measures to reduce costs and generate cash; and (v) providing regular updates to our shareholders, employees, customers, and suppliers in a transparent and timely manner.
At this time, Luxfer continues to operate all of its facilities, following temporary closures at a small number of locations earlier in 2020. However, due to weaker demand resulting from uncertain economic conditions, potential supply constraints, and the continued impact of COVID-19, Luxfer has implemented additional cost saving programs, including headcount reductions.
Luxfer’s results continue to reflect the global macro environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, including broad-based market weakness, which has been especially evident in our general industrial and transportation end-markets in 2020 with full year decline of 18.0% and 14.7% respectively. However, while general industrial has continued to decline in the fourth quarter by 12.5% relative to prior year, transportation has experienced a recovery with growth of 20.1%, largely on the back of the return to growth of sales of alternative fuel products. Despite the adverse macro trends, the Company has a strong balance sheet and access to an existing $150 million credit facility, of which only $4.1 million was drawn down at the end of the year following continued strong cash generation which allowed the early repayment in the fourth quarter of $25 million of Loan Notes due 2021. Furthermore, as our net debt to EBITDA ratio has fallen to 1.0x at the end of 2020 (from 1.2x at the end of 2019), we have identified no issues in relation to financial covenants nor availability of funding for continued operations.
Operating objectives and trends
In 2021, we expect the following operating objectives and trends to impact our business:
•Continuing proactive response to COVID-19 pandemic, including the health and well-being actions highlighted above, in addition to initiatives to stimulate demand for products, ensure continuity of supply and action, focused cost saving programs;
•Divestiture of non-strategic aluminum businesses (identified as discontinued operations) in the Gas Cylinders segment.
•Refocus on productivity acceleration and growth recovery post COVID-19 as we capitalize on lean manufacturing initiatives and pursue faster product innovation;
•Continued focus on developing global talent and implementing a high-performance culture; and
•Continued focus on improved operating cash generation with lower restructuring activity and maintaining strong working capital performance.
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The consolidated results of operations from, continuing operations of Luxfer were as follows:
Net sales
The 13.0% decrease in consolidated net sales in 2020 from 2019 was heavily influenced by the global economic downturn resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic across all end markets with the adverse impact most pronounced across the industrial and transportation end markets, including:
•Lower sales of photoengraving plates;
•Lower sales of zirconium-based chemical products used in industrial catalysis;
•Lower sales of SCBA cylinders used by first responders; and
•$7.6 million revenue decline as a result of the divestiture of Elektron's magnesium Czech recycling business in 2019.
•These decreases were partially offset by:
◦Continued growth of alternative fuel (AF) systems despite COVID-19 headwinds affecting transportation end markets; and
◦Increased revenues from Luxfer Magtech chemical kit products.
The 7.1% decrease in consolidated net sales in 2019 from 2018 was primarily the result of:
•$8.3 million revenue decline as a result of the divestiture of Elektron's magnesium Czech recycling business at the end of the second quarter. Excluding this divestiture, underlying business declined 5.1%;
•Significantly lower sales of our proprietary SoluMag® alloy as a result of continuing destocking amid budgetary pressures affecting North American shale producers;
•Adverse foreign currency effects of $8.4 million.
•These decreases were partially offset by:
◦Continued recovery in sales of alternative fuel (AF) systems;
◦Increased revenues from zirconium-based automotive and industrial catalysis materials.
Gross profit
The 2.9 percentage point decrease in gross profit as a percentage of sales in 2020 from 2019 was primarily the result of adverse sales mix and inefficiency from the impact of COVID-19.
These adverse factors were partially offset by the impact of productivity improvements in Luxfer Gas Cylinders Europe, following closure of the French operation in 2019 and transfer of production to the U.K. and U.S.A.
The 1.5 percentage point decrease in gross profit as a percentage of sales in 2019 from 2018 was primarily the result of:
•Adverse sales mix;
•Unfavorable foreign exchange variances; and
•Impact of short-term process inefficiency following plant consolidation exercises.
These decreases were partially offset by cost savings resulting from our continued effort to reduce production-based costs, partially derived from our transformation plan.
Selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A")
SG&A costs as a percentage of sales have decreased by 1.0 percentage points in 2020 from 2019. The $9.9 million or 19.9% decline in costs was primarily the result of continued cost savings derived from our transformation plan, as well as specific cost reduction actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
SG&A costs as a percentage of sales was flat in 2019 and 2018. The $4.9 million or 9.0% decline in costs was primarily the result of continued cost savings derived from our transformation plan, as well as lower management incentive awards in 2019. This was partially offset by $1.5 million of non-recurring litigation expense incurred in 2019.
Research and development costs
Research and development costs as a percentage of sales reduced by 0.5% in 2020 from 2019, largely as a result of COVID-19 led project delays.
Research and development costs as a percentage of sales was virtually flat at 1.5% in 2019 versus 1.6% in 2018.
Restructuring charges
The $8.9 million restructuring charges in 2020 includes:
•A further $7.5 million in relation to the closure of Luxfer Gas Cylinders France;
•$1.4 million in one-time severance costs as a result of actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The $25.9 million restructuring charges in 2019 was the result of:
•$20.1 million in relation to the closure of Luxfer Gas Cylinders France;
•$4.6 million related to asset write-downs and one-time employee benefits following the decision to scale down production at one of our Luxfer Magtech sites; and
•$1.2 million of other simplification costs.
Impairment charges / (credits)
Impairment credits of $0.2 million in 2019 relates to a $0.2 million true-up of the 2018 impairment of the assets of the Czech magnesium recycling business prior to its eventual divestiture in Q2, 2019.
Acquisition-related costs
Acquisition-related costs which were net $nil in 2020 related to $0.4 million costs incurred in relation to merger and acquisition ("M&A") exploration activities offset by deferred consideration adjustments and profit on previously written-down inventory. In July 2020 we sold our 51% investment in Luxfer Uttam India Private Limited to the joint venture ("JV") partner. Allowing for legal costs, we generated a profit on disposal of less than $0.1 million.
Acquisition-related costs of $1.4 million in 2019 related to :
•$3.5 million reimbursement payment and $0.9 million of professional and legal fees incurred in connection with the terminated acquisition of Neo Performance Materials; offset by
•$2.9 million gain on disposal of Elektron's magnesium recycling business in the Czech Republic; and
•$0.1 million credit in relation to the revaluation of deferred contingent consideration, arising from the acquisition of the legacy businesses of Luxfer Magtech Inc. which was acquired in 2014.
Other charges
The $0.4 million other charges incurred in 2020, is the result of further costs incurred in relation to the remediation of the legacy environmental issue outlined below.
The $2.5 million other charges incurred in 2019, is the result of the Company's decision to commence a project to remove low-level naturally occurring radioactive material (NORM) from a redundant building at Elektron's Manchester, UK site. The work represents remediation of a legacy environmental issue and is expected to complete in the first quarter of 2021.
Net interest expense
Net interest expense of $5.0 million in 2020 increased from $4.4 million in 2019 largely as a result of an additional finance charge following the $25 million voluntary early repayment of 3.67% Loan notes due 2021, at the end of the fourth quarter.
Net interest expense of $4.6 million in 2019 was flat compared to 2018.
Defined benefit pension credit
The defined benefit pension credit of $4.3 million has increased by $3.0 million in 2020 from 2019. This was primarily due to the combined effect on the U.K. plan of a reduction in the discount rate and lower inflation, partially offset by lower projected asset returns.
The $3.4 million decrease in defined benefit pension credit in 2019 from 2018 was primarily due to:
•Lower projected asset returns; and
•Loss of $0.8 million resulting from a settlement affecting the U.S. plan in the final quarter of 2019.
Provision for income taxes
The 23.9 percentage point decrease in the effective tax rate in 2020 from 2019 was primarily due to significantly lower non-deductible expenses of a non-recurring nature in the current year.
The 29.5 percentage point increase in the effective tax rate in 2019 from 2018 was primarily due to significant non-deductible expenses incurred in relation to the closure of Luxfer Gas Cylinders France and the terminated acquisition of Neo Performance Materials.
RECONCILIATION OF NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES TO GAAP MEASURES
The following table of non-GAAP summary financial data presents a reconciliation of net income from continuing operations to adjusted net income for the periods presented, being the most comparable GAAP measure. Management believes that adjusted net income, adjusted earnings per share, adjusted EBITA and adjusted EBITDA are key performance indicators (KPIs) used by the investment community and that such presentation will enhance an investor’s understanding of the Company's operational results. In addition, Luxfer's CEO and other senior management use these KPIs, among others, to evaluate business performance. However, investors should not consider adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share in isolation as an alternative to net income and earnings per share when evaluating Luxfer's operating performance or measuring Luxfer's profitability.
(1) For the purpose of calculating diluted earnings per share, the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the financial year has been adjusted for the dilutive effects of all potential ordinary shares and share options granted to employees.
The following table presents a reconciliation for the adjusted effective tax rate, which management believes is a KPI used by the investment community and that such presentation will enhance an investor's understanding of the Company's operational results.
SEGMENT RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The summary that follows provides a discussion of the results of operations of each of our two reportable segments (Gas Cylinders and Elektron). Both segments comprise various product offerings that serve multiple end markets.
Adjusted EBITDA represents operating income adjusted for restructuring charges; impairment charges; other charges; acquisition and disposals cost; loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment; depreciation and amortization; share based compensation charges; and unwind of discount on deferred consideration. A reconciliation to net income and taxes can be found in ITEM 8, Note 17.
GAS CYLINDERS
The results of operations from the Gas Cylinders segment are for continuing activities only, therefore numbers and commentary has been adjusted for the previous years.
The net sales and adjusted EBITDA for Gas Cylinders were as follows:
Net sales
The 7.6% decrease in Gas Cylinders sales in 2020 from 2019 was primarily the result of COVID-19 related disruption marked by temporary customer shutdowns, especially reduced sales of SCBA composite cylinders used by first responders. This was partially offset by continued growth in alternative fuel cylinder sales.
The 0.9% increase in Gas Cylinders sales in 2019 from 2018 was primarily the result of the continued strength in alternative fuel cylinder sales, partially offset by adverse foreign currency effects of $3.9 million.
Adjusted EBITDA
The 0.5 percentage point increase in adjusted EBITDA for Gas Cylinders as a percentage of net sales in 2020 from 2019 was primarily the result of productivity improvements and cost savings following the integration of the Luxfer Gas Cylinders France operation into other sites. This was partially offset by adverse sales mix.
The 0.9 percentage point decrease in adjusted EBITDA for Gas Cylinders as a percentage of net sales in 2019 from 2018 was primarily the result of adverse foreign currency effects partially offset by the impact of favorable cost reduction initiatives.
ELEKTRON
The net sales and adjusted EBITDA for Elektron were as follows:
Net sales
The 16.8% decrease in Elektron sales in 2020 from 2019 was primarily the result of COVID-19 related disruption especially to the industrial and transportation end markets, including:
•Decreased sales of zirconium-based industrial catalysts;
•Lower sales of photo-engraving plates and magnesium countermeasure flares;
•Lower sales of magnesium aerospace alloys;
•$7.6 million revenue decline as a result of the divestiture of Elektron's magnesium Czech recycling business in 2019.
This was partially offset by increased revenues from Luxfer Magtech chemical detection kits.
The 12.0% decrease in Elektron sales in 2019 from 2018 was primarily the result of:
•$8.3 million revenue decline as a result of the divestiture of Elektron's magnesium Czech recycling business at the end of Q2, with underlying business excluding the divestiture declining 8.9%;
•Significantly lower sales of our proprietary SoluMag® alloy ;
•Lower sales of other industrial products; and
•Adverse foreign currency effects of $4.5 million.
This was partially offset by increased revenues from zirconium-based automotive and industrial catalysis materials.
Adjusted EBITDA
The 2.6 percentage point decrease in adjusted EBITDA for Elektron as a percentage of net sales in 2020 from 2019 was primarily the result of the impact of COVID-19 related reduction in volumes more than offsetting associated cost saving measures. This was further impacted by adverse product sales mix.
The 2.1 percentage point decrease in adjusted EBITDA for Elektron as a percentage of net sales in 2019 from 2018 was primarily the result of:
•Adverse mix, predominantly the impact of lower SoluMag® sales;
•Impact of short term inefficiency following plant consolidation and a flood affecting Graphic Arts;
These decreases were partially offset by the favorable impact of cost saving initiatives.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our liquidity requirements arise primarily from obligations under our indebtedness, capital expenditures, acquisitions, the funding of working capital and the funding of hedging facilities to manage foreign exchange and commodity purchase price risks. We meet these requirements primarily through cash flows from operating activities, cash deposits and borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility and accompanying ancillary hedging facilities and the Loan Notes due 2023 and 2026. Our principal liquidity needs are:
•funding acquisitions,
•capital expenditure requirements;
•payment of shareholder dividends;
•servicing interest on the Loan Notes, which is payable at each quarter end, in addition to interest and / or commitment fees on the Senior Facilities Agreement;
•working capital requirements, particularly in the short term as we aim to achieve organic sales growth; and
•hedging facilities used to manage our foreign exchange and aluminum purchase price risks.
We believe that, in the long term, cash generated from our operations will be adequate to meet our anticipated requirements for working capital, capital expenditures and interest payments on our indebtedness. In the short term, we believe we have sufficient credit facilities to cover any variation in our cash flow generation. However, any major repayments of indebtedness will be dependent on our ability to raise alternative financing or to realize substantial returns from operational sales. Also, our ability to expand operations through sales development and capital expenditures could be constrained by the availability of liquidity, which, in turn, could impact the profitability of our operations.
We have been in compliance with the covenants under the Loan Notes and the Senior Facilities Agreement throughout all of the quarterly measurement dates from and including September 30, 2011, to December 31, 2020.
Luxfer conducts all of its operations through its subsidiaries, joint ventures and affiliates. Accordingly, Luxfer's main cash source is dividends from its subsidiaries. The ability of each subsidiary to make distributions depends on the funds that a subsidiary receives from its operations in excess of the funds necessary for its operations, obligations or other business plans. We have not historically experienced any material impediment to these distributions, and we do not expect any local legal or regulatory regimes to have any impact on our ability to meet our liquidity requirements in the future. In addition, since our subsidiaries are wholly-owned, our claims will generally rank junior to all other obligations of the subsidiaries. If our operating subsidiaries are unable to make distributions, our growth may slow, unless we are able to obtain additional debt or equity financing. In the event of a subsidiary's liquidation, there may not be assets sufficient for us to recoup our investment in the subsidiary.
Our ability to maintain or increase the generation of cash from our operations in the future will depend significantly on the competitiveness of and demand for our products, including our success in launching new products. Achieving such success is a key objective of our business strategy. Due to commercial, competitive and external economic factors, however, we cannot guarantee that we will generate sufficient cash flows from operations or that future working capital will be available in an amount sufficient to enable us to service our indebtedness or make necessary capital expenditures.
Cash Flows from Continuing Operations
Operating activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $49.3 million in 2020 which includes approximately $7 million of cash spent on restructuring activities. It was primarily related to net income from operating activities, net of the following non-cash items: depreciation and amortization; asset impairment charges, pension adjustments and net changes to assets and liabilities.
Cash provided by operating activities was $5.0 million in 2019 which includes approximately $20 million of cash spent on restructuring activities. It was primarily related to net income from operating activities, net of the following non-cash items: depreciation and amortization; asset impairment charges, pension adjustments and net changes to assets and liabilities.
Investing activities
Net cash used for investing activities was $6.5 million in 2020, compared to net cash used for investing activities of $7.5 million in 2019. The following investing activities impacted our cash flow:
Capital expenditures
Capital expenditures in 2020 was $8.0 million compared to $13.1 million in 2019 as we delayed some projects in response to COVID-19. We anticipate capital expenditures for 2021 to be around $15 million.
Proceeds from sale of business
In July 2020, the Company sold its 51% investment in Luxfer Uttam India Private Limited for net cash proceeds of $1.5 million.
In June 2019, the Company sold its Czech recycling business, for net cash proceeds of $4.4 million.
Financing activities
In 2020, net cash used for financing activities was $52.5 million (2019: $1.0 million). We made net repayments on our borrowing facilities of $38.2 million (2019: net drawdowns of $14.0 million) and dividend payments of $13.6 million 2019: $13.6 million), equating to $0.50 per ordinary share.
Loan Notes 2023 and 2026
The Note Purchase Agreement contains customary covenants and events of default, in each case with customary and appropriate grace periods and thresholds. In addition, the Note Purchase Agreement requires us to maintain compliance with a minimum interest coverage ratio and a leverage ratio. The interest coverage ratio measures our EBITDA (as defined in the Note Purchase Agreement) to Net Finance Charges (as defined in the Note Purchase Agreement). We are required to maintain an interest coverage ratio of 4.0:1. The leverage ratio measures our Total Net Debt (as defined in the Note Purchase Agreement) to Adjusted Acquisition EBITDA (as defined in the Note Purchase Agreement). We are required to maintain a leverage ratio of no more than 3.0:1. We have been in compliance with the covenants under the Note Purchase Agreement throughout all of the quarterly measurement dates from and including September 30, 2011, to December 31, 2020.
The Loan Notes due 2023 and 2026 and the Note Purchase Agreement are governed by the law of the State of New York.
The Loan Notes due 2023 and 2026 are denominated in U.S. dollars, which creates a natural partial offset between the dollar-denominated net assets and earnings of our U.S. operations and the dollar-denominated debt and related interest expense of the notes. We have included the Note Purchase Agreement and a form of the Loan Notes due 2023 and 2026 as exhibits to this Annual Report and refer you to the exhibits for more information on the Note Purchase Agreement and the Loan Notes due 2023 and 2026.
Loan Notes due 2021 and Shelf Facility
The Loan Notes due 2021 were due to mature on September 15, 2021, however we voluntarily chose to repay the notes early, on December 31, 2020 largely using surplus cash generated from operations, plus a small drawing on the Senior Facilities Agreement. In addition to the repayment of the $25 million principal, we incurred an early repayment charge of $0.5 million.
The Note Purchase and Private Shelf Agreement contains the same customary covenants and events of default as for the Note Purchase Agreement. The Note Purchase and Private Shelf Agreement also requires us to maintain compliance with the same, interest and leverage ratios as for the Note Purchase Agreement.
We have been in compliance with the covenants under the Note Purchase and Private Shelf Agreement throughout all of the quarterly measurement dates from and including September 30, 2014, to the eventual repayment on December 31, 2020.
The Loan Notes due 2021 and Shelf Facility and the Note Purchase and Private Shelf Agreement are governed by the law of the State of New York.
Senior Facilities Agreement
Structure. The current Senior Facilities Agreement provides $150 million of committed debt facilities, in the form of a multi-currency (GBP sterling, U.S. dollars or euros) Revolving Credit Facility and an additional $50 million of uncommitted facilities through an accordion clause. The facilities mature on July 31, 2022 and we are about to embark on negotiating a new facility which we expect to conclude in the first half of 2021. As of December 31, 2020, we had drawn down $4.1 million under the Revolving Credit Facility (December 31, 2019: $17.5 million).
Availability. The facility is used for loans and overdrafts. Amounts unutilized under the Revolving Credit Facility (or, if the case, under the revolving portion of the Accordion) are allocated to ancillary facilities available under the Senior Facilities Agreement in connection with overdraft facilities, bilateral loan facilities and letter of credit facilities. As of December 31, 2020, we had drawn down $nil under the ancillary facilities (December 31, 2019: $nil). We may use amounts drawn under the Revolving Credit Facility for our general corporate purposes and certain capital expenditures, as well as for the financing of permitted acquisitions and reorganizations. As of December 31, 2020, $145.9 million (net of $4.1 million drawn down) was available under the Revolving Credit Facility. The last day we may draw funds from the Revolving Credit Facility is June 30, 2022.
The Company also has two separate (uncommitted) bonding facilities for bank guarantees; one denominated in GBP sterling of £4.5 million (2020: $6.1 million, 2019: $5.9 million), and one denominated in USD of $1.5 million (2019: $0.4 million). Of that dominated in GBP, £1.0 million ($1.4 million) was utilized at December 31, 2020 (2019: £1.6 million / $2.3 million). Of that denominated in USD, $0.8 million was utilized in December 31, 2020 (2019: fully utilized).
Interest rates and fees. Borrowings under the facility bear an interest rate equal to an applicable margin plus either EURIBOR, in the case of amounts drawn in euros, or LIBOR, in the case of amounts drawn in GBP sterling or U.S. dollars. Note that GBP sterling drawings will be subject to interest rates based on SONIA (Sterling Overnight Index Average) once LIBOR is phased out, before the end of 2021. We do not expect this change to have a significant effect on our interest expense.
The tables below sets out the range of ratios and the related margin percentage currently in effect.
As of December 31, 2020, we had drawn down $4.1 million under the Revolving Credit Facility (December 31, 2019: $17.5 million). A commitment fee is levied each quarter against any unutilized element of the Revolving Credit Facility, excluding overdraft or ancillary facilities
In the event of a sale of all or substantially all of our business and / or assets or if any person or group of persons acting in concert gains direct or indirect control (as defined in the Senior Facilities Agreement) of Luxfer Holdings PLC, we will be required to immediately repay all outstanding amounts under the Revolving Credit Facility (and, if the case, the Accordion) and the ancillary facilities under the Senior Facilities Agreement.
In addition, the Senior Facilities Agreement requires us to maintain compliance with an interest coverage ratio and a leverage ratio. The interest coverage ratio measures our EBITDA (as defined in the Senior Facilities Agreement) to Net Finance Charges (as defined in the Senior Facilities Agreement). We are required to maintain a minimum interest coverage ratio of 4.0:1. The leverage ratio measures our Total Net Debt (as defined in the Senior Facilities Agreement) to the Relevant Period Adjusted Acquisition EBITDA (as defined in the Senior Facilities Agreement). We are required to maintain a leverage ratio of no more than 3.0:1.
We have been in compliance with the covenants under the Senior Facilities Agreement throughout all of the quarterly measurement dates from and including September 30, 2011, to December 31, 2020.
The Senior Facilities Agreement is governed by English law.
For more information see ITEM 8, Note 11.
Dividends
We paid dividends in 2020 of $13.6 million (2019: $13.6 million), or $0.50 per ordinary share.
Any payment of dividends is also subject to the provisions of the U.K. Companies Act, according to which dividends may only be paid out of profits available for distribution determined by reference to financial statements prepared in accordance with the Companies Act and the International Accounting Standards Board, which differ in some respects from U.S. GAAP. In the event that dividends are paid in the future, holders of the ordinary shares will be entitled to receive payments in U.S. dollars in respect of dividends on the underlying ordinary shares in accordance with the deposit agreement. Furthermore, because we are a holding company, any dividend payments would depend on cash flows from our subsidiaries.
Authorized shares
Our authorized share capital consists of 40.0 million ordinary shares with a par value of £0.50 per share.
Contractual obligations
The following summarizes our significant contractual obligations that impact our liquidity:
Off-balance sheet measures
At December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
COMMTIMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
Capital commitments
At December 31, 2020, the Company had capital expenditure commitments of $1.1 million (2019: $1.0 million and 2018: $2.5 million) for the purchase of new plant and equipment.
Committed banking facilities
At December 31, 2020, the Company had committed banking facilities of $150.0 million. The facilities were for providing loans, with a separate facility for letters of credit which at December 31, 2020, was £1.0 million ($1.3 million). Of the committed facilities, $4.1 million was drawn, no loans were drawn and no letters of credit were utilized. The Company also had two separate bonding facilities for bank guarantees, one denominated in GBP sterling of £4.5 million ($6.1 million), of which £1.2 million ($1.6 million) was utilized at December 31, 2020 and one denominated in USD of $1.5 million of which $0.8 million was utilized at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2019, the Company had committed banking facilities of $150.0 million. The facilities were for providing loans, with a separate facility for letters of credit which at December 31, 2019, was £1.0 million ($1.3 million). Of the committed facilities, $17.5 million was drawn, no loans were drawn and no letters of credit were utilized. The Company also had two separate bonding facilities for bank guarantees, one denominated in GBP sterling of £4.5 million ($5.9 million), of which £1.5 million ($2.3 million) was utilized at December 31, 2019 and one denominated in USD of $0.4 million which was fully utilized at December 31,2019.
Contingencies
In February 2014, a cylinder was sold to a long-term customer and ruptured at one of their gas facilities. As a result of this rupture, three people were noted to have minor injuries such as loss of hearing. There was no major damage to assets of the customer. A claim has been launched by the three people who were injured in the incident. We reviewed our quality control checks from around the time which the cylinder was produced and no instances of failures have been noted. It has also been noted by the investigator that the customer has poor quality and safety checks. As a result we do not believe that we are liable for the incident, and therefore, do not currently expect this case to have a material impact on the Company's financial position or results of operations.
In November 2018, an alleged explosion occurred at a third-party waste disposal and treatment site in Boise, Idaho, reportedly causing property damage, personal injury, and one fatality. We had contracted with a service company for removal and disposal of certain waste resulting from the magnesium powder manufacturing operations at the Reade facility in Manchester, New Jersey. We believe this service company, in turn, apparently contracted with the third-party disposal company, at whose facility the explosion occurred, for treatment and disposal of the waste. In November 2020, we were named as a defendant in three lawsuits in relation to the incident - one by the third-party disposal company, one by the estate of the decedent, and one by an injured employee of the third-party disposal company. At present, we have received insufficient information on the cause of the explosion. We do not believe that we are liable for the incident, have asserted such, and, therefore, do not currently expect this matter to have a material impact on the Company’s financial position or results of operations.
NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
See ITEM 8, Note 1 of the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in this Form 10-K, for information pertaining to recently adopted accounting standards or accounting standards to be adopted in the future.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
We have adopted various accounting policies to prepare the consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in ITEM 8, Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. These judgments are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, our observance of trends in the industry and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if:
•it requires us to make assumptions about matters that were uncertain at the time we were making the estimate; and
•changes in the estimate or different estimates that we could have selected would have had a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Our critical accounting estimates include the following:
Impairment of goodwill
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of acquired businesses over the net of the fair value of identifiable tangible net assets and identifiable intangible assets purchased and liabilities assumed.
Goodwill is tested at least annually for impairment and is tested for impairment more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. In 2020, the Company has adopted ASU 2017-04. Goodwill is tested for impairment by either performing a qualitative evaluation or a quantitative test. The qualitative evaluation is an assessment of factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. We may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment for some or all reporting units and perform a quantitative impairment test.In 2020, management have chosen to bypass the qualitative evaluation.
For the quantitative impairment test, the fair value of each reporting unit is determined using a discounted cash flow analysis. Projecting discounted future cash flows requires us to make significant estimates regarding future revenue growth rates including the perpetual growth rate; anticipated operating margins; and the discount rates applied to the estimated future cash flows. Actual results may differ from those used in our valuations. This non-recurring fair value measurement is a "Level 3" measurement under the fair value hierarchy described in ITEM 8 - Note 12.
In developing our discounted cash flow analysis, assumptions about future revenue growth rates and anticipated operating margins are based on our annual operating plan and long-term business plan for each of our reporting units. These plans take into consideration numerous factors including historical experience, anticipated future
economic conditions, changes in raw material prices and growth expectations for the industries and end markets we participate in. These assumptions are determined over a three year long-term planning period. The three year growth rates for revenues and operating profits vary for each reporting unit being evaluated. Revenues and operating profit beyond 2022 are projected to grow at a perpetual growth rate of 1.8%.
Discount rate assumptions for each reporting unit take into consideration our assessment of risks inherent in the future cash flows of the respective reporting unit and our weighted-average cost of capital. We utilized discount rates ranging from 8.0% to 9.0% in determining the discounted cash flows in our fair value analysis.
We completed our quantitative goodwill impairment evaluation as of the last day of the third quarter of 2020, 2019 and 2018 with each of our reporting units' fair value being substantially in excess of its carrying value apart from our Superform business unit within the Gas Cylinders segment. This resulted in an impairment in full of $1.3 million, previously disclosed within impairment costs on the income statement in 2018, now reclassified to discontinued operations.
Identifiable intangible assets
Our primary identifiable intangible assets include: customer relationships and technology and traded related assets. Identifiable intangibles with finite lives are amortized and those identifiable intangibles with indefinite lives are not amortized. Identifiable intangible assets that are subject to amortization are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Identifiable intangible assets not subject to amortization are tested for impairment annually or more frequently if events warrant. We complete our annual impairment test during the fourth quarter each year for those identifiable assets not subject to amortization.
Pension and other post-retirement plans
We sponsor U.S. and non-U.S. defined-benefit pension and other post-retirement plans. The amounts recognized in our consolidated financial statements related to our defined-benefit pension and other post-retirement plans are determined from actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are assumptions, including: expected return on plan assets, discount rates, rate of increase in future compensation levels and health care cost trend rates. These assumptions are updated annually and are disclosed in ITEM 8, Note 14 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Differences in actual experience or changes in assumptions may affect our pension and other post-retirement obligations and future expense.
We recognize changes in the fair value of plan assets and net actuarial gains or losses for pension and other post-retirement benefits annually in the fourth quarter each year ("mark-to-market adjustment") and, if applicable, in any quarter in which an interim remeasurement is triggered. Net actuarial gains and losses occur when the actual experience differs from any of the various assumptions used to value our pension and other post-retirement plans or when assumptions change as they may each year. The primary factors contributing to actuarial gains and losses each year are (1) changes in the discount rate used to value pension and other post-retirement benefit obligations as of the measurement date and (2) differences between the expected and the actual return on plan assets. This accounting method also results in the potential for volatile and difficult to forecast mark-to-market adjustments. The remaining components of pension expense, including service and interest costs and the expected return on plan assets, are recorded on a quarterly basis as ongoing pension expense.
Discount rate
The discount rate used represents the annualized yield based on a cash flow matched methodology with reference to an AA corporate bond spot curve and having regard to the duration of the Plan’s liabilities. This yield produced a weighted-average discount rate for our U.K. plans of 1.40% for 2020, 2.10% in 2019 and 2.90% in 2018. The discount rate on our U.S. plans was 2.30% in 2020, 3.10% in 2019 and 4.20% in 2018. There are no known or anticipated changes in our discount rate assumption that will impact our pension expense in 2020.
Expected rate of return
Our expected rate of return on plan assets for our U.K. plans was 3.00% for 2020, 4.10% in 2019 and 4.90% in 2018. The expected rate of return on our U.S. plans was 5.00% in 2020, 6.20% in 2019 and 6.20% in 2018. The expected rate of return is designed to be a long-term assumption that may be subject to considerable year-to-year variance from actual returns. In developing the expected long-term rate of return, we considered our historical returns, with consideration given to forecast economic conditions, our asset allocations, input from external consultants and broader longer-term market indices.
See ITEM 8, Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding pension and other post-retirement plans.
Loss contingencies
Accruals are recorded for various contingencies including legal proceedings, self-insurance and other claims that arise in the normal course of business. The accruals are based on judgment, the probability of losses and, where applicable, the consideration of opinions of internal and/or external legal counsel and actuarially determined estimates. Additionally, we record receivables from third party insurers when recovery has been determined to be probable.
Income taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. When the Company does not believe that, on the basis of available information, it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets will be fully recovered, it recognizes a valuation allowance against its deferred tax assets to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount more likely than not to be realized. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactments date.
Furthermore, a tax benefit from a tax position may be recognized in the financial statements only if it is more-likely-than-not that the position is sustainable, based solely on its technical merits and consideration of the relevant tax authority’s widely understood administrative practices and precedents. The tax benefit recognized, when the likelihood of realization is more likely-than-not (i.e. greater than 50 percent), is measured at the largest amount that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement.