ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following MD&A should be read in conjunction with a review of the other Items included in this Form 10-K and our December 31, 2020 consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report. A reference to a “Note” relates to a note in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. Certain statements contained in this MD&A may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
General
LSB is headquartered in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma and through its subsidiaries, manufactures and sells chemical products for the agricultural, mining, and industrial markets. We own and operate facilities in Cherokee, Alabama; El Dorado, Arkansas; and Pryor, Oklahoma, and operate a facility on behalf of a global chemical company in Baytown, Texas. Our products are sold through distributors and directly to end customers throughout the U.S. and parts of Mexico and Canada.
Key Operating Initiatives for 2021
We believe our future results of operations and financial condition will depend significantly on our ability to successfully implement the following key initiatives:
•
Continue Focusing on Becoming a “Best in Class” Chemical Plant Operator with respect to Safe, Reliable Operations that Produce the Highest Quality Product.
▪
We believe that high safety standards are critical and a precursor to improved plant performance. With that in mind, we implemented and are currently managing enhanced safety programs at our facilities that focus on improving our safety culture that will reduce risks and continuously improve our safety performance.
▪
We have several initiatives underway that we believe will improve the overall reliability of our plants and allow us to produce more products for sale while lowering our cost of production. Those initiatives are focused on, operations excellence through enhancements in the operating procedure program, asset health monitoring optimization and asset care excellence maintenance programs, and product quality programs focused on providing products to the customer that meet the highest quality standards.
•
Continue Broadening the Distribution of our Products. To further leverage our plants current production capacity, we are continuing to expand the distribution of our industrial and mining products by partnering with customers to take product into different markets both within and outside the U.S.
▪
In October 2020, we announced a new long-term nitric acid supply contract with a customer. Under the agreement, we agreed to supply between 70,000 to 100,000 tons of nitric acid per year, with sales beginning the first quarter of 2021. This contract advances our focus to leverage underutilized nitric acid production capacity at our El Dorado Facility.
▪
We also executed a new contract to capture and sell carbon dioxide out of our El Dorado Facility, where our customer is building a guest plant. We expect to begin sales under this agreement in the fourth quarter of 2021.
▪
Additionally, early in the second quarter of 2020, we completed a key storage project that will allow us to further maximize our production of HDAN at our El Dorado Facility, which we expect to enable us to achieve higher production, a lower cost per ton and increased sales of that product during periods of more attractive pricing.
•
Development of a Strategy to Capitalize on Ammonia Opportunities in a Renewable Energy Focused Economy. As there is a heightened global focus on significantly increasing the use of renewable energy to reduce carbon emissions, we are currently developing a strategy to enter the market for low-carbon or no carbon ammonia, a rapidly emerging trend referred to as “blue-green ammonia.” Many studies have shown that ammonia is the best carrier for hydrogen, given higher energy content and relative ease of storage via hydrogen gas. Ammonia can also be used as zero carbon fuel in the maritime sector, a carbon free fertilizer and as a coal substitute in energy constrained countries. If ammonia were to be used for energy consumption globally, this would equate to 5 times the amount of current global annual production of ammonia, or approximately 50 times of the current seaborne trade. We believe we are well-placed to partake in this opportunity given the ability to retrofit our existing plants rather than the need to invest in greenfield projects thereby reducing the time to market and the upfront capital expenditures which will help the overall economics.
•
Improving Our Capital Structure and Overall Cost of Capital. We are actively seeking ways to improve our capital structure and reduce our overall cost of capital. We believe that continued improvement in operating performance combined with improving fundamentals in the agriculture market and the continued economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic will be a benefit in achieving those efforts.
•
Evaluate Acquisitions of Strategic Assets or Companies. We are evaluating opportunities to acquire strategic assets or companies, mergers with other companies and investment in additional production capacity where we believe those acquisitions, mergers or expansion of production capacity will enhance the value of the Company and provide appropriate returns.
We may not successfully implement any or all of these initiatives. Even if we successfully implement the initiatives, they may not achieve the results that we expect or desire.
Business Developments-2020
COVID-19 Pandemic
All of the facilities we operate have been designated as essential critical infrastructure based on guidelines issued by the United States Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency. Since we produce fertilizer products used by the agriculture industry, as well as chemical products required in a variety of industrial manufacturing processes, LSB has been determined to be a critical service provider, and therefore, our facilities have remained operational despite the government mandated operational limitations or business closings resulting from the federal, state and local government responses to the evolving global health crisis resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Management has taken significant measures to ensure the health and safety of our employees and our business continuity during this challenging situation. For our personnel at our manufacturing facilities and retail agricultural centers, we have developed plans and procedures that have allowed them to operate in a safe manner in order to protect them, their families, our vendors and our customers. These include daily health screenings, including temperature checks and questionnaires, use of proper personal protection equipment, regular disinfection and cleaning of equipment and workspaces, social distancing, working from home where appropriate and quarantining of employees according to specific protocols. We intend to maintain our discipline in this regard for however long the current health risk persists.
The nitrogen chemical industry was under pressure during most of 2020. As a result of the COVID-19 global economic downturn and the resultant decline in energy prices, industry operating rates globally have risen, resulting in greater supply and lower fertilizer pricing. Pricing for all major agricultural product categories was impacted by the continued oversupply of ammonia in our primary end markets, along with increased imports of some of our downstream products. In addition, our industrial and mining sales volume declined as a result of pandemic-related weakness in demand in several of our end markets.
Looking ahead to 2021, while much of the U.S. economy has a least partially reopened and we have seen a healthy recovery of the economy, we are not yet back to pre-pandemic operating levels and uncertainty still remains for some of our end markets. With respect to our agricultural business, the corn market has experienced positive indicators beginning during the latter part of 2020. According to certain industry sources, the estimated corn acres to be planted in 2021 ranges between 92 to 94 million. Also, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (the “USDA”) currently estimates the U.S. ending corn stocks to be approximately 38.2 million metric tons, compared to 48.8 million metric tons relating to the 2020 crop. In addition, demand from ethanol-related consumption has increased since the second quarter of 2020, although overall demand continues to be lower compared to 2019 due to the stay-at-home orders, we experienced in the U.S. Increased Chinese import of corn and lower than expected ending corn inventory is currently improving corn pricing and is driving higher fertilizer pricing thus far for the 2021 spring season. However, improvements in fertilizer pricing could be tempered higher natural gas costs and from additional imported fertilizers. With respect to our industrial and mining business, we are seeing gradual improvement in demand for nitric acid, industrial ammonia and ammonium nitrate as sectors such as automotive manufacturing, home building, and copper mining have increased activity. Also see discussion below concerning a new long-term nitric acid supply contract with a customer.
On the liquidity front, as of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $58.1 million of combined cash and borrowing capacity, which, we believe, provides us with ample liquidity to fund our operations and meet our current obligations.
As discussed in footnotes (D) and (G) of Note 6, in April 2020, we received a $10 million loan through the PPP within the CARES Act stimulus package. The funds from this loan, along with the decisive action we implemented to defer expenses and capital expenditures, have enabled us to avoid the need to furlough or terminate employees to counteract the lost volume and pricing impacts we have seen or expect as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Also, during August 2020, EDA entered into a $30 million secured financing arrangement with an affiliate of LSB Funding with an interest rate of 8.75%. Beginning in September 2020, principal and interest are payable in 60 equal monthly installments with a final balloon payment of approximately $5 million due in August 2025. This $30 million financing arrangement is secured by an ammonia storage tank and is guaranteed by LSB. A portion of the proceeds from this secured financing arrangement was used to pay off the Secured Promissory Note that was scheduled to mature in May 2023.
Also see discussions below under “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Long-Term Nitric Acid Supply Contract
During October 2020, EDC entered into a new long-term nitric acid supply contract with a customer. Under the agreement, EDC agreed to supply between 70,000 to 100,000 tons of nitric acid annually, with sales beginning in the first quarter of 2021. The initial
contract term extends through 2027 but includes automatic one-year renewal terms unless terminated by either party pursuant to the terms of the contract.
Settlements with Certain Vendors
As discussed in Note 8, in June 2020, EDC and certain vendors mediated settlements totaling $7.6 million for EDC to recover certain costs associated with our new nitric acid plant at our El Dorado Facility. The construction of this plant was completed and began production in 2016. Of the $7.6 million, approximately $5.7 million is classified as a reduction to cost of sales and approximately $1.9 million is classified as a reduction to PP&E. The recovery amount was applied against the original classification of the underlying costs.
Business Development-February 2021
On February 21, 2021, we began the phased restart of our Pryor Facility, which was taken out of service on February 12, 2021 after extreme cold weather caused a surge in natural gas prices in the region, along with the curtailment of gas distribution by the operator of the pipeline that supplies natural gas to the facility.
As weather across the middle of the country has improved and temperatures have warmed, natural gas prices have normalized and supply volumes have been restored to levels required for full operation of our facilities. The Pryor Facility is in the process of restarting and we expect the facility to return to pre-shutdown production volume levels as safely and as soon as practicable.
Also, as a result of unprecedented cold weather conditions, on February 17, 2021, the primary natural gas supplier to our El Dorado Facility asserted a claim of force majeure and materially restricted the supply of gas to the facility. However, effective February 23, 2021, the force majeure was lifted and the facility’s ammonia plant is currently in production.
Notably, our Cherokee Facility was not materially impacted by the extreme cold weather and related natural gas price and supply issues and operated at targeted levels throughout February.
Key Industry Factors
Supply and Demand
Agricultural
See discussion above concerning the COVID-19 pandemic under “Business Developments-2020.”
The price at which our agricultural products are ultimately sold depends on numerous factors, including the supply and demand for nitrogen fertilizers which, in turn, depends upon world grain demand and production levels, the cost and availability of transportation and storage, weather conditions, competitive pricing and the availability of imports. Additionally, expansions or upgrades of competitors’ facilities and international and domestic political and economic developments continue to play an important role in the global nitrogen fertilizer industry economics, including the impact from the Phase 1 trade agreement between the U.S and China. These factors can affect, in addition to selling prices, the level of inventories in the market which can cause price volatility and affect product margins.
From a farmers’ perspective, the demand for fertilizer is affected by the aggregate crop planting decisions and fertilizer application rate decisions of individual farmers. Individual farmers make planting decisions based largely on prospective profitability of a harvest, while the specific varieties and amounts of fertilizer they apply depend on factors such as their financial resources, soil conditions, weather patterns and the types of crops planted.
Additionally, changes in corn prices and those of soybean, cotton and wheat prices, can affect the number of acres of corn planted in a given year, and the number of acres planted will drive the level of nitrogen fertilizer consumption, likely effecting prices.
For 2020 as noted in the table below, the USDA estimates the number of acres of corn planted in the U.S. was approximately 91 million acres and U.S ending stocks to be approximately 38 million metric tons, a 22% decrease from a year ago.
The following February estimates are associated with the corn market:
(1)
Information obtained from WASDE report dated February 9, 2021 (“February Report”) for the 2020/2021 (“2021 Crop”), 2019/2020 (“2020 Crop”) and 2018/2019 (“2019 Crop”) corn marketing years. The marketing year is the twelve-month period during which a crop normally is marketed. For example, the marketing year for the current corn crop is from September 1 of the current year to August 31 of the next year. The year begins at the harvest and continues until just before harvest of the following year.
(2)
Represents the percentage change between the 2021 Crop amounts compared to the 2020 Crop amounts.
(3)
Represents the percentage change between the 2021 Crop amounts compared to the 2019 Crop amounts.
After a challenging 2019 for U.S. corn farmers, the number of planted corn acres in 2020 increased slightly and corn production increased 4% year over year. Despite the national restrictions and stay at home orders placed on traveling during 2020, in an attempt to slow the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, the USDA estimates a slight demand increase in corn for ethanol production compared to last year. Most gasoline has 10% ethanol content. Ethanol is commonly made from corn and ethanol production is the largest user of U.S. corn, representing roughly 40% of total U.S. corn demand. Lastly, due to the overall demand for corn, the USDA significantly decreased the U.S. ending corn stocks to approximately 38 million metric tons, compared to 49 million metric tons relating to the 2020 crop.
For 2021, this decrease in ending corn stocks has elevated current and projected corn prices not seen in seven years, which may positively impact fertilizer demand and prices for the spring planting season.
On the supply side, given the low price of natural gas in North America over the last several years, North American fertilizer producers have become the global low-cost producers for delivered fertilizer products to the Midwest U.S. Several years ago, the market believed that low natural gas prices would continue. That belief, combined with favorable fertilizer pricing, stimulated investment in numerous expansions of existing nitrogen chemical facilities and the construction of new nitrogen chemical facilities. Following the expansions, global nitrogen fertilizer supply outpaced global nitrogen fertilizer demand causing oversupply in the global and North American markets. In addition, the new domestic supply of ammonia and other fertilizer products changed the physical flow of ammonia in North America placing pressure on nitrogen fertilizer selling prices as the new capacity was absorbed by the market.
Beginning in late 2019 and into 2020, ammonia pricing was under pressure due to inordinately inclement weather, followed by sluggish industrial demand throughout 2020, as a result of pandemic related weakness, which led to increased supply and resultant lower overall pricing for ammonia. Also, in 2020, ammonia prices in the Southern Plains market were under additional pricing pressure relating to the closure of the Magellan ammonia pipeline during 2019, which also led to a build-up in ammonia supply in this market.
Beginning in the latter half of 2019 and throughout 2020, UAN prices traded at a discount to urea on a nitrogen equivalent basis, due in part to European anti-dumping duties that were imposed on imports from certain countries, including the U.S., which resulted in increased imports of UAN into the U.S. primarily from Trinidad and Russia and decreased exports from the U.S., resulting in increased overall supply in the U.S market.
Looking forward to 2021, favorable dynamics for U.S. agriculture have translated into higher prices to date for a variety of crops, including corn, which has prompted an increase in demand for fertilizers by farmers seeking to maximize yields in the coming spring planting season. Favorable grower income in 2020, coupled with significant increase in Chinese imports of agricultural commodities, lower ending U.S. corn inventory levels, and drought conditions in South America have pushed commodity prices, including corn, to their highest level in over seven years. According to certain industry sources, the estimated corn acres to be planted in 2021 is between 92 to 94 million. These factors have resulted in a price rally for fertilizers over the last several months, which we expect will continue through the spring planting season.
Industrial and Mining
See discussion above concerning the COVID-19 pandemic under “Business Developments-2020.”
Our industrial products sales volumes are dependent upon general economic conditions primarily in the housing, automotive, and paper industries. According to the American Chemistry Council, the U.S. economic indicators are improving and pointing towards continued improvement despite continuing COVID-19 pandemic related difficulties in the markets we serve. Our sales prices generally vary with the market price of ammonia or natural gas, as applicable, in our pricing arrangements with customers. See discussion above concerning a new long-term nitric acid supply contract under “Business Developments-2020.”
Our mining products are LDAN and AN solution, which are primary used as AN fuel oil and specialty emulsions for usage in the quarry and the construction industries, for metals mining, and to a lesser extent, for coal. In our mining markets, our sales volumes are typically driven by changes in the overall North American consumption levels of mining products that can be impacted by weather. Metals mining prices have seen strong pricing during 2020 which in turn we expect will drive strong demand for our mining products for 2021 as producers push to extract as much as possible. Also, although U.S. coal production decreased by 24% during 2020, the EIA is projecting a 12% increase in 2021 because of a forecast 41% increase in natural gas prices for electricity generators, making coal more competitive in the electric power sector. We believe our plants are well located to support the more stable quarry and construction industries and the metals mining industries.
Farmer Economics
The demand for fertilizer is affected by the aggregate crop planting decisions and fertilizer application rate decisions of individual farmers. Individual farmers make planting decisions based largely on prospective profitability of a harvest, while the specific varieties and amounts of fertilizer they apply depend on factors such as their financial resources, soil conditions, weather patterns and the types of crops planted.
Natural Gas Prices
Natural gas is the primary feedstock used to produce nitrogen fertilizers at our manufacturing facilities. In recent years, U.S. natural gas reserves have increased significantly due to, among other factors, advances in extracting shale gas, which has reduced and stabilized natural gas prices, providing North America with a cost advantage over certain imports. As a result, our competitive position and that of other North American nitrogen fertilizer producers has been positively affected.
We historically have purchased natural gas either on the spot market, through forward purchase contracts, or a combination of both and have used forward purchase contracts to lock in pricing for a portion of our natural gas requirements. These forward purchase contracts are generally either fixed-price or index-price, short-term in nature and for a fixed supply quantity. We are able to purchase natural gas at competitive prices due to our connections to large distribution systems and their proximity to interstate pipeline systems. The following table shows the annual volume of natural gas we purchased and the average cost per MMBtu:
Transportation Costs
Costs for transporting nitrogen-based products can be significant relative to their selling price. For example, ammonia is a hazardous gas at ambient temperatures and must be transported in specialized equipment, which is more expensive than other forms of nitrogen fertilizers. In recent years, a significant amount of the ammonia consumed annually in the U.S. was imported. Therefore, nitrogen fertilizers prices in the U.S. are influenced by the cost to transport product from exporting countries, giving domestic producers who transport shorter distances an advantage. However, we continue to evaluate the recent rising costs of rail and truck freight domestically. Additionally, the Magellan ammonia pipeline, which had an annual capacity to transport approximately 900,000 tons per year, most of which was produced in Oklahoma and Texas and delivered via the pipeline in the Midwest has been permanently shut down. Without the pipeline in place for ammonia transport, producers that relied on the pipeline to transport their ammonia now have to rely on other transportation modes, primarily trucks, but will also include rail and barge transport of ammonia. Due to increases in demand for ammonia trucks during the spring and fall planting seasons, higher transportation costs have and could continue to impact our margins, if we were unable to fully pass through these costs to our customers. As a result, we continue to evaluate supply chain efficiencies to reduce or counter the impact of higher logistics costs.
Key Operational Factors
Facility Reliability
Consistent, reliable and safe operations at our chemical plants are critical to our financial performance and results of operations. The financial effects of planned downtime at our plants, including Turnarounds (primarily associated with our ammonia plants), is mitigated through a diligent planning process that considers the availability of resources to perform the needed maintenance and other factors. Unplanned downtime of our plants typically results in lost contribution margin from lost sales of our products, lost fixed cost absorption from lower production of our products and increased costs related to repairs and maintenance. All Turnarounds result in
lost contribution margin from lost sales of our products, lost fixed cost absorption from lower production of our products, and increased costs related to repairs and maintenance, which repair and maintenance costs are expensed as incurred.
Our Cherokee Facility is currently on a three-year ammonia plant Turnaround cycle with the next ammonia plant Turnaround planned in the third quarter of 2021.
Our El Dorado and Pryor Facilities are currently on a three-year ammonia plant Turnaround cycle with the next ammonia plant Turnaround planned in the third quarter of 2022.
Ammonia Production
Ammonia is the basic product used to produce all of our upgraded products. The ammonia production rates of our plants affect the total cost per ton of each product produced and the overall sales of our products.
Total ammonia production in 2020 was 827,000 tons. For 2021, we are targeting total ammonia production of approximately 830,000 tons to 850,000 tons despite a 30-day Turnaround at our Cherokee Facility, which will lower ammonia production during the third quarter by approximately 15,000 tons.
We believe that our focus on continuous improvement in reliability as discussed in key operating initiatives will result in year over year improvement in ammonia production for 2021.
Forward Sales Contracts
We use forward sales of our fertilizer products to optimize our asset utilization, planning process and production scheduling. These sales are made by offering customers the opportunity to purchase product on a forward basis at prices and delivery dates that are agreed upon, with dates typically occurring within 12 months. We use this program to varying degrees during the year depending on market conditions and our view of changing price environments. Fixing the selling prices of our products months in advance of their ultimate delivery to customers typically causes our reported selling prices and margins to differ from spot market prices and margins available at the time of shipment.
Consolidated Results for 2020
Our consolidated net sales for 2020 were $351.3 million compared to $365.1 million for 2019. Our consolidated operating loss was $15.5 million compared to $39.1 million for 2019. The items affecting our operating results are discussed below and under “Results of Operations.”
Items Affecting Comparability of Results
Selling Prices
For 2020, average agricultural selling prices for our ammonia, UAN, and HDAN decreased 29%, 25% and 11%, respectively, compared to 2019. As discussed above under “Key Industry Factors,” the COVID-19 economic downturn and the resultant decline in energy prices has led to lower natural gas prices globally. These factors have led to an increase in operating rates for nitrogen producers around the globe, resulting in greater supply of nitrogen products and lower fertilizer pricing. This, combined with elevated ammonia inventory levels from the inordinately inclement weather throughout the Midwest in 2019 and the closure of the Magellan ammonia pipeline in September 2019, has led to excess ammonia supply in the Southern Plains market. Also pricing pressures were driven by the impact of ammonia producers selling ammonia that would otherwise have been sold into the industrial market but was instead sold into the agricultural market due to the pandemic-related slowdown of the industrial market. UAN prices were negatively impacted by European anti-dumping duties, which resulted in less exports of UAN from the U.S. and more imports of UAN from Russia and Trinidad into the U.S. HDAN prices were impacted by the overall decline in agricultural commodity prices.
Our 2020 average industrial selling prices for our products were lower compared to the same period of 2019 as a result of the aforementioned negative impact on the markets we serve from the COVID-19 pandemic and the elevated ammonia inventory levels. The Tampa Ammonia pricing declined 6% compared to 2019, which led to a decrease in industrial selling prices as many of our industrial contracts are indexed to the Tampa Ammonia benchmark price. Our 2020 average mining selling prices were lower compared to 2019 primarily as a result of certain mining sales contracts are linked to natural gas indexes and as the cost of natural gas declines, the pricing for these products declines accordingly.
Legal Fees-Leidos
For 2020 and 2019, certain legal fees were approximately $5.7 million and $9.6 million, respectively. These fees relate to claims we are pursuing against Leidos to recover damages and losses associated with the construction of the ammonia plant at the El Dorado Facility as discussed in footnote B of Note 8. Due to the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic, the trial date has been delayed, which resulted in reduced costs in 2020. We are awaiting a new trial date.
Settlements with Certain Vendors (2020 only)
As discussed above under “Business Developments-2020”, EDC and certain vendors mediated settlements for EDC to recover certain costs associated with a nitric acid plant at our El Dorado Facility. As a result, a recovery from these settlements was recognized which includes approximately $5.7 million classified as a reduction to cost of sales.
Ammonia Plant Turnaround Activities (2019 only)
When an ammonia plant Turnaround is performed, overall results are negatively impacted. This impact includes lost contribution margin from lost sales, lost fixed cost absorption from lower production, and increased costs associated with repairs and maintenance. The effects of our ammonia plant Turnarounds, exclusive of the impacts due to lost production during the downtime, are shown below:
Charge Associated with Assets Held for Sale (2019 only)
In 2019, we recognized a non-cash charge of $9.7 million associated with assets held for sale, which amount is included in other expense.
Benefit for Income Taxes
For 2020, the benefit for income taxes was $4.7 million, with an effective benefit rate of 7.1%. The effective tax rate was impacted by adjustments made to our valuation allowances. For 2019, the benefit for income taxes was $20.9 million and the resulting increase in the effective benefit rate for 2019 was 24.8%, which includes changes to the state deferred tax assets and liabilities resulting from state tax law changes enacted and due to federal and state indefinite lived carryforward benefits that can be realized through the reversal of deferred tax liabilities.
Results of Operations
The following Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and accompanying notes and the discussions under “Overview” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” included in this MD&A. You should carefully review and consider the information in the MD&A of our 2019 Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2020, for an understanding of our results of operations and liquidity discussions and analysis comparing 2019 to 2018.
We present the following information about our results of operations. Net sales to unaffiliated customers are reported in the consolidated financial statements and gross profit represents net sales less cost of sales. Net sales are reported on a gross basis with the cost of freight being recorded in cost of sales.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table contains certain financial information:
(1)
Represents a non-GAAP measure since the amount excludes unallocated depreciation and amortization, Turnaround expenses and a recovery from settlements.
(2)
Represents amount classified as cost of sales.
(3)
See discussion above under “Business Developments - 2020.”
(4)
Includes interest expense of $1.6 million associated with a litigation judgment issued during 2020 as discussed in footnote (B) of Note 8.
(5)
As a percentage of total net sales.
The following table provides certain financial information by market (dollars in thousands):
(1)
Represents a non-GAAP measure since the amount excludes depreciation and amortization, Turnaround expenses and a recovery from settlements. See reconciliation included in the financial information table above.
(2)
As a percentage of the respective net sales.
The following tables provide key sales metrics for the agricultural products:
With respect to sales of industrial products, the following tables indicate key operating metrics of our major products:
With respect to sales of mining products, the following tables indicate key operating metrics of our major products:
Net Sales
•
Agricultural product sales decreased driven by lower selling prices for all of our agricultural products. The impact from the decline in selling prices was partially offset by an increase in sales volume of all our major agricultural products, including UAN as a result of higher production from the Pryor Facility as a result of the new Urea reactor which was installed in the fourth quarter of 2019.
•
Industrial products sales decreased primarily from lower selling prices due primarily to lower Tampa Ammonia benchmark pricing. The average Tampa ammonia pricing was approximately $15 per ton lower compared to 2019. Additionally, overall sales volumes were slightly higher into markets we serve, as a result of higher production, despite the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic.
•
Mining products sales increase slightly primarily as the result of overall higher sales volumes as customer demand has recently improved in certain markets we serve partially offset by lower selling prices. Certain mining sales contracts are linked to natural gas indexes and as the cost of natural gas declines, the pricing for these products declines accordingly.
Gross Profit
As noted in the tables above, we recognized a gross profit of $17 million for 2020 compared to $5 million for 2019, or an increase of approximately $12 million. Overall, our gross profit percentage increased to 4.9% for 2020 compared to 1.4% for 2019.
Our agricultural products adjusted gross profit percentage decreased to 11% for 2020 from 15% for 2019 due primarily to decreased selling prices for all of our agricultural products partially offset by increased sales volumes for all of our major products as discussed above.
Industrial and mining products adjusted gross profit percentage increased for 2020 to 36% from 33% for 2019 primarily driven by a shift of product mix, lower production costs and higher sales volumes of our mining products and certain industrial products partially offset by lower overall Tampa Ammonia pricing, which averaged approximately $233 per metric ton during 2020 compared to approximately $248 per metric ton for 2019 as discussed above.
The net negative effect on gross profit from activity discussed above was offset by approximately $13.9 million in lower natural gas costs per MMBtu and the result of settlements with certain vendors resulting in a recovery of approximately $5.7 million as discussed in Note 8. Also, during 2019, we incurred Turnaround costs totaling approximately $13.2 million (no Turnarounds were performed during 2020).
Selling, General and Administrative
Our SG&A expenses were $32.1 million for 2020, a decrease of $2.1 million compared to 2019. This net decrease was primarily driven by lower professional fees of $3.3 million, including legal fees discussed above under “Items Affecting Comparability”, partially offset by an increase in compensation-related and other miscellaneous costs of $1.2 million.
Other Expense, net
Other expense for 2019 was $9.9 million primarily relating to a non-cash charge associated with assets held for sale (minimal for 2020).
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense for 2020 was $51.1 million compared to $46.4 million for 2019. The net increase relates primarily to interest expense incurred associated with the issuance of the New Notes in 2019, the Secured Financing due 2023 and the Secured Financing Agreement due 2025 as discussed in Note 6 in addition to a litigation judgment discussed in footnote (B) of Note 8.
Benefit for Income Taxes
The benefit for income taxes for 2020 was $4.7 million compared to $20.9 million for 2019. The resulting benefit rate for 2020 was 7.1% compared to 24.8% for 2019. For 2020, the effective tax rate was impacted by adjustments made to our valuation allowances. The 2019 effective tax rate was impacted primarily due to changes to the state deferred tax assets and liabilities resulting from state tax law changes enacted during 2019 and due to federal and state indefinite lived carryforward benefits that can be realized through the reversal of deferred tax liabilities. Also, see discussion in Note 7.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The following table summarizes our cash flow activities for 2020 and 2019:
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Net cash used by operating activities was $2.5 million for 2020 compared net cash provided of $2.1 million for 2019, a decrease of $4.6 million.
For 2020, net cash used is the result of a net loss of $61.9 million plus adjustments of $69.6 million for depreciation and amortization of PP&E, and other adjustments of $9.4 million less an adjustment of $4.8 million for deferred taxes and net cash used of approximately $14.8 million primarily from our working capital, including accounts payable, accounts receivable and prepaid deposits.
For 2019, net cash provided is the result of a net loss of $63.4 million plus adjustments of $68.3 million for depreciation and amortization of PP&E, non-cash charge of $9.7 million associated assets held for sale, and other adjustments of $7.0 million less an adjustment of $20.9 million for deferred taxes and net cash provided of approximately $1.4 million primarily from our working capital.
Net Cash Flow from Investing Activities
Net cash used by investing activities was $28.4 million for 2020 compared to $35.9 million for 2019, a change of $7.5 million.
For 2020 and 2019, net cash used relates primarily to expenditures for PP&E.
Net Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $24.4 million for 2020 compared to $30.6 million for 2019, a change of $6.2 million.
For 2020, net cash provided primarily consists of proceeds of $57.2 million from other long-term debt and insurance premium short-term financing partially offset by payments on other long-term debt and short-term financing of $32.3 million and payments of $0.5 million for other financing activities.
For 2019, net cash provided primarily consists of net proceeds of $35.1 million from the New Notes, net proceeds of $7.5 million, net of payments, from other long-term debt and insurance premium short-term financing partially offset by net payments of $10 million on the Working Capital Revolver Loan, and payments of $2.0 million for other financing activities.
Capitalization
The following is our total current cash, long-term debt, redeemable preferred stock and stockholders’ equity:
(1)
See discussions below under “Loan Agreements and Redeemable Preferred Stock” concerning these financing transactions during 2020.
(2)
Liquidation preference of $278.0 million as of December 31, 2020.
See discussion above concerning the COVID-19 pandemic under “Business Developments - 2020.”
We currently have a revolving credit facility, our Working Capital Revolver Loan, with a borrowing base of $65 million. As of December 31, 2020, our Working Capital Revolver Loan was undrawn and had approximately $41.8 million of availability.
We expect capital expenditures to be approximately $30 million for 2021, which includes approximately $5 million for margin enhancement projects. The remaining capital spending is planned for reliability and maintenance capital projects.
We believe that the combination of our cash on hand, the availability on our revolving credit facility, and our cash flow from operations will be sufficient to fund our anticipated liquidity needs for the next twelve months.
Compliance with Long - Term Debt Covenants
As discussed below under “Loan Agreements,” the Working Capital Revolver Loan requires, among other things, that we meet certain financial covenants. The Working Capital Revolver Loan does not include financial covenant requirements unless a defined covenant trigger event has occurred and is continuing. As of December 31, 2020, no trigger event had occurred.
Loan Agreements and Redeemable Preferred Stock
Senior Secured Notes due 2023 - LSB has $435 million aggregate principal amount of the 9.625% Senior Secured Notes currently outstanding, as discussed in footnote (B) of Note 6. Interest is to be paid semiannually on May 1st and November 1st, maturing May 1, 2023.
Secured Promissory Note due 2021 - EDC is party to a secured promissory note due in March 2021. This promissory note bears interest at the annual rate of 5.25%. Principal and interest are payable in monthly installments.
Unsecured Loan Agreement due 2022 - As discussed in footnote (D) of Note 6, LSB is a party to an unsecured PPP loan with a lender pursuant to a new loan program through the SBA as the result of the PPP established by the CARES Act and amended by the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020. We have used all or substantially all of the proceeds from the PPP loan for payroll, rent, utilities, and other specified costs that qualify for loan forgiveness. Under the current terms of the PPP loan, loan forgiveness applications are due within 10 months after the end of the loan forgiveness covered period, which period began on the date the PPP loan was disbursed and ends either 8-weeks or 24-weeks after disbursement of the loan. Once the SBA notifies the lender the amount of the loan which has been approved for forgiveness, the lender will determine the date that the equal monthly principal and interest payments will begin for the remaining loan balance, if any. As of December 31, 2020, the loan matures in April 2022, which term may be extended to April 2025 if mutually agreed to by the parties. As for the potential loan forgiveness, once the PPP loan is,
wholly or partially, forgiven and a legal release is received, the liability would be reduced by the amount forgiven and a gain on extinguishment would be recorded.
Secured Financing due 2023 - EDC is party to a secured financing arrangement with an affiliate of LSB Funding. Principal and interest are payable in 48 equal monthly installments with a final balloon payment of approximately $3 million due in June 2023.
Secured Loan Agreement due 2025 - EDC is party to a secured loan agreement with an affiliate of LSB Funding, which provided for available borrowings (the “Interim Loan”) during the construction of certain equipment (the “Interim Loan Period”), subject to certain conditions. During the Interim Loan Period, interest only was payable in monthly installments. Effective February 28, 2020, the Interim Loan Period ended, and the Interim Loan was replaced by a secured promissory note due in March 2025. Under the terms of the note, principal and interest are payable in 60 equal monthly installments.
Secured Financing due 2025 - As discussed in footnote (G) of Note 6, EDA is party to a $30 million secured financing arrangement with an affiliate of LSB Funding. Principal and interest are payable in 60 equal monthly installments with a final balloon payment of approximately $5 million due in August 2025.
Working Capital Revolver Loan - At December 31, 2020, the Working Capital Revolver Loan was undrawn and the net credit available for borrowings under our Working Capital Revolver Loan was approximately $41.8 million, based on our eligible collateral, less outstanding standby letters of credit as of that date. Also see discussion above under “Compliance with Long-Term Debt Covenants.
Redemption of Series E Redeemable Preferred - At December 31, 2020, there were 139,768 outstanding shares of Series E Redeemable Preferred and the aggregate liquidation preference (par value plus accrued dividends) was $278.0 million.
At any time on or after October 25, 2023, each Series E holder has the right to elect to have such holder’s shares redeemed by us at a redemption price per share equal to the liquidation preference per share of $1,000 plus accrued and unpaid dividends plus the participation rights value (the “Liquidation Preference”). Additionally, at our option, we may redeem the Series E Redeemable Preferred at any time at a redemption price per share equal to the Liquidation Preference of such share as of the redemption date. Lastly, with receipt of (i) prior consent of the electing Series E holder or a majority of shares of Series E Redeemable Preferred and (ii) all other required approvals, including under any principal U.S. securities exchange on which our common stock is then listed for trading, we can redeem the Series E Redeemable Preferred by the issuance of shares of common stock having an aggregate common stock price equal to the amount of the aggregate Liquidation Preference of such shares being redeemed in shares of common stock in lieu of cash at the redemption date.
In the event of liquidation, the Series E Redeemable Preferred is entitled to receive its Liquidation Preference before any such distribution of assets or proceeds is made to or set aside for the holders of our common stock and any other junior stock. In the event of a change of control, we must make an offer to purchase all of the shares of Series E Redeemable Preferred outstanding at the Liquidation Preference.
Since carrying values of the redeemable preferred stocks are being increased by periodic accretions (including the amount for dividends earned but not yet declared or paid) using the interest method so that the carrying amount will equal the redemption value as of October 25, 2023, the earliest possible redemption date by the holder, this accretion has and will continue to affect income (loss) per common share. However, this accretion will change if the expected redemption date changes.
Also, see discussion in Note 10.
Capital Expenditures - 2020
For 2020, capital expenditures relating to PP&E were $30.5 million, which expenditures include approximately $1.8 million associated with maintaining compliance with environmental laws, regulations and guidelines. The capital expenditures were funded primarily from cash and working capital.
See discussion above under “Capitalization” for our expected annual capital expenditures for 2021.
Expenses Associated with Environmental Regulatory Compliance
We are subject to numerous federal, state and local laws and regulations, including matters regarding environmental, health and safety matters. As a result, we incurred expenses of $4.0 million in 2020 in connection with environmental projects. For 2021, we expect to incur expenses ranging from $4.1 million to $4.6 million in connection with additional environmental projects. However, it is possible that the actual costs could be significantly different than our estimates.
Dividends
We have not paid cash dividends on our outstanding common stock in many years, and we do not currently anticipate paying cash dividends on our outstanding common stock in the near future.
Dividends on the Series E Redeemable Preferred are cumulative and payable semi-annually (May 1 and November 1) in arrears at the current annual rate of 14% of the liquidation value of $1,000 per share, but such annual rate will increase beginning on April 25, 2021 as discussed in Note 10. Each share of Series E Redeemable Preferred is entitled to receive a semi-annual dividend, only when
declared by our Board. In addition, dividends in arrears at the dividend date, until paid, shall compound additional dividends at the current annual rate of 14%, but such annual rate will increase beginning on April 25, 2021. The current semi-annual compounded dividend is approximately $136.29 per share for the current aggregate semi-annual dividend of $19.0 million. We also must declare a dividend on the Series E Redeemable Preferred on a pro rata basis with our common stock. As long as the Purchaser holds at least 10% of the Series E Redeemable Preferred, we may not declare dividends on our common stock and other preferred stocks unless and until dividends have been declared and paid on the Series E Redeemable Preferred for the then current dividend period in cash. As of December 31, 2020, the amount of accumulated dividends on the Series E Redeemable Preferred was approximately $138.2 million.
Dividends on the Series D 6% cumulative convertible Class C preferred stock (the “Series D Preferred”) and Series B 12% cumulative convertible Class C Preferred Stock (the “Series B Preferred”) are payable annually, only when declared by our Board, as follows:
•
$0.06 per share on our outstanding non-redeemable Series D Preferred for an aggregate dividend of $60,000, and
•
$12.00 per share on our outstanding non-redeemable Series B Preferred for an aggregate dividend of $240,000.
As of December 31, 2020, the amount of accumulated dividends on the Series D Preferred and Series B Preferred totaled approximately $1.6 million. All shares of the Series D Preferred and Series B Preferred are owned by the Golsen Holders and an immediate family member. There are no optional or mandatory redemption rights with respect to the Series B Preferred or Series D Preferred.
Seasonality
We believe fertilizer products sold to the agricultural industry are seasonal while sales into the industrial and mining sectors generally are less susceptible. The selling seasons for agricultural products are primarily during the spring and fall planting seasons, which typically extend from March through June and from September through November in the geographical markets we distribute the majority of our agricultural products. As a result, we typically increase our inventory of fertilizer products prior to the beginning of each planting season in order to meet the demand for our products. In addition, the amount and timing of sales to the agricultural markets depend upon weather conditions and other circumstances beyond our control.
Performance and Payment Bonds
We are contingently liable to sureties in respect of insurance bonds issued by the sureties in connection with certain contracts entered into by subsidiaries in the normal course of business. These insurance bonds primarily represent guarantees of future performance of our subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2020, we have agreed to indemnify the sureties for payments, up to $10 million, made by them in respect of such bonds. All of these insurance bonds are expected to expire or be renewed in 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Aggregate Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, our aggregate contractual obligations are summarized in the following table:
(1)
The estimated interest payments are based on interest rates at December 31, 2020 which debt is all fixed interest rate debt.
(2)
The Series E redeemable preferred stock (including dividends) are assumed to be redeemed and paid on the earliest possible redemption date by the holder (October 25, 2023) and that dividends are accrued until that date.
(3)
Capital expenditures include only the budgeted amounts at December 31, 2020.
(4)
Our proportionate share of the minimum costs to ensure capacity relating to a gathering and pipeline system.
(5)
The future cash flows relating to executive and death benefits are based on estimates at December 31, 2020. The participation rights value associated with embedded derivative of our Series E redeemable preferred stock is based on the value of our common stock at December 31, 2020 and is based on the earliest possible redemption date by the holder, October 25, 2023.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 for recently issued accounting standards.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and disclosures of contingencies and fair values. It is reasonably possible that the estimates and assumptions utilized as of December 31, 2020, could change in the near term. The more critical areas of financial reporting affected by management's judgment, estimates and assumptions include the following:
Contingencies - Certain conditions may exist which may result in a loss, but which will only be resolved when future events occur. We and our legal counsel assess such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. If the assessment of a contingency indicates that it is probable that a loss has been incurred, we would accrue for such contingent losses when such losses can be reasonably estimated. If the assessment indicates that a potentially material loss contingency is not probable but reasonably possible, or is probable but cannot be estimated, the nature of the contingent liability, together with an estimate of the range of possible loss if determinable and material, would be disclosed. Estimates of potential legal fees and other directly related costs associated with contingencies are not accrued but rather are expensed as incurred. Loss contingency liabilities are included in current and noncurrent accrued and other liabilities and are based on current estimates that may be revised in the near term. In addition, we recognize contingent gains when such gains are realized or realizable and earned.
We are involved in various legal matters that require management to make estimates and assumptions, including costs relating to the lawsuit styled City of West, Texas v CF Industries, Inc., et al, discussed under “Other Pending, Threatened or Settled Litigation” of Note 8.
It is reasonably possible that the actual costs could be significantly different than our estimates.
Regulatory Compliance - As discussed under “Government Laws and Regulations” in Item 1 of this report, we are subject to numerous federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including matters regarding environmental, health and safety matters. We have developed policies and procedures related to regulatory compliance. We must continually monitor whether we have maintained compliance with such laws and regulations and the operating implications, if any, and amount of penalties, fines and assessments that may result from noncompliance. We will also be obligated to manage certain discharge water outlets and monitor groundwater contaminants at our chemical facilities should we discontinue the operations of a facility. However, certain conditions exist which may result in a loss, but which will only be resolved when future events occur relating to these matters. We are involved in various environmental matters that require management to make estimates and assumptions, including matters discussed under footnote A of Note 8. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, liabilities totaling $0.5 million and $0.2 million, respectively, have been accrued relating to these matters. It is also reasonably possible that the estimates and assumptions utilized as of December 31, 2020 could change in the near term. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates and judgments, as additional information becomes known.
Income Tax - As discussed under “Income Taxes” in Note 1 and in Note 7, income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those differences are expected to be recovered or settled. We establish valuation allowances if we believe it is more-likely-than-not that some or all of deferred tax assets will not be realized. Significant judgment is applied in evaluating the need for and the magnitude of appropriate valuation allowances against deferred tax assets. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our valuation allowance on deferred tax assets was $64.7 million and $51.6 million, respectively.
Redeemable Preferred Stocks - Our outstanding Series E and F Redeemable Preferred are redeemable outside of our control and are classified as temporary/mezzanine equity on our consolidated balance sheet. In addition, certain embedded features (the “embedded derivative”) included in the Series E Redeemable Preferred required bifurcation and are classified as derivative liabilities.
Currently, the carrying values of the redeemable preferred stocks are being increased by periodic accretions (recorded to retained earnings and included in determining income or loss per share) using the interest method so that the carrying amount will equal the redemption value as of October 25, 2023, the earliest possible redemption date by the holder. Approximately $37 million of accretion (including the amount for earned dividends) was recorded to retained earnings in 2020. At December 31, 2020, the carrying value of these redeemable preferred stocks was $272.1 million.
For the embedded derivative, changes in fair value are recorded in our statement of operations. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had estimated that the contingent redemption features had fair value since we had assessed that it was probable that a portion of the shares of this preferred stock would have been redeemed prior to October 25, 2023.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the fair value of the embedded derivative was $1.0 million and $1.1 million, respectively, primarily relating to the participation rights based on the equivalent of 303,646 shares of our common stock at $3.39 and $4.20 per share, respectively. The valuation is classified as Level 3.
Management’s judgment and estimates in the above areas are based on information available from internal and external resources at that time. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates and judgments, as additional information becomes known.