Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the section titled “Selected Consolidated Financial and Other Data” and the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses fiscal years 2020 and 2019 and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of fiscal year 2018 and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Financial Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020
•Total revenue was $2.4 billion, a decrease of 35% year-over-year.
•Total costs and expenses were $4.2 billion, including stock-based compensation expense of $565.8 million and insurance costs related to changes to insurance reserves attributable to historical periods of $168.1 million.
•Loss from operations was $1.8 billion.
•Net loss was $1.8 billion.
•Cash used in operating activities was $1.4 billion.
•Unrestricted cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments totaled $2.3 billion as of December 31, 2020.
Impact of COVID-19 to our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to spread throughout the United States, Canada, and in many other countries globally. The spread of COVID-19 has caused public health officials to recommend and governments to enact precautions to mitigate the spread of the virus, including travel restrictions, extensive social distancing measures and issuing “shelter-in-place” orders in many regions of the United States and Canada. Beginning in the middle of March 2020, the pandemic and these related responses have caused decreased demand for our platform leading to decreased revenues as well as decreased earning opportunities for drivers on our platform, the global slowdown of economic activity (including the decrease in demand for a broad variety of goods and services), disruptions in global supply chains and significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. These impacts are ongoing and have continued into 2021.
We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Although demand has improved compared to the second quarter of 2020, it remains significantly below the prior year. The exact timing and pace of the recovery remain uncertain. As certain regions have reopened, some have experienced a resurgence of COVID-19 cases and reimposed restrictions. The extent to which our operations will continue to be impacted by the pandemic will depend largely on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the pandemic, actions by government authorities and private businesses to contain the pandemic or recover from its impact, and the availability and distribution of the vaccine, among other things. Even as travel restrictions have been and will continue to be modified or lifted, we anticipate that continued social distancing, altered consumer behavior, reduced travel and commuting and expected corporate cost cutting will be significant challenges for us. The strength and duration of these challenges cannot be presently estimated.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, beginning in March and continuing into the first quarter of 2021, we have adopted multiple measures, including pausing our shared rides offerings, distributing thousands of bottles of hand sanitizer, masks and partitions to drivers on our platform, requiring face coverings on all rideshare trips, providing most employees with the option to work from home at least until September 1, 2021, restricting non-critical business travel by our employees, and making adjustments to our expenses and cash flow to correlate with declines in revenues. For example, in the second quarter of 2020, in an effort to reduce operating expenses and adjust cash flows in light of the ongoing economic challenges resulting from the pandemic, we announced the following actions:
•Termination of approximately 17% of our employees;
•Furlough of approximately 300 employees;
•Implementation of a reduction in base salary for exempt employees for 12 weeks, ranging from 10% for most non-hourly employees and up to 30% for our senior leadership team; and
•Members of our board of directors voluntarily agreeing to forego 30% of their cash compensation for the second quarter of 2020.
As a result of these actions, we recognized a stock-based compensation benefit related to the reversal of previously recognized stock-based compensation expenses for unvested stock awards of $72.7 million offset by a charge related to the accelerated vesting of certain equity awards for employees who were terminated of $22.9 million. Additionally, we recognized other restructuring charges including severance and other employee costs of $32.1 million and lease termination and other restructuring charges of $3.1 million, resulting in a net benefit of $14.5 million in the second quarter of 2020. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we terminated 45 employees in our continued efforts to reduce operating expenses resulting in an additional $1.4 million in net restructuring charges. However, these actions have and will only mitigate a limited portion of the negative effects of the pandemic on our business.
In addition to the actions outlined above, we also significantly decreased our planned 2020 capital expenditure spending. We decreased rider incentives to an all-time low in the second quarter of 2020 and maintained them near the historical low through the fourth quarter of 2020, resulting in a significant decrease in sales and marketing expenses.
During the second quarter of 2020, we also issued $747.5 million in aggregate principal amount of 1.50% convertible senior notes due 2025, or the 2025 Notes. In addition, we entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions with the option counterparties at a cost of approximately $132.7 million. We believe the net proceeds further improve our financial position for general corporate purposes and improve our ability to execute on capital expenditures, potential acquisitions and strategic transactions as they arise.
We remain confident in our ability to navigate this challenging time and continue to focus on our long-term growth opportunities and our business model, including our ability to be profitable in the future. With $2.3 billion in unrestricted cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2020, we believe we have sufficient liquidity to continue to support our business operations and to take strategic investments that are in the best interests of our employees and other stakeholders. For more information on risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and our litigation matters, see the section titled “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part I.
Recent Developments - Driver Classification
On November 3, 2020, California voters passed the ballot initiative, Proposition 22. Proposition 22 protects independence and flexibility, while providing them new earnings opportunities and protections, including contributions towards health care coverage, occupational accident insurance, and minimum guaranteed earnings. We have incurred additional expenses associated with these new earnings opportunities and protections. We do not expect these changes will have a material impact on our business, results of operations, financial position, or cash flows. See the sections titled “Legal Proceedings” and “Risk Factors” in Items 3 and 1A, respectively, of Part I for additional information.
Active Riders and Revenue per Active Rider
The COVID-19 pandemic caused a significant decrease in Active Riders and in revenue per Active Rider, though we experienced a recovery in revenue per Active Rider in the second half of 2020 as well as, to a lesser extent, the number of Active Riders. The number of Active Riders is a key indicator of the scale of our community and awareness of our brand. Revenue per Active Rider represents our ability to drive usage and monetization of our platform.
We define Active Riders as all riders who take at least one ride during a quarter where the Lyft Platform processes the transaction. An Active Rider is identified by a unique phone number. If a rider has two mobile phone numbers or changed their phone number and such rider took rides using both phone numbers during the quarter, that person would count as two Active Riders. If a rider has a personal and business profile tied to the same mobile phone number, that person would be considered a single Active Rider. If a ride has been requested by an organization using our Concierge offering for the benefit of a rider, we exclude this rider in the calculation of Active Riders. unless the ride is accessible in the Lyft App.
Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, some riders were able to access their Concierge rides in the Lyft App if they already had a Lyft account. Accordingly, Lyft updated the definition of Active Riders to include Concierge riders if the rider’s phone number matches that of a verified Lyft account, allowing the rider to access their ride in the Lyft App. This update resulted in a 0.01% increase, or an additional 927 Active Riders in the fourth quarter of 2020. Prior to the fourth quarter of 2020, all Concierge riders were excluded from the calculation of Active Riders as Concierge rides could not be matched with verified rider accounts.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, we updated the definition of Active Riders to include riders who have migrated from the legacy Motivate platform to the Lyft Platform, which resulted in a 0.01% increase, or an additional 1,167 Active Riders, in the fourth quarter. Prior to the fourth quarter of 2019, for Motivate, only riders that had taken a ride or rented a bike or scooter through the Lyft App during the quarter were counted as an Active Rider. This change had no impact on the Active Riders disclosed in any of the prior periods presented.
With the exception of the three months ended March 31, 2020 as compared to the three months ended March 31, 2019, Active Riders in each of the three month periods ended June 30, September 30, and December 31, 2020 was down compared to the same period in 2019. This was primarily due to the implementation of travel restrictions and extensive social distancing measures across North America in response to the COVID-19 pandemic since March 2020. However, relative to the trough in Active Riders for the three months ended June 30, 2020, our Active Riders base increased during the three months ended September 30, 2020 and was stable during the three months ended December 31, 2020 despite the surge in COVID-19 cases and the reintroduction of restrictive measures toward the end of the year. Local recovery trends continue to vary significantly.
Revenue per Active Rider for each of the three months ended June 30, 2020 and September 30, 2020 was down compared to the same period in 2019 reflecting the decline in ride frequency as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, revenue per Active Rider reached an all time high in the three months ended December 31, 2020, reflecting a mix shift toward higher frequency Active Riders as new rider activations declined and lower frequency riders used the platform less often. Additions to our Active Rider base at the end of any quarter are generally dilutive to revenue per Active Rider for the quarter, which resulted in increased revenue per Active Rider this quarter. In the latter part of the fourth quarter, as COVID-19 cases surged and states and cities implemented restrictive measures intended to curb the spread, ride demand also declined.
Initial Public Offering
Our IPO Registration Statement was declared effective on March 28, 2019 and our Class A common stock began trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on March 29, 2019. Our IPO was completed on April 2, 2019 and the partial exercise of the
underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares was completed on April 9, 2019. Our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2019 and for the year then-ended reflect the sale by us of an aggregate of 35,496,845 shares in our IPO, including pursuant to the partial exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at the public offering price of $72.00 per share, for aggregate net proceeds to us of approximately $2.5 billion, after underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, and the conversion of all outstanding shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock into an aggregate of 219,175,709 shares of Class A common stock.
Our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2019 and for the year then-ended reflect stock-based compensation expense of $1.6 billion primarily associated with the vesting of RSUs for which the requisite service condition was met as of December 31, 2019. The liquidity event condition for RSUs, if any, was satisfied upon the effectiveness of our IPO Registration Statement on March 28, 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from our estimates. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a significant degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, we believe these are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. For further information, see Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606)
We generate substantially all our revenue from our ridesharing marketplace that connects drivers and riders. We recognize revenue from fees paid by drivers for use of our Lyft Platform offerings in accordance with ASC 606 as described in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Drivers enter into terms of service (“ToS”) with us in order to use our Lyft Driver App.
We provide a service to drivers to complete a successful transportation service for riders. This service includes on-demand lead generation that assists drivers to find, receive and fulfill on-demand requests from riders seeking transportation services and related collection activities using our Lyft Platform. As a result, our single performance obligation in the transaction is to connect drivers with riders to facilitate the completion of a successful transportation service for riders.
We evaluate the presentation of revenue on a gross versus net basis based on whether we act as a principal by controlling the transportation service provided to the rider or whether we act as an agent by arranging for third parties to provide the service to the rider. We facilitate the provision of a transportation service by a driver to a rider (the driver’s customer) in order for the driver to fulfill their contractual promise to the rider. The driver fulfills their promise to provide a transportation service to their customer through use of the Lyft Platform. While we facilitate setting the price for transportation services, the drivers and riders have the discretion in accepting the transaction price through the platform. We do not control the transportation services being provided to the rider nor do we have inventory risk related to the transportation services. As a result, we act as an agent in facilitating the ability for a driver to provide a transportation service to a rider.
We report revenue on a net basis, reflecting the service fees and commissions owed to us from the drivers as revenue, and not the gross amount collected from the rider. We made this determination of not being primarily responsible for the services since we do not promise the transportation services, do not contract with drivers to provide transportation services on our behalf, do not control whether the driver accepts or declines the transportation request via the Lyft Platform, and do not control the provision of transportation services by drivers to riders at any point in time either before, during, or after, the trip.
We consider the ToS and our customary business practices in identifying the contracts under ASC 606. As our customary business practice, a contract exists between the driver and us when the driver’s ability to cancel the trip lapses, which typically is upon pickup of the rider. We collect the fare and related charges from riders on behalf of drivers using the rider’s pre-authorized credit card or other payment mechanism and retain any fees owed to us before making the remaining disbursement to drivers; thus the driver’s ability and intent to pay is not subject to significant judgment.
We earn service fees and commissions from the drivers either as the difference between an amount paid by a rider based on an upfront quoted fare and the amount earned by a driver based on actual time and distance for the trip or as a fixed percentage of the fare charged to the rider. In an upfront quoted fare arrangement, as we do not control the driver’s actions at any point in the transaction to limit the time and distance for the trip, we take on risks related to the driver’s actions which may not be fully mitigated. We earn a
variable amount from the drivers and may record a loss from a transaction, which is recorded as a reduction to revenue, in instances where an up-front quoted fare offered to a rider is less than the amount we are committed to pay the driver.
We recognize revenue upon completion of a ride as the single performance obligation is satisfied and we have the right to receive payment for the services rendered upon the completion of the ride.
We offer various incentive programs to drivers that are recorded as reduction to revenue if we do not receive a distinct good or service in consideration or if we cannot reasonably estimate the fair value of goods or services received.
In some cases, we also earn Concierge platform fees from organizations that use our Concierge offering, which is a product that allows organizations to request rides for their customers and employees through our ridesharing marketplace. Concierge platform fees are earned as a fixed dollar amount per ride or a percentage of the ride price depending on the contract and such Concierge platform fee revenue is recognized on a gross basis.
We recognize revenue from subscription fees paid by users to access transportation options through the Lyft Platform and mobile-based applications over the applicable subscription period.
Rental Revenue (ASC 842)
We generate rental revenues primarily from Flexdrive, our network of Light Vehicles, and Lyft Rentals. Under the Flexdrive and Lyft Rentals programs, we operate a fleet of rental vehicles comprised of both vehicles owned by us and vehicles leased from third-party leasing companies (“head leases”). We either lease or sublease vehicles to drivers and Lyft Rentals renters, as a result, we are considered the accounting lessor or sublessor, as applicable, in these arrangements in accordance with ASC 842. For vehicles that are subleased, sublease income and head lease expense for these transactions are recognized on a gross basis in the consolidated financial statements. Drivers who rent vehicles are charged rental fees, which we collect from the driver by deducting such amounts from the driver’s earnings on the Lyft Platform.
Revenue generated from single-use ride fees paid by Light Vehicles riders are recognized upon completion of each related ride. Revenue generated from Flexdrive and Lyft Rentals is recognized evenly over the rental period, which is typically seven days or less. Due to the short-term nature of the Flexdrive, Lyft Rentals, and Light Vehicle transactions, we classify these rentals as operating leases.
Insurance Reserves
We utilize both a wholly-owned captive insurance subsidiary and third-party insurance, which may include deductibles and self-insured retentions, to insure or reinsure costs including auto liability, uninsured and underinsured motorist, auto physical damage, first party injury coverages including personal injury protection under state law and general business liabilities up to certain limits. The recorded liabilities reflect the estimated ultimate cost for claims incurred but not paid and claims that have been incurred but not yet reported and any estimable administrative run-out expenses related to the processing of these outstanding claim payments. Liabilities are determined on a quarterly basis by internal actuaries through an analysis of historical trends, changes in claims experience including consideration of new information and application of loss development factors among other inputs and assumptions. On an annual basis, an independent third-party actuary will evaluate the liabilities for appropriateness with claims reserve valuations.
Insurance claims may take years to completely settle, and we have limited historical loss experience. Because of the limited operational history, we make certain assumptions based on currently available information and industry statistics and utilize actuarial models and techniques to estimate the reserves. A number of factors can affect the actual cost of a claim, including the length of time the claim remains open, economic and healthcare cost trends and the results of related litigation. Furthermore, claims may emerge in future years for events that occurred in a prior year at a rate that differs from previous actuarial projections. The impact of these factors on ultimate costs for insurance is difficult to estimate and could be material. However, while we believe that the insurance reserve amount is adequate, the ultimate liability may be in excess of, or less than, the amount provided. As a result, the net amounts that will ultimately be paid to settle the liability and when amounts will be paid may significantly vary from the estimated amounts provided for in the consolidated balance sheets. We continue to review our insurance reserve estimates in a regular, ongoing process as historical experience develops, additional claims are reported as settled, and the legal, regulatory and economic environment evolves.
Stock-Based Compensation
We incur stock-based compensation expense primarily from RSUs, performance based stock units (“PSUs”), stock options, and stock purchase rights granted under the our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”).
We estimate the fair value of stock options granted to employees, directors and consultants and ESPP purchase rights using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of stock options that are expected to vest is recognized as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We recognize compensation expense related to the ESPP purchase rights on a straight-line basis over the offering period, which is typically 12 months.
The fair value of RSUs and PSUs are estimated based on the fair market value of our common stock on the date of grant, which subsequent to our IPO is determined based on the closing price of our Class A common stock as reported on the date of grant. Prior to our IPO, we granted RSUs which vest upon the satisfaction of both a service condition and a performance condition.
Compensation expense for RSUs with service and performance conditions is amortized on a graded basis over the requisite service period as long as the performance condition in the form of a specified liquidity event is probable to occur. The liquidity event condition was satisfied upon the effectiveness of our IPO Registration Statement on March 28, 2019. On that date we recorded a cumulative stock-based compensation expense of $857.2 million using the accelerated attribution method for the RSUs for which the service condition was satisfied as of March 28, 2019. The remaining unrecognized stock-based compensation expense related to these RSUs is recorded over their remaining requisite service periods. The compensation expense for RSUs granted after March 28, 2019, which vest upon satisfaction of a service-based condition only, is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. As of December 31, 2020, the total unrecognized compensation cost related to RSUs was $905.6 million, which we expect to recognize over the remaining weighted-average period of approximately 2.4 years.
Stock-based compensation expense is based on awards ultimately expected to vest and reflects estimated forfeitures. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from initial estimates.
Business Combinations
We account for our business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires, among other things, allocation of the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. When determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with a corresponding offset to goodwill if new information is obtained related to facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date. After the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are reflected in the consolidated statements of operations. Acquisition costs, such as legal and consulting fees, are expensed as incurred.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in a business combination. Intangible assets resulting from the acquisition of entities accounted for using the purchase method of accounting are estimated by us based on the fair value of assets received. Intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives which range from two to twelve years.
Goodwill is not subject to amortization, but is tested for impairment on an annual basis during the fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the goodwill may not be recoverable. As part of the annual goodwill impairment test, we first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary. If, as a result of its qualitative assessment, it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amounts, the quantitative impairment test will be required. There was no impairment of goodwill recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted as of the date of this report.
Components of Results of Operations
As noted above, we expect to see decreased levels of demand for our platform, decreased numbers of new rider activations, and negative impacts on revenue for so long as responsive measures to COVID-19 remain in place, and we have adopted multiple measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We cannot be certain that these actions will mitigate some or all of the negative effects of the pandemic on our business. In light of the evolving and unpredictable effects of COVID-19, we are not currently in a position to forecast the expected impact of COVID-19 on our financial and operating results in future periods.
Revenue
Revenue consists of revenue recognized from fees paid by drivers for use of our Lyft Platform offerings, Concierge platform fees from organizations that use our Concierge offering, and subscription fees paid by riders to access transportation options through
the Lyft Platform. Revenue derived from these offerings are recognized in accordance with ASC 606 as described in the Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates above and in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue also consists of rental revenues recognized through leases or subleases primarily from Flexdrive, Lyft Rentals, and our network of Light Vehicles, which includes revenue generated from single-use ride fees paid by riders of Light Vehicles. Revenue derived from these offerings are recognized in accordance with ASC 842 as described in the Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates above and in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
We offer various incentive programs to drivers that are recorded as reduction to revenue if we do not receive a distinct good or service in consideration or if we cannot reasonably estimate the fair value of goods or services received.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists of costs directly related to revenue generating transactions through our multimodal platform which primarily includes insurance costs, payment processing charges, and other costs. Insurance costs consist of insurance generally required under TNC and city regulations for ridesharing and bike and scooter rentals and also includes occupational hazard insurance for drivers. Payment processing charges include merchant fees, chargebacks and failed charges. Other costs included in cost of revenue are hosting and platform-related technology costs, vehicle lease expenses, personnel-related compensation costs, depreciation, amortization of technology-related intangible assets, asset write-off charges, and gains and losses related to the sale of vehicles.
Operations and Support
Operations and support expenses primarily consist of personnel-related compensation costs of local operations teams and teams who provide phone, email and chat support to users, bike and scooter fleet operations support costs, driver background checks and onboarding costs, facility costs, certain car rental fleet support costs and fees paid to third-parties providing operations support. Bike and scooter fleet operations support costs include general repairs and maintenance, and other customer support activities related to repositioning bikes and scooters for rider convenience, cleaning and safety checks.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel-related compensation costs and facilities costs. Such expenses include costs related to certain of our autonomous vehicle technology initiatives. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of rider incentives, personnel-related compensation costs, driver incentives for referring new drivers or riders, advertising expenses, rider refunds and marketing partnerships with third parties. Sales and marketing costs are expensed as incurred.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel-related compensation costs, professional services fees, certain insurance costs that are generally not required under TNC regulations, certain loss contingency expenses including legal accruals and settlements, insurance claims administrative fees, policy spend, depreciation, facility costs and other corporate costs. General and administrative expenses are expensed as incurred.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest incurred on our 2025 Notes, as well as the related amortization of deferred debt issuance costs and debt discount. Interest expense also includes interest incurred on our Non-Revolving Loan and our Master Vehicle Loan.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents, and restricted and unrestricted short-term investments.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in foreign jurisdictions and U.S. state income taxes. As we expand the scale of our international business activities, any changes in the U.S. and foreign taxation of such activities may increase our overall provision for income taxes in the future.
We have a valuation allowance for our U.S. deferred tax assets, including federal and state net operating loss carryforwards, or NOLs. We expect to maintain this valuation allowance until it becomes more likely than not that the benefit of our federal and state deferred tax assets will be realized by way of expected future taxable income in the United States.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our historical consolidated statements of operations data:
The following table sets forth the components of our consolidated statements of operations data as a percentage of revenue:
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Revenue
Revenue decreased $1.3 billion, or 35%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year, driven primarily by a decrease in the number of Active Riders beginning in March 2020 and continuing throughout 2020 due to the implementation of travel restrictions and extensive social distancing measures across North America in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We expect to see continued suppression of demand for our platform and resulting negative impacts on revenue for so long as the travel restrictions, extensive social distancing measures and other restrictive measures in response to COVID-19 remain in place
and we cannot predict when such measures may no longer be in place. Even as these measures and travel restrictions have been and will continue to be modified or lifted, we cannot estimate the extent that continued social distancing, altered consumer behavior, reduced travel and commuting and expected corporate cost cutting will impact our business.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue decreased $729.0 million, or 33%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. The decrease was due primarily to a decrease of $371.7 million in insurance costs driven by (i) the negative impact on ride volume due to the COVID-19 pandemic and (ii) a decrease of $51.0 million in changes to the liabilities for insurance required by regulatory agencies attributable to historical periods. The lower ride volume due to the COVID-19 pandemic also resulted in decreases in transaction fees and web hosting fees to support our platform of $186.0 million and $43.4 million, respectively. Bike and scooter related costs also decreased $48.6 million as a result of a reduction in asset disposals and a reduction in depreciation expenses due to lower capital expenditures in response to the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, stock-based compensation expense decreased $48.4 million, primarily attributable to (i) the use of the accelerated attribution method to recognize expenses for RSUs granted prior to the effectiveness of our IPO Registration Statement which resulted in higher stock-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, and (ii) the stock-based compensation benefit related to the restructuring in the second quarter of 2020.
Operations and Support
Operations and support expenses decreased $182.2 million, or 29%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to a reduction of $64.6 million in driver onboarding costs and rider and driver support costs as well as a reduction of $16.9 million in facilities costs as a result of the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Personnel-related costs also decreased $32.2 million primarily as a result of the restructuring in the second quarter of 2020. In addition, stock-based compensation expense decreased $56.6 million, primarily attributable to (i) the use of the accelerated attribution method to recognize expenses for RSUs granted prior to the effectiveness of our IPO Registration Statement which resulted in higher stock-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, and (ii) the stock-based compensation benefit related to the restructuring in the second quarter of 2020.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses decreased $596.5 million, or 40%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to a $609.6 million reduction in stock-based compensation expense primarily attributable to (i) the use of the accelerated attribution method to recognize expenses for RSUs granted prior to the effectiveness of our IPO Registration Statement which resulted in higher stock-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, and (ii) the stock-based compensation benefit related to the restructuring in the second quarter of 2020. The decrease was partially offset by an increase of $47.0 million in autonomous vehicles research and development costs primarily due to the absence of
reimbursements from a co-development partnership which concluded in the fourth quarter of 2019. We recently announced that we were exploring strategic options for our Level 5 self-driving system development program.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $397.8 million, or 49%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. The decrease was due to a $246.5 million decrease in costs related to incentive programs driven primarily by a reduction in rider incentives beginning in the second quarter of 2020 through the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of $36.3 million in costs associated with driver and rider acquisition and a decrease of $31.9 million in brand and other marketing. Personnel-related costs also decreased $12.2 million primarily as a result of the restructuring in the second quarter of 2020. The decrease was also due to a $47.1 million reduction in stock-based compensation expense primarily attributable to (i) the use of the accelerated attribution method to recognize expenses for RSUs granted prior to the effectiveness of our IPO Registration Statement which resulted in higher stock-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, and (ii) the stock-based compensation benefit related to the restructuring in the second quarter of 2020.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased $240.0 million, or 20%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. The decrease was due primarily to a $222.7 million reduction in stock-based compensation expense primarily attributable to (i) the use of the accelerated attribution method to recognize expenses for RSUs granted prior to the effectiveness of our IPO Registration Statement which resulted in higher stock-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, and (ii) the stock-based compensation benefit related to the restructuring events in 2020. There was also a $50.0 million decrease in the accrual of self-retained general business liabilities and a decrease of $23.5 million in certain loss contingencies including legal accruals and settlements. These decreases were partially offset by $44.6 million in policy spend in support of the passage of Proposition 22 in California and an increase of $28.5 million in consultant and advisory costs.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased $32.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to prior years. Interest expense relates to the issuance of our 2025 Notes in May 2020 and the vehicle related debt assumed from the acquisition of Flexdrive in February 2020.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net decreased $58.9 million, or 57%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily related to a decrease in interest income driven by a decline in interest rates and the yield on debt securities and a decrease in our cash equivalents and short-term investments balance.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our unaudited quarterly consolidated results of operations for each of the eight quarters in the period ended December 31, 2020. These unaudited quarterly results of operations have been prepared on the same basis as our audited
consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In the opinion of management, the financial information set forth in the table below reflects all normal recurring adjustments necessary for the fair statement of results of operations for these periods. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future and the results of a particular quarter or other interim period are not necessarily indicative of the results for a full year. You should read the following unaudited quarterly consolidated results of operations in conjunction with the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on 10-K.
Quarterly Consolidated Statements of Operations
_______________
(1)Costs and expenses include stock-based compensation expense as follows:
The three months ended March 31, 2019 includes $857.2 million of stock-based compensation expense related to RSUs, for which the performance-based condition, if any, was satisfied on March 28, 2019, the effective date of our IPO Registration Statement, and the requisite service conditions was met as of December 31, 2019.
Consolidated Statements of Operations, as a percentage of revenue
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
_______________
(1)Contribution, Contribution Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are non-GAAP financial measures and metrics. For more information regarding our use of these measures and a reconciliation of these measures to the most comparable GAAP measures, see “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Contribution and Contribution Margin
Contribution and Contribution Margin are measures used by our management to understand and evaluate our operating performance and trends. We believe Contribution and Contribution Margin are key measures of our ability to achieve profitability and increase it over time. Contribution Margin has generally increased over the periods presented as revenue has increased at a faster rate than the costs included in the calculation of Contribution.
We define Contribution as revenue less cost of revenue, adjusted to exclude the following items from cost of revenue:
•amortization of intangible assets;
•stock-based compensation expense;
•payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation;
•changes to the liabilities for insurance required by regulatory agencies attributable to historical periods;
•transfer of certain legacy auto insurance liabilities; and
•restructuring charges, if any.
For more information about cost of revenue, see the section titled “Components of Results of Operations-Cost of Revenue.”
Contribution Margin is calculated by dividing Contribution for a period by revenue for the same period.
We record historical changes to liabilities for insurance required by regulatory agencies for financial reporting purposes in the quarter of positive or adverse development even though such development may be related to claims that occurred in prior periods. For example, if in the first quarter of a given year, the cost of claims grew by $1 million for claims related to the prior fiscal year or earlier, the expense would be recorded for GAAP purposes within the first quarter instead of in the results of the prior period. We believe these prior period changes to insurance liabilities do not illustrate the current period performance of our ongoing operations since these prior period changes relate to claims that could potentially date back years. We have limited ability to influence the ultimate development of historical claims. Accordingly, including the prior period changes would not illustrate the performance of our ongoing operations or how the business is run or managed by us. For consistency, we do not adjust the calculation of Contribution for any prior period based on any positive or adverse development that occurs subsequent to the quarter end. Annual Contribution is calculated by adding Contribution of the last four quarters. We believe the adjustment to exclude the historical changes to liabilities for insurance required by regulatory agencies from Contribution and Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors by enabling them to better assess our operating performance in the context of current period results.
During the first quarter of 2020, we entered into a Novation Agreement for the transfer of certain legacy auto insurance liabilities between October 1, 2015 and September 30, 2018. Refer to Note 5 “Supplemental Financial Statement Information” to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding this transaction. We believe the costs associated with the transfer of these legacy auto insurance liabilities do not illustrate the current period performance of our ongoing operations despite this transaction occurring in the current period because these costs are non-recurring and the transferred insurance liabilities relate to claims that date back years. We believe the adjustment to exclude these costs related to the transfer of legacy insurance liabilities from Contribution and Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors by enabling them to better assess our operating performance in the context of current period results and provide for better comparability with our historically disclosed Contribution and Adjusted EBITDA amounts.
We had restructuring efforts in the second and fourth quarters of 2020 to reduce operating expenses and adjust cash flows in light of the ongoing economic challenges resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our business. We believe the costs associated with the restructuring do not reflect current period performance of our ongoing operations. We believe the adjustment to exclude the costs related to restructuring from Contribution and Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors by enabling them to better assess our operating performance in the context of current period results and provide for better comparability with our historically disclosed Contribution and Adjusted EBITDA amounts.
For more information regarding the limitations of Contribution and Contribution Margin and a reconciliation of revenue to Contribution, see the section titled "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are key performance measures that our management uses to assess our operating performance and the operating leverage in our business. Because Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin facilitate internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis, we use these measures for business planning purposes. We expect Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin will increase over the long term as we continue to scale our business and achieve greater efficiencies in our operating expenses.
We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as net loss, adjusted to exclude:
•interest expense;
•other income (expense), net;
•provision for (benefit from) income taxes;
•depreciation and amortization;
•stock-based compensation expense;
•payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation;
•changes to the liabilities for insurance required by regulatory agencies attributable to historical periods;
•costs related to acquisitions, if any;
•transfer of the certain legacy auto insurance liability; and
•restructuring charges, if any.
Adjusted EBITDA Margin is calculated by dividing Adjusted EBITDA for a period by revenue for the same period.
For more information regarding the limitations of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin and a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA, see the section titled “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use Contribution, Contribution Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin in conjunction with GAAP measures as part of our overall assessment of our performance, including the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, and to communicate with our board of directors concerning our financial performance. Our definitions may differ from the definitions used by other companies and therefore comparability may be limited. In addition, other companies may not publish these or similar metrics. Furthermore, these measures have certain limitations in that they do not include the impact of certain expenses that are reflected in our consolidated statements of operations that are necessary to run our business. Thus, our Contribution, Contribution Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin should be considered in addition to, not as substitutes for, or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We compensate for these limitations by providing a reconciliation of Contribution and Adjusted EBITDA to the related GAAP financial measures, revenue and net loss, respectively. We encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure and to view Contribution, Contribution Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin in conjunction with their respective related GAAP financial measures.
The following table provides a reconciliation of revenue to Contribution (in millions):
_______________
(1)$204.1 million of insurance expense recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects changes to reserves estimates of claims from the third quarter of 2020 and earlier periods. $270.3 million of insurance expense recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019 reflects changes to reserves estimates of claims from the third quarter of 2019 and earlier periods. $3.4 million of insurance expense recorded during the year ended December 31, 2018 reflects changes to reserves estimates of claims from the third quarter of 2018 and earlier periods.
(2)The total impact of the transfer of certain legacy auto insurance liabilities on our consolidated statement of operations was $64.7 million, with $62.5 million in cost of revenue and $2.2 million in general and administrative expense.
(3)Included in restructuring charges is $2.0 million of severance and other employee costs and $1.5 million of other restructuring charges. Restructuring related charges for the stock-based compensation benefit of $4.2 million and payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation of $0.1 million are included on their respective line items.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA (in millions):
_______________
(1)Includes interest expense for Flexdrive vehicles and the 2025 Notes and $1.6 million related to the interest component of vehicle related finance leases. Refer to Note 7 “Leases” to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding the interest component of vehicle related finance leases.
(2)Includes interest income which was reported as a separate line item on the consolidated statement of operations in periods prior to the second quarter of 2020.
(3)$204.1 million of insurance expense recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects changes to reserves estimates of claims from the third quarter of 2020 and earlier periods. $270.3 million of insurance expense recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019 reflects changes to reserves estimates of claims from the third quarter of 2019 and earlier periods. $3.4 million of insurance expense recorded during the year ended December 31, 2018 reflects changes to reserves estimates of claims from the third quarter of 2018 and earlier periods.
(4)The total impact of the transfer of certain legacy auto insurance liabilities on our consolidated statement of operations was $64.7 million, with $62.5 million in cost of revenue and $2.2 million in general and administrative expense.
(5)Included in restructuring charges is $32.9 million of severance and other employee costs and $2.6 million related to lease termination and other restructuring costs. Restructuring related charges for the stock-based compensation benefit of $50.0 million, payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation of $0.7 million and accelerated depreciation of $0.5 million are included on their respective line items.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of approximately $319.7 million and short-term investments of approximately $1.9 billion, exclusive of restricted cash, cash equivalents and investments of $1.2 billion. Cash and cash equivalents consisted of institutional money market funds, certificates of deposits, commercial paper and corporate bonds that have an original maturity of less than three months and are readily convertible into known amounts of cash. Also included in cash and cash equivalents are certain money market deposit accounts and cash in transit from payment processors for credit and debit card transactions. Short-term investments consisted of commercial paper, certificates of deposit, corporate bonds and term deposits, which mature in 12 months or less. Restricted cash, cash equivalents and investments consisted primarily of amounts held in separate trust accounts and restricted bank accounts as collateral for insurance purposes and amounts pledged to secure certain letters of credit.
We collect the fare and related charges from riders on behalf of drivers at the time the ride is delivered using the rider’s authorized payment method, and we retain any fees owed to us before making the remaining disbursement to drivers. Accordingly, we maintain no accounts receivable from drivers. Our contracts with insurance providers require reinsurance premiums to be deposited into trust accounts with a third-party financial institution from which the insurance providers are reimbursed for claims payments. Our restricted reinsurance trust investments as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $1.1 billion and $1.4 billion, respectively.
We continue to actively monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Beginning in March 2020, the pandemic and responses thereto contributed to a severe decrease in the number of rides on our platform and revenue which had a significant effect on our cash flows from operations. These impacts are ongoing and have continued into 2021.The extent to which our operations, financial results and financial condition will be impacted in the next few quarters by the pandemic will depend largely on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the pandemic, actions by government authorities and private businesses to contain the pandemic or recover from its impact, and the availability and distribution of the vaccine, among other things. We have adopted several measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including pausing our shared ride offerings, distributing thousands of bottles of hand sanitizer, masks and partitions to drivers on our platform, providing most employees with the option to work from home until September 1, 2021, restricting non-critical business travel by our employees, and making adjustments to our expenses and cash flow to correlate with declines in revenues. On
April 29, 2020. we announced a restructuring plan which included the termination of approximately 17% of our employees, furlough approximately 300 employees, and implement temporary salary reductions for all exempt employees and board members. In connection with these decisions, we incurred a net restructuring benefit of $14.5 million in the second quarter of 2020. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we had an additional restructuring plan which included the termination of 45 employees in our continued efforts to reduce operating expenses resulting in an additional $1.4 million in net restructuring charges. In addition, we have also implemented an aggressive plan to strengthen our financial position. For example, we significantly decreased our 2020 capital expenditure spending from our original plan and exceeded our target cost reductions in 2020 by 20%. We also decreased rider incentives to an all-time low in the second quarter of 2020 and maintained them near the historical low through the fourth quarter of 2020, resulting in a significant decrease in sales and marketing expenses.
In May 2020, we issued $747.5 million aggregate principal amount of our 2025 Notes. The net proceeds from this offering were approximately $733.2 million, after deducting the Initial Purchasers’ discounts and commissions and debt issuance costs. In connection with the issuance of our 2025 Notes, we entered into the Capped Calls at a cost of approximately $132.7 million.
We cannot be certain that our actions will mitigate some or all of the negative effects of the pandemic on our business. With nearly $2.3 billion in unrestricted cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2020, we believe we have sufficient liquidity to meet our working capital and capital expenditures needs for at least the next 12 months.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to our growth, our ability to attract and retain drivers and riders on our platform, the continuing market acceptance of our offerings, the timing and extent of spending to support our efforts to develop our platform, actual insurance payments for which we have made reserves, measures we take in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to maintain demand for and confidence in the safety of our platform during and following the COVID-19 pandemic, and the expansion of sales and marketing activities. As noted above, we expect to see continued suppression of demand for our platform and the resultant negative impacts on revenue for so long as the travel restrictions and other social distancing measures in response to COVID-19 remain in place. Further, we may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in businesses, products, services and technologies. From time to time, we may seek additional equity or debt financing to fund capital expenditures, strategic initiatives or investments and our ongoing operations, or to refinance our existing or future indebtedness. In the event that we decide, or are required, to seek additional financing from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities was $1.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. This consisted primarily of a net loss of $1.8 billion and a decrease in the insurance reserve of $391.4 million primarily related to the transfer of certain legacy auto insurance liabilities in the first quarter of 2020. This was offset by non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $565.8 million and depreciation and amortization expense of $157.4 million.
Cash used in operating activities was $105.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This consisted primarily of a net loss of $2.6 billion offset by non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $1.6 billion largely driven by the recognition of costs related to RSUs which we started to recognize upon the effectiveness of our IPO Registration Statement on March 28, 2019. Additionally, there was an increase in insurance reserves and accrued and other liabilities of $0.9 billion.
Cash used in operating activities was $280.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This consisted of a net loss of $911.3 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $75.6 million and a decrease in accounts payable of $40.8 million due to the timing of payments, partially offset by an increase in insurance reserves and accrued and other liabilities of $741.9 million.
Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities was $740.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily consisted of proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities of $5.4 billion and maturities of term deposits of $645.6 million, partially offset by purchases of marketable securities of $4.1 billion and term deposits of $1.1 billion.
Cash used in investing activities was $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, which primarily consisted of purchases of short-term investments of $6.4 billion, partially offset by proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities of $5.2 billion.
Cash used in investing activities was $1.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2018, which primarily consisted of purchases of short-term investments of $5.5 billion, partially offset by proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities of $4.7 billion.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $512.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily consisted of proceeds from issuance of our 2025 Notes of $734.1 million offset by the purchase of the Capped Calls for $132.7 million.
Cash provided by financing activities was $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, which primarily consisted of proceeds from the issuance of our Class A common stock in our IPO of $2.5 billion, partially offset by taxes paid related to net share settlement of equity awards of $0.9 billion.
Cash provided by financing activities was $852.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, which consisted almost exclusively of proceeds from issuances of redeemable convertible preferred stock, net of issuance costs.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 (in millions):
_______________
(1)The table excludes insurance reserves due to uncertainties in the timing of settlement of these reserves.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, including entities sometimes referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.