ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations together with the audited consolidated financial statements and notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed under Item 1A.-Risk Factors and other sections in this Annual Report.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items along with year-over-year comparisons between these two years. Discussion of 2018 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 can be found in Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Executive Overview
Due to the global COVID-19 pandemic, we ceased all Live Nation tours and closed all our venues beginning in mid-March 2020 to support global efforts to mitigate the spread of the virus. To ensure the safety of our artists, fans, and employees, we held very few traditional events in the year and had minimal ticket sales.
As a result, our overall revenue for 2020 decreased by 84%, from $11.5 billion in 2019 to $1.9 billion in 2020. The revenue reduction was largely in our Concerts and Ticketing segments as a result of almost no shows occurring from mid-March through the end of the year and ticket sales for future shows sharply reduced given the uncertainty around when live events will return. Our Ticketing revenue was also impacted by refunds for cancelled and postponed events. The pandemic led to an operating loss for 2020 of $1.7 billion compared to operating income of $325 million for 2019. The impact of foreign exchange rates to both our revenue and operating income were minimal. While the unparalleled disruption of the pandemic has had a material impact on our business, as the leading global live event and ticketing company, we still firmly believe that we are well-positioned to provide the best service to artists, teams, fans and venues once business resumes. Twenty years of global growth demonstrates the resilience of fan demand for the live entertainment experience. Recent fan surveys indicate that the demand will be there when the shows return, with 95% of fans expecting to attend concerts again once government and/or health officials determine events can resume. We are actively taking steps to ensure that when the time is right for us to do so, we will be ready to quickly ramp back up and once again connect audiences to artists at the concerts they cherish.
Our Concerts segment revenue for 2020 was $1.5 billion, compared to $9.4 billion for 2019, a reduction of 84%. The unfavorable results were almost entirely due to the impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic. Of the 8,117 events we held this year, about 7,100 of those were in the first quarter of 2020, prior to our shutdown. Overall, our show count went from 40,237 in 2019 down to 8,117 in 2020, a reduction of 80%. In addition to normal show activity from January through mid-March, we were able to hold drive-in concert events as well as socially distanced shows in some markets during the pandemic. Towards the end of the year, we saw a return to almost normal levels of activity in New Zealand which held our Rhythm and Vines festival in December with record levels of attendance. Coinciding with the trend on show count, our total fan count for the year went from 97.7 million in 2019 down to 11.1 million in 2020, a reduction of 89%. Concerts had an operating loss for the year largely due to lost business resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic and from sunk costs, such as advertising expenses, associated with shows cancelled or rescheduled to 2021.
Our Ticketing segment revenue for 2020 was $188 million, compared to $1.5 billion for 2019, a reduction of 88% driven by a lack of ticket sales for future events and refunds on 2020 shows that were cancelled or rescheduled. Before refunds, our fee-bearing tickets sold for the year were 58.5 million, which compares to 219.8 million for 2019, a reduction of 73%. A total of 27.4 million tickets were refunded in the year, equating to just slightly over $2.6 billion of gross transaction value. The decline in operating results for the year was largely driven by the lack of ticket sales as well as refunds processed for cancelled and rescheduled events.
Our Sponsorship & Advertising segment revenue for 2020 was $204 million, compared to $590 million for 2019, a reduction of 65%. After a very strong performance for the first 10 weeks of the year, there was a significant reduction to Sponsorship & Advertising revenue and operating results due to the lack of shows and online activity resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic.
We continue to be focused on mitigating the financial impact of the shutdown. We have undertaken cost-savings initiatives across the organization, including salary reductions, hiring freezes, furloughs, termination of certain employees, as well as eliminating costs for consultants, travel and entertainment and repairs and maintenance for our facilities. We are also protecting our liquidity by tightly managing cash outflows associated with all our major expenditures: operating expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, and advances in both our ticketing and concert businesses. The length and severity of the impact to live events and our related sponsorship and ticketing businesses is still uncertain. The magnitude and pace of the recovery will depend on each market and their containment efforts, the nature of the events being held, ongoing efforts to develop rapid testing technologies and rollout of approved vaccines and treatments for COVID-19. We remain optimistic about the long-term potential of our company and the unique power of live shows to unite people. We believe our aggressive cost-savings and cash management programs, combined with a strong liquidity profile, position Live Nation to manage through the global COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on live events and provides us the flexibility to scale up quickly when our shows resume.
Segment Overview
Concerts
Revenue and related costs for events are generally deferred and recognized when the event occurs. All advertising costs incurred during the year for shows in future years are expensed at the end of the year. If a current year event is rescheduled into a future year, all advertising costs incurred to date are expensed in the period when the event is rescheduled.
Concerts direct operating expenses include artist fees, event production costs, show-related marketing and advertising expenses, along with other costs.
To judge the health of our Concerts segment, we primarily monitor the number of confirmed events and fan attendance in our network of owned or operated and third-party venues, talent fees, average paid attendance, market ticket pricing, advance ticket sales and the number of major artist clients under management. In addition, at our owned or operated venues and festivals, we monitor ancillary revenue per fan and premium ticket sales. For business that is conducted in foreign markets, we also compare the operating results from our foreign operations to prior periods without the impact of changes in foreign exchange rates.
Ticketing
Revenue related to ticketing service charges is recognized when the ticket is sold for our third-party clients. For our own events, where our concert promoters control ticketing, revenue is deferred and recognized when the event occurs. Gross transaction value (“GTV”) represents the total amount of the transaction related to a ticket sale and includes the face value of the ticket as well as the service charge. We use GTV to evaluate changes in ticket fee revenue that are driven by the pricing of our service charges.
Ticketing direct operating expenses include call center costs and credit card fees, along with other costs.
To judge the health of our Ticketing segment, we primarily review the GTV and the number of tickets sold through our ticketing operations, the number of clients renewed or added and the average royalty rate paid to clients who use our ticketing services. In addition, we review the number of visits to our websites, cost of customer acquisition, the purchase conversion rate, the overall number of customers in our database, the number and percentage of tickets sold via mobile and the number of app installs. For business that is conducted in foreign markets, we also compare the operating results from our foreign operations to prior periods without the impact of changes in foreign exchange rates.
Sponsorship & Advertising
Revenue related to sponsorship and advertising programs is recognized over the term of the agreement or operating season as the benefits are provided to the sponsor unless the revenue is associated with a specific event, in which case it is recognized when the event occurs.
Sponsorship & Advertising direct operating expenses include fulfillment costs related to our sponsorship programs, along with other costs.
To judge the health of our Sponsorship & Advertising segment, we primarily review the revenue generated through sponsorship arrangements and online advertising, and the percentage of expected revenue under contract. For business that is conducted in foreign markets, we also compare the operating results from our foreign operations to prior periods without the impact of changes in foreign exchange rates.
Key Operating Metrics
_________
(1)Events generally represent a single performance by an artist. Fans generally represent the number of people who attend an event. Festivals are counted as one event in the quarter in which the festival begins, but the number of fans is based on the days the fans were present at the festival and thus can be reported across multiple quarters. Events and fan attendance metrics are estimated each quarter.
(2)The fee-bearing tickets estimated above include primary and secondary tickets that are sold using our Ticketmaster systems or that we issue through affiliates. This metric includes primary tickets sold during the year regardless of event timing, except for our own events where our concert promoters control ticketing which are reported when the events occur. The non-fee-bearing tickets estimated above include primary tickets sold using our Ticketmaster systems, through season seat packages and our venue clients’ box offices, along with tickets sold on our “do it yourself” platform. These ticketing metrics are net of any refunds requested and any cancellations that occurred during the period and up to the time of reporting of these consolidated financial statements. Fee-bearing tickets sold above are net of refunds of 27.4 million tickets for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP Measures
The following table sets forth the reconciliation of AOI to operating income (loss):
Adjusted Operating Income (Loss)
AOI is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as operating income (loss) before certain stock-based compensation expense, loss (gain) on disposal of operating assets, depreciation and amortization (including goodwill impairment), amortization of non-recoupable ticketing contract advances and acquisition expenses (including transaction costs, changes in the fair value of accrued acquisition-related contingent consideration obligations, and acquisition-related severance and compensation). We use AOI to evaluate the performance of our operating segments. We believe that information about AOI assists investors by allowing them to evaluate changes in the operating results of our portfolio of businesses separate from non-operational factors that affect net income (loss), thus providing insights into both operations and the other factors that affect reported results. AOI is not calculated or presented in accordance with GAAP. A limitation of the use of AOI as a performance measure is that it does not reflect the periodic costs of certain amortizing assets used in generating revenue in our business. Accordingly, AOI should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, operating income (loss), net income (loss), and other measures of financial performance reported in accordance with GAAP. Furthermore, this measure may vary among other companies; thus, AOI as presented herein may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
AOI Margin
AOI margin is a non-GAAP financial measure that we calculate by dividing AOI by revenue. We use AOI margin to evaluate the performance of our operating segments. We believe that information about AOI margin assists investors by allowing them to evaluate changes in the operating results of our portfolio of businesses separate from non-operational factors that affect net income (loss), thus providing insights into both operations and the other factors that affect reported results. AOI margin is not calculated or presented in accordance with GAAP. A limitation of the use of AOI margin as a performance measure is that it does not reflect the periodic costs of certain amortizing assets used in generating revenue in our business. Accordingly, AOI margin should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, operating income (loss) margin, and other measures of financial performance reported in accordance with GAAP. Furthermore, this measure may vary among other companies; thus, AOI margin as presented herein may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
Constant Currency
Constant currency is a non-GAAP financial measure. We calculate currency impacts as the difference between current period activity translated using the current period’s currency exchange rates and the comparable prior period’s currency exchange rates. We present constant currency information to provide a framework for assessing how our underlying businesses performed excluding the effect of foreign currency rate fluctuations.
Segment Operating Results
Concerts
Our Concerts segment operating results were, and discussions of significant variances are, as follows:
_________________________
* Percentages are not meaningful.
** See “-Non-GAAP Measures” above for the definition and reconciliation of AOI and AOI margin.
Revenue
Concerts revenue decreased $8.0 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year primarily due to the unprecedented stoppage of our concert events globally during 2020. Due to the global COVID-19 pandemic, beginning in mid-March 2020 we ceased all of our tours, closed our venues and cancelled or postponed our festivals to support global efforts at social distancing and mitigating the virus, and to comply with restrictions put in place by various governmental entities. Concerts had incremental revenue of $134.0 million during 2020 from acquisitions, primarily that of a merchandise business.
Operating results
The decrease in Concerts operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the reduction in revenue caused by the global COVID-19 pandemic discussed above partially offset by cost reduction measures implemented during 2020, which have included salary reductions, hiring freezes, furloughs, and reduction or elimination of other discretionary spending along with participating in government support programs globally. Depreciation and amortization during 2020 includes $23.2 million in impairment charges associated with revenue-generating contracts, venue management and leaseholds and client/vendor relationships intangible assets due to the impacts from the global COVID-19 pandemic. Depreciation and amortization in 2019 includes $21.2 million in impairment charges primarily associated with revenue-generating contract intangible assets. Concerts operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020 include net operating losses of $59.2 million related to acquisitions and new venues.
Ticketing
Our Ticketing segment operating results were, and discussions of significant variances are, as follows:
__________________________
* Percentages are not meaningful.
** See “-Non-GAAP Measures” above for the definition and reconciliation of AOI and AOI margin.
Revenue
Ticketing revenue decreased $1.4 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year primarily due to the lack of tickets available for sale to the public driven by the unprecedented stoppage of concerts, sports and other events globally during 2020 and refunds for cancelled or rescheduled events for third-party clients due to the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating results
The decrease in Ticketing operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the reduction in revenue caused by the global COVID-19 pandemic discussed above, without a proportionate reduction in direct operating expenses as credit card fees and other costs associated with processing refunds and responding to fan and ticketing client inquiries continued. This decrease was partially offset by cost reduction measures implemented during 2020, including salary reductions, hiring freezes, furloughs, and reduction or elimination of other discretionary spending along with participating in government support programs globally.
Sponsorship & Advertising
Our Sponsorship & Advertising segment operating results were, and discussions of significant variances are, as follows:
______________
* Percentages are not meaningful.
** See “-Non-GAAP Measures” above for the definition and reconciliation of AOI and AOI margin.
Revenue
Sponsorship & Advertising revenue decreased $386.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year primarily due to a reduction in sponsorship revenue associated with our venues, festivals and lack of online activity as ticket sales declined driven by the unprecedented stoppage of events beginning in mid-March of 2020 due to the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating results
The decreased operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the reduction in revenue discussed above along with higher fulfillment costs on certain sponsorship programs. This decrease was partially offset by cost reduction measures implemented during 2020, including salary reductions, hiring freezes, furloughs, and reduction or elimination of other discretionary spending along with participating in government support programs globally.
Consolidated Results of Operations
________
* Percentages are not meaningful.
** See “-Non-GAAP Measures” above for definition of constant currency.
Corporate
Corporate expenses decreased $66.7 million, or 40%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year primarily due to cost reduction efforts implemented during 2020, including salary reductions, with salaries for senior executives reduced by up to 60%. Additional cost reduction efforts include hiring freezes, reduction in the use of contractors, furloughs, and reduction or elimination of other discretionary spending, including, among other things, travel and entertainment and repairs and maintenance.
Interest expense
Interest expense increased $69.3 million, or 44%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year due to additional interest costs from the issuance of our 4.75% senior notes in October 2019, the issuance of our 2.0% convertible senior notes in February 2020 and the issuance of our 6.5% senior secured notes in May 2020. These additional costs were partially offset by interest cost reductions realized from the October 2019 redemption of our 5.375% senior notes and amendment to our senior secured credit facility.
Our debt balances, excluding unamortized debt discounts and issuance costs, were $5.0 billion and $3.4 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Income taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net tax benefit of $28.9 million on losses before income taxes of $1.9 billion compared to a net tax expense of $66.9 million on income before income taxes of $185.1 million for 2019. In 2020, the net income tax benefit consisted of $16.4 million related to United States federal income taxes, $12.8 million related to foreign entities partially offset by $0.3 million tax expense related to state and local income taxes. The net decrease in tax expense of $95.8 million is due primarily to lower pre-tax income or higher pre-tax losses in taxable jurisdictions.
Net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests
Net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests was a loss of $103.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to income of $48.3 million in the prior year primarily due to lower operating results from certain concert and festival promotion businesses driven by postponed and cancelled events during 2020 due to the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In response to the impact that the global COVID-19 pandemic has had on our business, and the uncertainty of the duration of current conditions globally, we have taken certain actions to strengthen our liquidity position and preserve our capital resources.
In April 2020, we amended our senior secured credit facility to provide an incremental $130 million revolving credit facility. We further amended our senior secured credit facility in July 2020, which, among other things, substitutes our net leverage covenant with a $500 million liquidity covenant (as defined in the agreement) until the earlier of (a) December 31, 2021 and (b) at our election, any fiscal quarter prior to December 31, 2021. In February 2020, we issued $400 million principal amount of 2.0% convertible senior notes due 2025 and in May 2020 we issued $1.2 billion principal amount of 6.5% senior secured notes due 2027. In January 2021, we issued $500 million principal amount of 3.75% senior secured notes due 2028. As a result, we believe that these amendments and additional debt issuances will allow us the flexibility to manage our business through the disruption we experienced in 2020 and expect to experience in 2021.
Our cash is centrally managed on a worldwide basis. Our primary short-term liquidity needs are to fund general working capital requirements, capital expenditures and debt service requirements while our long-term liquidity needs are primarily related to acquisitions and debt repayment. Our primary sources of funds for our short-term liquidity needs will be cash flows from operations and borrowings under our amended senior secured credit facility, while our long-term sources of funds will be from cash flows from operations, long-term bank borrowings and other debt or equity financings. We may from time to time engage in open market purchases of our outstanding debt securities or redeem or otherwise repay such debt.
Our balance sheet reflects cash and cash equivalents of $2.5 billion for both December 31, 2020 and 2019. Included in the December 31, 2020 and 2019 cash and cash equivalents balances are $673.5 million and $837.7 million, respectively, of cash received that includes the face value of tickets sold on behalf of our ticketing clients and their share of service charges, which we refer to as client cash. We generally do not utilize client cash for our own financing or investing activities as the amounts are payable to clients on a regular basis. Our foreign subsidiaries held approximately $836.2 million in cash and cash equivalents, excluding client cash, at December 31, 2020. We generally do not repatriate these funds, but if we did, we would need to accrue and pay United States state income taxes as well as any applicable foreign withholding or transaction taxes on future repatriations. We may from time to time enter into borrowings under our revolving credit facility. If the original maturity of these borrowings is 90 days or less, we present the borrowings and subsequent repayments on a net basis in the statement of cash flows to better represent our financing activities. Our balance sheet reflects total net debt of $4.9 billion and $3.3 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our weighted-average cost of debt, excluding unamortized debt discounts and debt issuance costs on our term loans and notes, was 4.4% at December 31, 2020.
Our cash and cash equivalents are held in accounts managed by third-party financial institutions and consist of cash in our operating accounts and invested cash. Cash held in non-interest-bearing and interest-bearing operating accounts in many cases exceeds the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insurance limits. The invested cash is in interest-bearing funds consisting primarily of bank deposits and money market funds. While we monitor cash and cash equivalents balances in our operating accounts on a regular basis and adjust the balances as appropriate, these balances could be impacted if the underlying financial institutions fail. To date, we have experienced no loss or lack of access to our cash and cash equivalents; however, we can provide no assurances that access to our cash and cash equivalents will not be impacted by adverse conditions in the financial markets, including those resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic.
For our Concerts segment, we often receive cash related to ticket revenue in advance of the event, which is recorded in deferred revenue until the event occurs. In the United States, this cash is largely associated with events in our owned or operated venues, notably amphitheaters, festivals, theaters and clubs. Internationally, this cash is from a combination of both events in our owned or operated venues, as well as events in third-party venues associated with our promoter’s share of tickets in allocation markets. We do not otherwise generally hold cash for events being held in third-party venues. In the United States, most venues traditionally hold all the cash, and internationally either the venue holds all the cash or holds the portion of the cash associated with their ticket allocation. With the exception of some upfront costs and artist advances, which are recorded in prepaid expenses until the event occurs, we pay the majority of event-related expenses at or after the event. Artists are paid when the event occurs under one of several different formulas, which may include fixed guarantees and/or a percentage of ticket sales or event profits, net of any advance they have received. When an event is cancelled, any cash held in deferred revenue is reclassified to accrued expenses as those funds are typically refunded to the fan within 30 days of event cancellation. In certain markets, we are offering fans an incentive to receive a voucher for a future ticket purchase to one of our events in lieu of receiving a refund for a cancelled event. Where a fan has elected to receive the incentive voucher, the cash from the original ticket purchase remains in deferred revenue. When a show is rescheduled, fans have the ability to request a refund if they do not want to attend the event on the new date, although historically we have had low levels of refund requests for rescheduled events.
We view our available cash as cash and cash equivalents, less ticketing-related client cash, less event-related deferred revenue, less accrued expenses due to artists and cash collected on behalf of others, plus event-related prepaid expenses. This is essentially our cash available to, among other things, repay debt balances, make acquisitions, pay artist advances and finance capital expenditures.
Our intra-year cash fluctuations are impacted by the seasonality of our various businesses. Examples of seasonal effects include our Concerts segment, which reports the majority of its revenue in the second and third quarters. Cash inflows and outflows depend on the timing of event-related payments but the majority of the inflows generally occur prior to the event. Due to the unprecedented stoppage of our concert events globally beginning in mid-March due to the global COVID-19 pandemic, we did not experience our typical seasonality trends in 2020. See “-Seasonality” below. We believe that we have sufficient financial flexibility to fund these fluctuations and to access the global capital markets on satisfactory terms and in adequate amounts, although there can be no assurance that this will be the case, and capital could be less accessible and/or more costly given current economic conditions, including those resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic. We expect cash flows from operations and borrowings under our amended senior secured credit facility, along with other financing alternatives, to satisfy working capital requirements, capital expenditures and debt service requirements for at least the succeeding year.
We may need to incur additional debt or issue equity to make other strategic acquisitions or investments. There can be no assurance that such financing will be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. We may make significant acquisitions in the near term, subject to limitations imposed by our financing agreements and market conditions.
The lenders under our revolving loans and counterparty to our interest rate hedge agreement consists of banks and other third-party financial institutions. While we currently have no indications or expectations that such lenders will be unable to fund their commitments as required, we can provide no assurances that future funding availability will not be impacted by adverse conditions in the financial markets, including those resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic. Should an individual lender default on its obligations, the remaining lenders would not be required to fund the shortfall, resulting in a reduction in the total amount available to us for future borrowings, but would remain obligated to fund their own commitments. Should the counterparty to our interest rate hedge agreement default on its obligation, we could experience higher interest rate volatility during the period of any such default.
Fourth Quarter Results of Operations (Unaudited)
Sources of Cash
During 2020, we amended our senior secured credit facility, issued $1.2 billion principal amount of 6.5% senior secured notes due 2027 and issued $400 million principal amount of 2.0% convertible senior notes due 2025. A portion of the proceeds were used to pay transaction fees of approximately $35.5 million, leaving approximately $1.6 billion for general corporate purposes.
In January 2021, we issued $500 million principal amount of 3.75% senior secured notes due 2028. Interest on the notes is payable semi-annually in cash in arrears on January 15 and July 15 of each year beginning on July 15, 2021, and will mature on January 15, 2028. The proceeds were used to pay estimated fees of $8.0 million and repay $75.0 million aggregate principal amount of our senior secured term loan B facility, leaving approximately $417.0 million for general corporate purposes, including acquisitions and organic investment opportunities.
Amended Senior Secured Credit Facility
Information regarding our amended senior secured credit facility can be found in Part II -Financial Information -Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 5-Long-Term Debt.
6.5% Senior Secured Notes Due 2027
Information regarding our 6.5% senior secured notes due 2027 can be found in Part II -Financial Information -Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 5-Long-Term Debt.
4.75% Senior Notes Due 2027
Information regarding our 4.75% senior notes due 2027 can be found in Part II -Financial Information -Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 5-Long-Term Debt.
4.875% Senior Notes Due 2024
Information regarding our 4.875% senior notes due 2024 can be found in Part II -Financial Information -Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 5-Long-Term Debt.
5.625% Senior Notes Due 2026
Information regarding our 5.625% senior notes due 2026 can be found in Part II -Financial Information -Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 5-Long-Term Debt.
3.75% Senior Secured Notes Due 2028
Information regarding our 3.75% senior secured notes due 2028 can be found in Part II -Financial Information -Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 16-Subsequent Events.
2.5% Convertible Senior Notes Due 2023
Information regarding our 2.5% convertible senior notes due 2023 can be found in Part II -Financial Information -Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 5-Long-Term Debt.
2.0% Convertible Senior Notes Due 2025
Information regarding our 2.0% convertible senior notes due 2025 can be found in Part II -Financial Information -Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 5-Long-Term Debt.
Extinguishment of Debt
Information regarding extinguishment of our debt in October 2019 and March 2018 can be found in Part II -Financial Information -Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 5-Long-Term Debt.
Debt Covenants
Information regarding our debt covenants can be found in Part II -Financial Information -Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 5-Long-Term Debt.
Uses of Cash
Acquisitions
When we make acquisitions, the acquired entity may have cash at the time of acquisition. All amounts related to the use of cash for acquisitions discussed in this section are presented net of any cash acquired. During 2020, we used $41.1 million of cash primarily for the acquisitions of a festival promotion business and a venue management business, both located in the United States. As of the date of acquisition, the acquired businesses had a total of $77.4 million of cash on their balance sheets, primarily related to deferred revenue for future events.
During 2019, we used $235.1 million of cash primarily for the acquisitions of venue management and concert promotion businesses located in Canada, Belgium and the United States. As of the date of acquisition, the acquired businesses had a total of $74.7 million of cash on their balance sheets, primarily related to deferred revenue for future events.
Purchases and Sales of Noncontrolling Interests, net
In 2020, we used $106.2 million of cash primarily for the acquisitions of the remaining or additional interest in festival promotion businesses located in the United States and Brazil.
Capital Expenditures
Venue and ticketing operations are capital intensive businesses, requiring continual investment in our existing venues and ticketing systems in order to address fan and artist expectations, technological industry advances and various federal, state and/or local regulations.
We categorize capital outlays between maintenance capital expenditures and revenue generating capital expenditures. Maintenance capital expenditures are associated with the renewal and improvement of existing venues and technology systems, web development and administrative offices. Revenue generating capital expenditures generally relate to the construction of new venues, major renovations to existing buildings or buildings that are being added to our venue network, the development of new ticketing tools and technology enhancements. Revenue generating capital expenditures can also include smaller projects whose purpose is to increase revenue and/or improve operating income. Capital expenditures typically increase during periods when our venues are not in operation since that is the time that such improvements can be completed.
Our capital expenditures, including accruals for amounts incurred but not yet paid for but net of expenditures funded by outside parties such as landlords and noncontrolling interest partners or replacements funded by insurance proceeds, consisted of the following:
Maintenance capital expenditures for 2020 decreased from the prior year primarily due to a reduction in leasehold improvements of certain office facilities, venue-related projects and technology enhancements as part of our cash savings initiatives implemented in connection with the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Revenue generating capital expenditures for 2020 decreased from the prior year primarily due to lower spending in our amphitheater venues and a reduction in technology-related projects as part of our cash savings initiatives implemented in connection with the global COVID-19 pandemic.
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, $17.9 million, $22.0 million and $11.6 million, respectively, of insurance proceeds and landlord or noncontrolling interest partner reimbursements have been excluded from capital expenditures in the table above.
We currently expect capital expenditures to be approximately $150 million for the year ending December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Firm Commitments
In addition to the scheduled maturities on our debt and operating lease liabilities, we have future cash obligations under various types of contracts. We lease office space, certain equipment and many of the venues used in our concert operations under long-term operating leases. Some of our lease agreements contain renewal options and annual rental escalation clauses (generally tied to the consumer price index), as well as provisions for our payment of utilities and maintenance. We also have minimum payments associated with non-cancelable contracts related to our operations, such as artist guarantees and client ticketing agreements. As part of our ongoing capital projects, we will enter into construction-related commitments for future capital expenditure work. The scheduled maturities discussed below represent contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and thus do not represent all expected expenditures for those periods.
The scheduled maturities of our outstanding long-term debt (excluding unamortized debt discounts and issuance costs), scheduled maturities of operating lease liabilities, minimum payments under other non-cancelable contracts, capital expenditure commitments and expected payments of contingent and deferred consideration liabilities as of December 31, 2020 are as follows:
_____________
(1)
Does not include $500 million principal amount of 3.75% senior secured notes due 2028 issued in January 2021.
(2)
On or after December 15, 2022, holders may convert their 2.5% convertible senior notes.
(3)
On or after November 15, 2024, holders may convert their 2.0% convertible senior notes.
(4)
Does not include interest on the delayed draw term loan A or revolving credit facility as the balances were zero as of December 31, 2020.
(5)
Does not include $0.6 million of uncertain tax positions due to the unpredictable timing of the future payments.
Guarantees of Third-Party Obligations
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we guaranteed the debt of third parties of approximately $12.1 million and $16.5 million, respectively, primarily related to maximum credit limits on employee and tour-related credit cards, obligations of a nonconsolidated affiliate and obligations under a venue management agreement.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities decreased $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year primarily due to lower cash-related income during 2020 resulting from the cessation of our concert events, and the related rescheduling of shows to 2021, beginning in mid-March in response to the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities decreased $466.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year primarily due to fewer acquisitions, less cash paid for capital expenditures and an increase in collections of notes receivable. See “-Uses of Cash” above for further discussion.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities increased $1.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year primarily due to higher net proceeds in 2020 from debt issuances. See “-Sources of Cash” above for further discussion.
Seasonality
Information regarding the seasonality of our business can be found in Part II-Financial Information-Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1-The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
Market Risk
We are exposed to market risks arising from changes in market rates and prices, including movements in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates.
Foreign Currency Risk
We have operations in countries throughout the world. The financial results of our foreign operations are measured in their local currencies. Our foreign subsidiaries also carry certain net assets or liabilities that are denominated in a currency other than that subsidiary’s functional currency. As a result, our financial results could be affected by factors such as changes in foreign currency exchange rates or weak economic conditions in the foreign markets in which we have operations. Currently, we do not have significant operations in any hyper-inflationary countries. Our foreign operations reported an operating loss of $355.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We estimate that a 10% change in the value of the United States dollar relative to foreign currencies would change our operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 by $35.5 million. As of December 31, 2020, our most significant foreign exchange exposure included the Euro, British Pound, Australian Dollar and Canadian Dollar. This analysis does not consider the implication such currency fluctuations could have on the overall economic conditions of the United States or other foreign countries in which we operate or on the results of operations of our foreign entities. In addition, the reported carrying value of our assets and liabilities, including the total cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign operations, will also be affected by changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
We primarily use forward currency contracts, in addition to options, to reduce our exposure to foreign currency risk associated with short-term artist fee commitments. We also may enter into forward currency contracts to minimize the risks and/or costs associated with changes in foreign currency rates on forecasted operating income. At December 31, 2020, we had forward currency contracts outstanding with a notional amount of $42.0 million.
Interest Rate Risk
Our market risk is also affected by changes in interest rates. We had $5.0 billion of total debt, excluding unamortized debt discounts and issuance costs, outstanding as of December 31, 2020. Of the total amount, we had $4.5 billion of fixed-rate debt and $0.5 billion of floating-rate debt.
Based on the amount of our floating-rate debt as of December 31, 2020, each 25-basis point increase or decrease in interest rates would increase or decrease our annual interest expense and cash outlay by approximately $1.2 million. This potential increase or decrease is based on the simplified assumption that the level of floating-rate debt remains constant with an immediate across-the-board increase or decrease as of December 31, 2020 with no subsequent change in rates for the remainder of the period.
In January 2020, we entered into an interest rate swap agreement that is designated as a cash flow hedge for accounting purposes to effectively convert a portion of our floating-rate debt to a fixed-rate basis. The swap agreement expires in October 2026, has a notional amount of $500.0 million and ensures that a portion of our floating-rate debt does not exceed 3.397%.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements can be found in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1-The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amount of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates that are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The result of these evaluations forms the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the reported amount of revenue and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such difference could be material. Management believes that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. The following narrative describes these critical accounting estimates, the judgments and assumptions and the effect if actual results differ from these assumptions where applicable.
Consolidation
Typically we consolidate entities in which we own more than 50% of the voting common stock and control operations and also VIEs for which we are the primary beneficiary. Investments in nonconsolidated affiliates in which we own more than 20% of the voting common stock or otherwise exercise significant influence over operating and financial policies, but not control of the nonconsolidated affiliate, are accounted for using the equity method of accounting. Investments in nonconsolidated affiliates in which we own less than 20% of the voting common stock and do not exercise significant influence over operating and financial policies are accounted for at fair value unless the investment does not have a readily determinable fair value in which case the investment is accounted for at cost less any impairment. Intercompany accounts among the consolidated businesses have been eliminated in consolidation. Net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests is reflected in the statements of operations for consolidated affiliates.
Business Combinations
We account for our business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting. Identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree are recognized and measured as of the acquisition date at fair value. Additionally, contingent consideration is recorded at fair value on the acquisition date and classified as a liability. Goodwill is recognized to the extent by which the aggregate of the acquisition-date fair value of the consideration transferred and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree exceeds the recognized basis of the identifiable assets acquired, net of assumed liabilities. Determining the fair value of assets acquired, liabilities assumed and noncontrolling interest requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash flows, discount rates and asset lives among other items.
Intangibles
We test for possible impairment of definite-lived intangible assets whenever events or circumstances change, such as a current period operating cash flow loss combined with a history of, or projections of, operating cash flow losses or a significant adverse change in the manner in which the asset is intended to be used, which could indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable.
We test for possible impairment of indefinite-lived intangible assets on at least an annual basis. Based on facts and circumstances, we perform either a qualitative or a quantitative assessment for impairment. If a qualitative assessment is performed, and the existence of events and circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired, we perform the quantitative impairment test by comparing the fair value with the carrying amount.
When performing quantitative assessments for impairment of our definite-lived and indefinite-lived intangible assets, we compare the estimated undiscounted future cash flows related to the asset or asset group to the carrying amount of those assets or asset group. If the carrying value is greater than the estimated undiscounted future cash flows, the cost basis of the asset or asset group is reduced to reflect the current fair value. We use various assumptions in determining the current fair value of these definite-lived and indefinite-lived intangible assets, including future expected cash flows, discount rates and royalty rates as well as other fair value measures. Our impairment loss calculations require us to apply judgment in estimating future cash flows, including forecasting useful lives of the assets and selecting the discount rate that reflects the risk inherent in future cash flows.
If actual results are not consistent with our assumptions and judgments used in estimating future cash flows and asset fair values, we may be exposed to future impairment losses that could be material to our results of operations.
Goodwill
We currently have seven reporting units with goodwill balances: International Concerts, North America Concerts, Artist Management and Artist Services (non-management) within the Concerts segment; Sponsorship & Advertising; and International Ticketing and North America Ticketing within the Ticketing segment.
We test goodwill for impairment in any period when an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount or when we change our reporting units. The rapid and severe impacts of the global COVID-19 pandemic, and more specifically the need to support global social distancing efforts, mitigate the spread of the virus, and comply with restrictions put in place by various governmental entities, led to our decision to stop all tours and close our venues beginning in mid-March. As such actions have a material impact on our cash flows during the suspension of operations, we performed qualitative and sensitivity reviews in all three interim quarters of 2020 to assess whether we believed these actions caused the fair value of any of our reporting units to fall below its carrying value. The result of these interim assessments was a conclusion that no conditions existed that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of any of our reporting units below its carrying amount and therefore that we did not believe that our goodwill was impaired.
We review goodwill for impairment annually, as of October 1, using a two-step process. The first step of the process is a qualitative evaluation as to whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of any of our reporting units is less than its carrying value using an assessment of relevant events and circumstances. Examples of such events and circumstances include historical financial performance, industry and market conditions, macroeconomic conditions, reporting unit-specific events, historical results of goodwill impairment testing, and the timing of the last performance of a quantitative assessment.
If any reporting units are concluded to be more likely than not impaired, or if that conclusion cannot be determined qualitatively, a second step is performed for that reporting unit. Regardless, it is our policy that all reporting units undergo a second step at least once every five years to support our annual qualitative first step. This second step, used to quantitatively screen for potential impairment and measure the impairment, if any, compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. Inherent in such fair value determinations are certain judgments and estimates relating to future cash flows, including our interpretation of current economic indicators and market valuations, and assumptions about our strategic plans with regard to our operations. Due to the uncertainties associated with such estimates, actual results could differ from such estimates. If the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, the excess of the carrying value over the fair value is recorded as an impairment to goodwill. If a reporting unit’s carrying value is negative, the reporting unit passes the impairment test. In this case, we will disclose the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit and disclose which reportable segment the reporting unit is included in.
In both steps, discount rates, market multiples and sensitivity tests are derived and/or computed with the assistance of external valuation consultants. In addition, we perform sensitivity analyses for all reporting units either during the first or the second step of the process to assist in the evaluation. Generally, we test for sensitivities to discount rates, revenue and terminal growth rates, and market multiples, which are the most significant assumptions.
In developing fair values for our reporting units, we may employ a discounted cash flow or a market multiple methodology, or a combination thereof. The discounted cash flow methodology establishes fair value by estimating the present value of the projected future cash flows to be generated from the reporting unit. The discount rate applied to the projected future cash flows to arrive at the present value is intended to reflect all risks of ownership and the associated risks of realizing the stream of projected future cash flows. The discounted cash flow methodology uses our estimates of future financial performance. The most significant assumptions used in the discounted cash flow methodology are the discount rate and expected future revenue, which vary among reporting units.
The market multiple methodology compares us to similar companies on the basis of risk characteristics to determine our risk profile relative to those companies as a group. This analysis generally focuses on both quantitative considerations, which include financial performance and other quantifiable data, and qualitative considerations, which include any factors which are expected to impact future financial performance. The most significant assumptions affecting the market multiple methodology are the market multiples used on projected future cash flows and market participant acquisition premium. A market participant acquisition premium represents the additional value a buyer would pay to obtain control of the respective reporting unit because having control would lead to higher cash flows, lower cost of capital or both. In 2020, both in the interim qualitative reviews and as part of the October 1 annual review, market multiples were not incorporated into our assessments as our current financial metrics do not support use of the market approach as a corroborating approach. When our business resumes and stabilizes, we will reincorporate the market approach into our fair value methodology.
In 2020 as part of our annual impairment test, four of our reporting units with goodwill were assessed under the first qualitative step. Three of these four of the reporting units did not advance to the second step. These reporting units had no increases in discount rate and considerable excess of fair value over their carrying value in the most recent quantitative tests. Further review of these reporting units with sensitivity tests did not change our first step conclusions.
The North American Concerts reporting unit advanced to the second step because it was unclear whether its fair value would exceed its carrying value primarily due to the loss of revenue resulting from the current cessation of concerts and an increase in its carrying value. The excess of fair value over carrying value for this reporting unit was approximately 35%. Therefore, we concluded goodwill for this reporting unit was not impaired. Sensitivity tests showed that a 150-basis point change in the discount rate, or a 66% decline in the long-term revenue growth rate, or a 13% decline in the margin was needed to change the conclusion.
The three remaining reporting units went straight to the second step as part of our policy to perform a quantitative test at least every five years to support future first step qualitative reviews. The results of these quantitative tests continued to support a healthy amount of excess fair value over carrying value.
Further, we performed an October 1, 2020 market capitalization reconciliation at a stock price of $53.74 which yielded implied premiums of 4.0% and 6.0% for business enterprise value and equity, respectively, which suggests conservative internal forecasts versus the market.
If actual results are not consistent with our assumptions and judgments used in estimating future cash flows and asset fair values, we may be exposed to future impairment losses that could be material to our results of operations.
Given the results of the tests performed, although we cannot predict future performance or market conditions, we do not currently believe any of our reporting units are at risk of failing the second step in the near future.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from the promotion or production of an event is recognized when the show occurs. Revenue collected in advance of the event is recorded as deferred revenue until the event occurs. Revenue collected from sponsorship agreements, which is not related to a single event, is classified as deferred revenue and recognized over the term of the agreement or operating season as the benefits are provided to the sponsor.
Revenue from our ticketing operations primarily consists of our share of convenience and order processing fees charged at the time a ticket for an event is sold in either the primary or secondary markets. We act as an agent on behalf of our clients and therefore do not record the face value of the tickets as revenue. For tickets sold for our concert and festival events, where our concert promoters control ticketing, revenue is recognized when the show occurs. Revenue for these ticket service charges collected in advance of the event is recorded as deferred revenue until the event occurs and these service charges are shared between our Ticketing and Concerts segments. For tickets sold for events of our third-party clients and secondary market sales, this revenue is recognized at the time of the sale and is recorded by our Ticketing segment.
We account for taxes that are externally imposed on revenue producing transactions on a net basis, as a reduction of revenue.
Litigation Accruals
We are currently involved in certain legal proceedings and, as required, have accrued our estimate of the probable costs for the resolution of these claims. Management’s estimates used have been developed in consultation with counsel and are based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. It is possible, however, that future results of operations for any particular period could be materially affected by changes in our assumptions or the effectiveness of our strategies related to these proceedings.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the liability method in accordance with the FASB guidance for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between financial reporting bases and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the periods in which the deferred tax asset or liability is expected to be realized or settled. Deferred tax assets are reduced by valuation allowances if we believe it is more likely than not that some portion or the entire asset will not be realized. As almost all earnings from our continuing foreign operations are permanently reinvested and not distributed, our income tax provision does not include additional United States state taxes and foreign withholding or transaction taxes on those foreign earnings that would be incurred if they were distributed. It is not practicable to determine the amount of state and foreign income taxes, if any, that might become due in the event that any remaining available cash associated with these earnings were distributed.
The FASB guidance for income taxes prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. The amount recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is more likely than not to be realized upon ultimate settlement.