Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on June 7, 2019, formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the IPO, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On December 10, 2020, we entered into a Merger Agreement with Merger Sub, WMH and Ghost Media Group, LLC, a Nevada limited liability company, solely in its capacity as the securityholder representative thereunder (the “Holder Representative”).
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub will merge with and into WMH with WMH continuing as the surviving entity and a subsidiary of the Company (refer to as “Surviving Pubco” following the Business Combination) (the “Merger” and the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, the “Business Combination”).
As a result of the Business Combination, each of our issued and outstanding Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares will convert into a share of Class A common stock of Surviving Pubco, and each issued and outstanding warrant to purchase Class A ordinary shares of the Company will be exercisable by its terms to purchase an equal number of shares of Class A common stock of Surviving Pubco.
The merger consideration (the “Merger Consideration”) to be paid to holders of the limited liability company interests of WMH (each, a “WMH Equity Holder”) at the closing of the Business Combination (“the Closing”) pursuant to the Merger Agreement will be equal to $1.31 billion and will be paid in a mix of cash and equity consideration.
The Merger Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants by the parties thereto and the Closing is subject to certain conditions as further described in the Merger Agreement.
On January 13, 2021, we held an Extraordinary General Meeting pursuant to which our shareholders approved extending the extension date. In connection with the approval of the extension, shareholders elected to redeem an aggregate of 1,425 Class A ordinary shares. As a result, an aggregate of $14,489 (or approximately $10.17 per share) was released from our trust account to pay such shareholders.
On February 18, 2021, we issued a note in the amount of up to $750,000 to the sponsor for general working capital purposes. The note is non-interest bearing and payable upon the earlier to occur of (i) June 10, 2021 or (ii) the consummation of a Business Combination. If we do not consummate a Business Combination, we may use a portion of any funds held outside the trust account to repay the note; however, no proceeds from the trust account may be used for such repayment.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, identifying a target for our Business Combination and activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of WMH. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,601,521, which consists of operating costs of $3,864,234 offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $2,257,985 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the trust account of $4,728.
For the period from June 7, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had net income of $1,618,159, which consists of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,812,577 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $112,416, offset by operating and formation costs of $306,834.
Going Concern, Liquidity and Capital Resources
August 12, 2019, we consummated the IPO of 25,000,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $250,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 7,000,000 private placement warrants to our sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $7,000,000.
Following the IPO and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $250,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $14,413,362 in transaction costs, including $5,000,000 of underwriting fees, $8,750,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $663,362 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $581,882. Net loss of $1,601,521 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $2,257,985 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities of $4,728. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $3,282,352 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from June 7, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $467,049. Net income of $1,618,159 was offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $1,812,577, an unrealized gain on marketable securities of $112,416 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $160,215 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $254,187,706. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our share capital is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $312,707 held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant unit at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. On February 18, 2021, we issued a note in the amount of up to $750,000 to the sponsor for general working capital purposes.
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsors, or an affiliate of the sponsor, officers, directors, or third parties. Our sponsors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through July 10, 2021, the date that we will be required to cease all operations, except for the purpose of winding up, if a Business Combination is not consummated. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay our sponsor a monthly fee of $20,000 for office space, and administrative and support services, provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on August 7, 2019 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $8,750,000 in the aggregate, which will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, if any, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for non-redeemable Class B ordinary shares is calculated by dividing net income less income attributable to Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period presented.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.