Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations together with our financial statements and the notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, whose actual outcomes involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those stated in or implied by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the section entitled “Cautionary Statement regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report. Please see the notes to our Financial Statements for information about our Critical Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
The Company has had limited revenues from operations in each of the last two fiscal years, and in the current fiscal year.
Business Overview
We are a Nevada corporation, originally formed as a Utah corporation under the name State Cycle, Inc. on August 7, 1974. We moved the corporation to the state of Nevada and changed our name to X Rail Enterprises, Inc. on November 5, 2015, at which time our primary business changed from mining to rail transportation, passenger excursions, rail car construction and rail related operations and services. Effective November 4, 2017, we changed our name to Las Vegas Xpress, Inc. On October 9, 2020 and pursuant to approval from FINRA, the Company effected a 4000-to-1 reverse stock split, changed its name to Maptelligent, and obtained the new ticker symbol “MAPT.”
We are on a mission to enhance physical security of structures where large gatherings of people can be found such as, schools, universities, hospitals, sports venues, shopping malls, corporate campuses, etc. We enhance the ability to provide a safer environment through the use of geospatial technology by presenting a building footprint, floorplan and associated attributes on a map for property stakeholders and first responders to access during emergency incidents. Our goal is to transform how data and information are accessed by those who need it most during a time of crisis, namely first responders. We provide a geographic platform for first responders to access site specific information enhancing situational awareness while en route and upon arrival to an incident scene. This ability to access pertinent information shortens the time it takes for tactical action thereby mitigating additional life and property threat exposure. Our geocentric system serves as a common operating picture for all stakeholders involved in maintaining and protecting physical structures and venues. Through potential partnerships with industry leaders in physical security technology, our solutions act as the data integration platform for visualizing information produced by partner’s technologies.
Once our software is completed, our customers will begin their solution journey by uploading a building floor plan via a PDF file to a hosted solution in the cloud. This low-touch and low-cost solution allows users to quickly share site specific details with public safety. Our customers seeking to share additional relevant information and data are able to use our content management cloud services making it accessible anywhere on any device with permission. We plan to offer a suite of maps and applications providing customers the ability to maintain and manage data in a mobile environment for public safety to create incident pre-plans associated with the building floor plan and for building engineers to manage maintenance schedules for critical elements of a building such as alarm panels, pull stations and fire extinguishers. We plan to provide for our customers the ability to build high fidelity floor plans, safety assessments, and system integration services making the whole system complete and comprehensive.
GEOCommand Software
On April 13, 2020, the Company, under its former name Las Vegas Xpress Inc., entered into an asset purchase agreement with GEOcommand, Inc. a Florida corporation (“GEOcommand”), to acquire GEOcommand’s proprietary GEOcommand Software source code and the applicable access to operate such software (the “GEOcommand Software”) in exchange for common stock in the Company, such that the shares issued to GEOcommand shall represent eighty percent (80%) of the post-closing shares of the total outstanding common stock of the Company. Additionally, GEOcommand agreed to loan to the Company the sum of $75,000 to be used by the Company to bring current it’s accounting past due fees, bring current the fees for listing on the OTC Markets Exchange under an OTCQB listing, fees to the State of Nevada to remain current as a Nevada business, filing fees with FINRA, and fees and expenses required to create and file an S-1 registration statement in the future for an amount to raise at least $5 million (collectively, the “GEOcommand Transaction”). In connection with the GEOcommand Transaction, the Company intended to enter into a licensing agreement with GEOcommand for the exclusive, unlimited and world-wide use of the GEOcommand Software in exchange for $1,000,000. As of the date of this report, none of these above actions have been executed yet, as various provisions of the underlying contract have not been fulfilled. The timing of the satisfaction of these events is currently unknown.
GEOcommand has developed their in-building, location-specific GIS platform and has significant investments in the preparation of the GEOcommand Software. The GEOcommand Software is a site-specific mapping platform that provides a real time viewing of building floorplans on a map utilizing the Esri ArcGIS, a geographic information software, so first responders can visualize the locations of critical assets such as electrical shutoff, water main valves, gas lines, metal detectors, door access controls and cameras before they arrived on scene.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, which require management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. We believe our most critical accounting policies and estimates relate to the following:
·
Use of Estimates
·
Derivative liability
·
Stock-based Compensation
·
Income Taxes
While our estimates and assumptions are based on our knowledge of current events and actions we may undertake in the future, actual results may ultimately differ from these estimates and assumptions. For a discussion of the Company’s significant accounting policies, refer to Note 2 of Notes to the Financial Statements.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported periods. Amounts could materially change in the future.
Derivative Liability
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. For stock-based derivative financial instruments, the Company used a Black Scholes valuation model to value the derivative instruments at inception and on subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company issues stock, options and warrants as share-based compensation to employees and non-employees.
The Company accounts for its share-based compensation to employees and non-employees in accordance ASC 718. Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the estimated fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The deferred tax assets of the Company relate primarily to operating loss carryforwards for federal income tax purposes. A full valuation allowance for deferred tax assets has been provided because the Company believes it is not more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will be realized. Realization of deferred tax assets is dependent on the Company generating sufficient taxable income in future periods.
Results of Operations
The following are the results of our continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019:
Revenue
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company did not generate any revenue.
Operating Expenses
Compensation and payroll taxes increased by $1,351,063, or 338%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase in compensation expense in the current year is primarily due to stock issuances to officers and directors as non-cash compensation in stock and employees’ payroll. Professional fees decreased by $101,667, or 68%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to consulting fees. General and administrative expenses increased by $79,624, or 206%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase in general and administrative expenses is primarily due to an increase in rent, marketing software expenses.
Other (Expense) Income
The increase in other expense was primarily due to an increase in loss on change in fair value of derivative liability, from an accounting estimate primarily from the conversion feature of one convertible promissory note.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support asset growth, satisfy disbursement needs, maintain reserve requirements and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. The Company has insufficient operating revenues so is currently dependent on debt financing and sale of equity to fund operations.
As shown in the accompanying financial statements, the Company has net losses of $106,248,820 and $576,608 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company also has an accumulated deficit of $129,645,375 and negative working capital of $105,935,274 as of December 31, 2020, as well as outstanding convertible notes payable of $229,438.
As of December 31, 2020 the net loss and working capital deficiency is primarily due to the non-cash accounting estimate of a derivative liability of $102 million, for the valuation of a convertible feature on one of our convertible notes that is convertible at $0.0001 per share. Our derivative accounting estimates and disclosures should be read in conjunction with critical accounting policies and Notes 5 and 7 in our financial statements, as they are disclosed elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Management believes that it will need additional equity or debt financing to be able to implement its business plan. Given the lack of revenue, capital deficiency and negative working capital, there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
We believe that the successful growth and operation of our business is dependent upon our ability to do the following:
•
obtain adequate sources of debt or equity financing to pay unfunded operating expenses and fund long-term business operations; and
•
manage or control working capital requirements by controlling operating expenses.
Management is attempting to raise additional capital via equity and debt offerings to sustain operations until it can market its services and achieves profitability. The successful outcome of future activities cannot be determined at this time and there are no assurances that, if achieved, the Company will have sufficient funds to execute its intended business plan or generate positive operating results.
Cash Flows
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $670,678 and $89,664, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a net loss of $106,248,820 and the net loss included significant non-cash expenses of $20,447 in debt discount amortization, $960,000 in stock issued for compensation and $104,180,679 in change in fair value of derivative liabilities, as well as $417,016 in changes in operating assets and liabilities. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred a net loss of $576,608 and the net loss included significant non-cash expenses of $65,001 in debt discount amortization, $77,500 in stock issued for compensation, and $156,420 in change in fair value of derivative liabilities, as well as $500,863 in changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company lent $36,000 to related parties and $14,100 was paid back from related parties.
There were no investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2019.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $754,150, which consisted of $100,000 in proceeds from convertible notes payable, $467,900 from proceeds from issuance of common stock, $230,000 in proceeds from notes payable and repayments of notes payable of $43,750. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 amounted to $86,576, which consisted of proceeds from notes payable of $1,546, repayments on notes payable of $1,647 and $86,677 in proceeds from related party notes payable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.