ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto set forth in Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K. Such discussion and analysis includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties and that are not historical facts, including statements about our beliefs and expectations. You should also read Business, Risk Factors and Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements in this 2020 Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
We are a diversified global technology company with leading artificial intelligence and data-analytics solutions, and we also own and operate an e-commerce digital media property focused on a luxury beach lifestyle.
AI Business
Through our proprietary data and AI platform, our Remark AI business (currently known in the Asia-Pacific region as KanKan) generates revenue by delivering AI-based software products, computing devices and software-as-a-service solutions
for businesses in many industries. In addition to the other work that we have ramped up, we continue partnering with top universities on research projects targeting algorithm, artificial neural network and computing architectures which we believe keeps us among the leaders in technology development. Our research team continues to participate in various computer vision competitions at which it wins or ranks near or at the top.
We continue to market Remark AI’s innovative AI-based solutions to customers in the retail, urban life cycle and workplace and food safety markets.
Retail Solutions. Utilizing a client’s existing cameras and IoT devices placed throughout the store, Remark AI’s retail solutions swiftly analyze real-time customer shopping behavior, such as time of store entry and shelf-browsing habits, and provide managers with a customer heatmap that reflects traffic patterns. Purchase history is also analyzed, leading to relevant offers for future purchase conversions, and customers for their continued loyalty through a special VIP status that brings customized promotions and coupons along with attentive customer service. Remark AI’s retail solutions allow retailers and store managers to make better data-driven decisions regarding store layout, item placement, and pricing strategy, all while anonymizing customers’ identities to protect their privacy.
Urban Life Cycle Solutions. We offer and have installed several solutions in what we call the urban life cycle category. Our urban life cycle solutions include our AI community system which assists in building “smart” communities by enhancing community security and safety. We also have AI solutions that help to make schools “smart” by (i) providing an accurate and convenient method for student check-in and check-out, (ii) providing an autonomous method of campus monitoring that enhances students’ safety by, for example, monitoring students for elevated body temperatures that could indicate viral infections such as influenza or COVID-19, detecting trespassers, detecting dangerous behaviors or physical accidents that could result in injury, and (iii) monitoring the school kitchen for safety violations.
In traffic management, our solutions assist in monitoring traffic for various violations by automatically detecting, capturing, and obtaining evidence regarding violations such as speeding, running red lights, driving against the flow of traffic and even using counterfeit registration plates. Additionally, our solutions provide constant road-condition monitoring, providing control centers with real-time information on traffic conditions such as areas of congestion or other traffic anomalies.
Workplace and Food Safety Solutions. The monitoring and detection capabilities of our solutions ensure that workers are practicing established food safety protocols, wearing the proper personal protective equipment, and complying with local health codes. From commercial kitchens to factories to construction work zones, our safety-compliance algorithms manage regulatory functions, review hygienic and equipment status while checking and alerting management regarding violations.
Biosafety Business
The first half of 2020 was one of renewed focus for us as we repurposed and improved our existing urban life cycle solution that we were selling to make schools in China “smart” schools to build a new product line of high-quality, highly-effective thermal imaging solutions that leverage our innovative software. We currently focus our efforts predominantly in the U.S. market.
Remark AI Thermal Kits. We sell our Remark AI Thermal Kits to customers needing the ability to scan crowds and areas of high foot traffic for indications that certain persons with elevated temperatures may require secondary screening. Though the kits are semi-customizable, they generally consist primarily of a thermal imaging camera, a calibrating device, a computer to monitor the video feed, supporting equipment and our AI software. Once set up and calibrated, the kits scan a large number of people each minute, providing both thermally enhanced and standard video feeds that allow our customers to evaluate high volumes of people at large gatherings.
Remark AI Thermal Pads. Our Remark AI rPad thermal imaging devices, usually mounted on a wall or a single-post stand, are designed for customers needing the ability to scan individuals on a one-by-one basis in situations where rapid, high-volume scanning is not necessary, such as at a customer’s office entrances where employees can be scanned as they enter for indications of an elevated temperature that may require secondary screening. In addition to thermal scanning, we can customize our AI software embedded in the rPad to perform additional safety and security functions including identifying persons for authorized entry.
Financial Statement Index
Overall Business Outlook
Our innovative AI and data analytics solutions continue to gain worldwide awareness and recognition through media exposure, comparative testing, product demonstrations and word of mouth resulting from positive responses and increased acceptance. We intend to expand our business not only in the Asia-Pacific region, where we believe there still are fast-growth AI market opportunities for our solutions, but also in the United States and Europe, where we see a tremendous number of requests for AI products and solutions in the workplace and public safety markets, especially in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the COVID-19 pandemic may also present challenges to our business, as could economic and geopolitical conditions in some international regions, and we do not yet know what will be the ultimate effects on our business. We continue to pursue large business opportunities, but anticipating when, or if, we can close these opportunities is difficult. Quickly deploying our software solutions in the market segments we have identified, in which we may face a number of large, well-known competitors, is also difficult.
Business Developments During 2020
After spending most of the first quarter of 2020 on product development and relationship building, we were able to launch our biosafety business in the second quarter of 2020 and begin recognizing revenue from sales of the new products. Our expectation is that the U.S. will be the primary market for this new product line, though we will continue to work to develop other markets as well. The third quarter of 2020 saw us ramp up execution of our larger contracts in China, such as the China Mobile project and the projects with several school districts. We expect to continue completing projects under those contracts and under other contracts to continue to increase revenue from our China AI business. Our work to build on the initial success of our biosafety business continues. Not all businesses across the U.S. have re-opened after COVID-19 lockdowns and not all of those that have re-opened have done so completely, which, in addition to the uncertainty of whether new closures will be implemented, somewhat slowed our biosafety business sales during the second half of 2020. Customers and potential customers, however, continue to show strong interest in our products, so we expect that revenue from the biosafety business will increase as more businesses can begin to make their plans to re-open.
Though working capital constraints and the U.S.-China trade war had some adverse impact, our business has also been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which has resulted in national and local governmental authorities across the world implementing numerous preventative measures in an effort to control the spread of the virus, including travel restrictions, shelter-in-place orders, school closings, closure of non-essential businesses and other quarantine measures. The pandemic and the related preventative measures have limited our operational capabilities by preventing our employees from working for long periods of time and causing many of our customers to delay implementation of contracts we already signed with them, all of which has adversely impacted our business and results of operations. Our business and financial results may be materially and adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic during the first half of 2021 or longer, and we are unable to predict the duration or degree of such impact with any certainty.
The following table presents our revenue categories as a percentage of total consolidated revenue during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Management’s discussion and analysis of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources is based upon our financial statements. We prepare our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). Certain of our accounting policies require that we apply significant judgment in determining the estimates and assumptions for calculating estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. We use, in part, our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, observance of trends in the industry and information obtained from independent valuation experts or other outside sources to make our judgments. We cannot assure
Financial Statement Index
you that our actual results will conform to our estimates. We regularly evaluate these estimates and assumptions, particularly in areas we consider to be critical accounting estimates, where changes in estimates and assumptions could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position and, generally to a lesser extent, cash flows.
Senior management and the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors have reviewed the disclosures included herein about our critical accounting estimates, and have reviewed the processes to determine those estimates.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions which affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expense during the period. Estimates incorporated into our consolidated financial statements include the estimated useful lives for depreciable and amortizable assets, the fair value of the liabilities related to certain stock warrants we issued, the fair value of stock options issued under our equity incentive plans, the estimated cash flows we use in assessing the recoverability of long-lived assets, and the estimated fair values we use when indicators suggest the need to quantitatively test goodwill for impairment. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Accounting for Share-Based Compensation
For grants of restricted stock or restricted stock units, we measure fair value using the closing price of our stock on the measurement date, while we use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model (the “BSM Model”) to estimate the fair value of stock options and similar instruments awarded.
The BSM Model requires the following inputs:
•Expected volatility of our stock price. We analyze the historical volatility of our stock price utilizing daily stock price returns, and we also review the stock price volatility of certain peers. Using the information developed from such analysis and our judgment, we estimate how volatile our stock price will be over the period we expect the stock options will remain outstanding.
•Risk-free interest rate. We estimate the risk-free interest rate using data from the Federal Reserve Treasury Constant Maturity Instruments H.15 Release (a table of rates downloaded from the Federal Reserve website) as of the valuation date for a security with a remaining term that approximates the period over which we expect the stock options will remain outstanding.
•Stock price, exercise price and expected term. We use an estimate of the fair value of our common stock on the measurement date, the exercise price of the option, and the period over which we expect the stock options will remain outstanding.
We do not currently issue dividends, but if we did so, then we would also include an estimated dividend rate as an input to the BSM model. Generally speaking, the BSM model tends to be most sensitive to changes in stock price, volatility or expected term.
We measure compensation expense as of the grant date for granted equity-classified instruments and as of the settlement date for granted liability-classified instruments (meaning that we re-measure compensation expense at each balance sheet date until the settlement date occurs).
Once we measure compensation expense, we recognize it over the requisite service period (generally the vesting period) of the grant, net of forfeitures as they occur.
Liabilities Related to Warrants Issued
We record certain common stock warrants we issued (see Note 4 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more detailed information) at fair value and recognize the change in the fair value of such warrants as a gain or loss which we report
Financial Statement Index
in the Other income (expense) section in our consolidated statement of operations. We report some of the warrants that we record at fair value as liabilities because they contain certain provisions allowing for reduction of their exercise price, while others are recorded as liabilities because they contain a conditional promise to issue a variable number of our common stock shares upon the warrants’ expiration, and the monetary amount of such obligation was fixed at the inception of the contract.
We estimate the fair value of the warrants using either the BSM Model, for warrants whose terms do not change resulting from dilutive events (i.e., “plain vanilla” warrants), or the Monte Carlo Simulation method. The Monte Carlo Simulation method uses many of the same types of estimated inputs, such as the expected volatility of our stock price, the risk-free interest rate and the expected term of the warrant, as the BSM Model that we use to estimate the fair value of stock options that we issue.
Impairments
Long-Lived Assets Other Than Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets. When events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of a long-lived asset may not be recoverable, we evaluate long-lived assets for potential impairment. We estimate the future undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition and, if the sum of the expected undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying value of the asset, we recognize an impairment loss for the difference between the carrying value of the asset and its fair value.
Investment. We routinely perform an assessment of our investments in Sharecare and in Beijing All-in-one Cloud Net Technology, Co. Ltd. (“AIO”) to determine if they are other-than-temporarily impaired. An investment is impaired when the fair value of the investment declines to an amount less than the cost or amortized cost of that investment. As part of our assessment process, we determine whether the impairment is temporary or other-than-temporary. We base our assessment on both quantitative criteria and qualitative information, considering a number of factors including, but not limited to how long the security has been impaired, the amount of the impairment, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer, whether the issuer is current on contractually-obligated interest and principal payments, key corporate events pertaining to the issuer and whether the market decline was affected by macroeconomic conditions.
If we determine that an investment has incurred an other-than-temporary impairment, we permanently reduce the cost of the security to fair value and recognize an impairment charge in our consolidated statements of operations.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for a discussion regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements which may affect us.
Financial Statement Index
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion summarizes our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenue and Cost of Revenue. During the second half of the year ended December 31, 2020, we ramped up execution of our larger contracts in China, such as our China Mobile project and the projects with several school districts, such that we were able to complete more projects than we did in 2019 and earn $4.3 million more revenue. Our new biosafety business contributed $1.7 million to the overall increase in revenue as we launched our thermal imaging product line primarily in the U.S beginning in 2020.
The increases in revenue from our project acceleration in China and from our new biosafety business were partially offset by a decrease in the revenue contribution of our Remark Entertainment business of $0.6 million, primarily due to contracts that ended in the prior year that we did not renew, and a decrease in e-commerce revenue of $0.3 million, primarily due to the combined effects of our decision to sell portions of our inventory at lower costs as well as reduced orders due to changes in consumer spending as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our cost of revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily increased in conjunction with the ramping up of work on our larger contracts in China, which caused an increase of $2.7 million, while the new biosafety business added another $1.0 million during the period. The increases were partially offset by a decrease of $0.7 million that resulted because we recorded a full reserve against our e-commerce inventory during 2019, meaning that sales in 2020 had no associated cost of revenue.
Sales and marketing. Marketing expense increased by $1.5 million as a result of a payment we made to a third-party computer hardware manufacturer in China to present a combination of their hardware and our KanKan AI software to large potential clients in response to requests for proposals that could result in lucrative contracts on AI projects to modernize such
Financial Statement Index
potential clients’ facilities and operations. A decrease in headcount, including in several more-highly-compensated positions, led to a decrease of $0.6 million in payroll-related expense that partially offset the increase in marketing expense.
Technology and Development. The increase in our common stock price at December 31, 2020 as compared to the price of our common stock on December 31, 2019 caused a $0.5 million increase in share-based compensation expense related to our outstanding liability-classified China Cash Awards. Stock price is an input to the model we use to estimate the fair value of the China Cash Awards, and changes in stock price can cause large fluctuations in our estimates of fair value.
General and administrative. The decrease in general and administrative expense in 2020 from the corresponding 2019 period was affected by the following:
•Net lease cost decreased by $2.9 million. As a result of the early termination of our lease for our former office located in Las Vegas, Nevada (see Note 9 for more information), we recorded additional lease cost of $1.5 million in 2019. We also entered into a less-costly lease on our current office space in Las Vegas in 2020, resulting in the remainder of the decrease in lease cost.
•Bad debt expense decreased by $2.0 million because collection patterns have not indicated a need to record a significant allowance in the current year period, while during 2019 we recorded a large increase in the allowance for doubtful accounts because we identified an increased risk that we may not fully collect on certain trade receivables related to our AI projects and our former FinTech business.
• A decrease in headcount contributed to a decrease of approximately $0.6 million in payroll and related cost.
•An increase of $0.3 million in travel-related expense partially offset the decreases in general and administrative expense noted above, and resulted from increased domestic travel primarily related to the launch of our new biosafety business in the U.S.
•Immaterial increases and decreases affected other accounts in the general and administrative expense category but did not represent trends in our business.
Depreciation and amortization. The decrease in depreciation expense was primarily the result of long-lived assets which were being depreciated or amortized in the prior-year which were no longer being depreciated or amortized in the current year because such assets became fully depreciated or amortized before, or during the early part of, the current year periods.
Impairments. Impairment expense decreased primarily because, during 2019, we recorded a $1.3 million impairment of a security deposit related to our former FinTech business and a $1.0 million impairment of internal-use software projects, while during 2020 we only recorded a $0.4 million impairment of our investment in AIO and a $0.3 million impairment of the intangible asset representing the bikini.com domain name.
Interest expense. Our prepayment of a large portion of our debt when we completed the sale of Vegas.com in May 2019 resulted in the decrease in interest expense.
Other income. The amount of other income we recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily resulted from our release from a liability related to our former FinTech business. We had no similar activity during 2020.
Gain on lease termination. During August 2020, we entered into a settlement agreement relating to the lease for our former office space in Las Vegas which we vacated during March 2020. During March 2020, we reduced right of use assets and operating lease liabilities relating to this lease, which resulted in a gain on lease termination of $1.5 million. In addition, we recognized a further gain of $2.0 million during August 2020, when we entered into the Hughes Center Lease Settlement (as defined below). The comparable period of the prior year reflected no comparable activity.
Change in fair value of warrant liability. The fair value of our warrant liability maintains a direct relationship with the price of our common stock. The increase in our common stock price between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020 caused the increase in the fair value of our warrant liability for the year ended December 31, 2020, while the decrease in our common stock price between December 31, 2018 and December 31, 2019 caused the decrease in fair value during the year
Financial Statement Index
ended December 31, 2019. Partially offsetting the effect of the stock price increase during 2020 was the one-year decrease in the amount of time the warrants are expected to be outstanding.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
During the year ended December 31, 2020, and in each fiscal year since our inception, we have incurred net losses which has resulted in an accumulated deficit of $360.5 million as of December 31, 2020. Additionally, our operations have historically used more cash than they have provided. Net cash used in continuing operating activities was $18.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents balance was $0.9 million and we had a negative working capital balance of $8.3 million. Our net revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $10.1 million.
We were a party to the Financing Agreement with the Lenders pursuant to which the Lenders extended credit to us consisting of a term loan in the aggregate principal amount of $35.5 million.
On May 15, 2019, we completed the sale of all of the issued and outstanding membership interests of Vegas.com and used the cash proceeds of $30.0 million to pay amounts due under the Financing Agreement, of which approximately $10.0 million remained outstanding after giving effect to the application of such cash proceeds.
On May 28, 2020, we repaid in full all outstanding obligations under, and terminated, the Financing Agreement in an amount equal to approximately $12.7 million.
On April 12, 2017, we issued a short-term note payable in the principal amount of $3.0 million to a private lender in exchange for cash in the same amount. The agreement, which does not have a stated interest rate, required us to repay the note plus a fee of $115 thousand on the maturity date of June 30, 2017. The note is accruing interest at $500 per day on the unpaid principal until we repay the note in full. As of December 31, 2020, we owed $1.5 million in principal and $0.5 million accrued interest on such note.
Pursuant to the terms of the purchase agreement we entered into in connection with our acquisition of Vegas.com in 2015, we were obligated to make an Earnout Payment of $1.0 million based upon the performance of Vegas.com in the year ended December 31, 2018. We made the payment during August 2020.
On March 3, 2020, we entered into a new common stock agreement (the “2020 Aspire Purchase Agreement”), later amended on April 9, 2020, with Aspire Capital Fund, LLC (“Aspire Capital”) under which Aspire Capital purchased $30.0 million of shares of our common stock. The 2020 Aspire Purchase Agreement terminated and replaced the 2019 Aspire Purchase Agreement.
Our history of recurring operating losses, working capital deficiencies and negative cash flows from operating activities, in conjunction with the ongoing events of default under the Financing Agreement, give rise to substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern.
We intend to fund our future operations and meet our financial obligations through revenue growth as well as through sales of our thermal-imaging products. We cannot, however, provide assurance that revenue, income and cash flows generated from our businesses will be sufficient to sustain our operations in the twelve months following the filing of this 2020 Form 10-K. As a result, we are actively evaluating strategic alternatives including debt and equity financings and potential sales of investment assets or operating businesses.
Conditions in the debt and equity markets, as well as the volatility of investor sentiment regarding macroeconomic and microeconomic conditions (in particular, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic), will play primary roles in determining whether we can successfully obtain additional capital. We cannot be certain that we will be successful at raising additional capital.
Financial Statement Index
A variety of factors, many of which are outside of our control, affect our cash flow; those factors include the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, regulatory issues, competition, financial markets and other general business conditions. Based on financial projections, we believe that we will be able to meet our ongoing requirements for at least the next 12 months with existing cash, cash equivalents and cash resources, and based on the probable success of one or more of the following plans:
•develop and grow new product line(s)
•monetize existing assets
•obtain additional capital through equity issuances.
However, projections are inherently uncertain and the success of our plans is largely outside of our control. As a result, there is substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern, and we may fully utilize our cash resources prior to March 31, 2022.
Cash Flows - Continuing Operating Activities
We used $5.4 million more cash from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 than we did during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash used in continuing operating activities partially resulted from the $1.5 million payment we made to try to win lucrative contracts on AI projects to modernize potential clients’ facilities and operations in China, and is also a result of the timing of payments related to elements of working capital.
Cash Flows - Continuing Investing Activities
We engaged in an immaterial amount of investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, and the change in investing activities from the comparable period of the prior year was not material, exclusive of the proceeds from the sale of Vegas.com in the prior year period.
Cash Flows - Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $32.0 million from sales of shares of our common stock reflecting more activity under our agreements with Aspire Capital, whereas the same period of 2019 included stock sale proceeds of only $10.8 million. We also received debt proceeds of $1.4 million and repaid $13.8 million of debt during the year ended December 31, 2020, while the same period of the prior year included debt repayment of $25.5 million plus loan fee and debt issuance cost payments of $2.3 million. Finally, in the third quarter of 2020, we paid the final Earnout Payment related to our acquisition of Vegas.com in 2015; $0.9 million of the payment was reflected as a financing activity.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We currently have no off-balance sheet arrangements.