ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read this discussion together with the financial statements, related notes and other financial information included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion may contain predictions, estimates and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed under Item 1A - “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These risks could cause our actual results to differ materially from any future performance suggested below.
Executive Overview
We are a global medical technology company that develops, manufactures and markets a variety of noninvasive monitoring technologies and hospital automation solutions. Our mission is to improve patient outcomes and reduce the cost of patient care. Our patient monitoring solutions generally incorporate a monitor or circuit board, proprietary single-patient use or reusable sensors, software and/or cables. We provide our products to hospitals, emergency medical service (EMS) providers, home care providers, long-term care facilities, physician offices, veterinarians and consumers through our direct sales force, distributors and original equipment manufacturers (OEM) partners. We were incorporated in California in May 1989 and reincorporated in Delaware in May 1996.
Our core business is Measure-through Motion and Low Perfusion™ pulse oximetry, known as Masimo Signal Extraction Technology® (SET®) pulse oximetry. Our product offerings have expanded significantly over the years to also include noninvasive monitoring of blood constituents with an optical signature, optical regional oximetry monitoring, electrical brain function monitoring, acoustic respiration monitoring and exhaled gas monitoring. In addition, we have developed the Root® patient monitoring and connectivity platform, the Radical-7® and Rad-97® bedside and portable patient monitors and the Radius-7® wearable wireless patient monitor. We have also developed hospital automation and connectivity solutions, such as the Masimo Patient SafetyNet™ supplemental remote patient surveillance and monitoring system, which currently allows up to 200 patients to be monitored and viewed simultaneously and remotely through a PC-based monitor or by care providers through their pagers, voice-over-IP phones or smartphones; Iris® and Iris® Gateway, which allow the transfer of data from Masimo and third-party devices to hospital electronic medical records; and UniView™, which provides an integrated display of real-time data from Masimo and third-party devices. Please see Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to our business, products and technologies.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has created significant uncertainty in the U.S. and around the globe, resulting in both challenges and opportunities for our business. We are committed to being as transparent as possible with our investors, employees, customers, suppliers and business partners as we collectively work to respond to this crisis. In response to this situation, we have implemented a number of precautionary measures at our facilities, including requiring certain personnel to work remotely from home and enacting social distancing, requiring face masks and mandatory screening for symptoms associated with COVID-19 for critical personnel that are required to report to our facilities to work. We have recently introduced new products, such as Masimo SafetyNet™ and Masimo SafetyNet-Open™, to help combat the COVID-19 pandemic, and have made charitable pledges to various global health organizations to support global COVID-19 relief efforts. In response to the increased product demand that we are seeing from our customers as they respond to and prepare for COVID-19 patient volumes, we have continued to increase our manufacturing capacity. We currently believe that our existing liquidity position will be sufficient to fund these initiatives and our response efforts.
Given the uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot predict how long the increased product demand we have experienced or any resulting changes in our product mix, as well as the associated gross margin impact from increased boards/instruments sales, will continue. In addition, this increase in current demand could result in potential reductions in future demand if our customers have over purchased our products and need to consume their excess inventory before purchasing additional products. Furthermore, we continue to be exposed to potential disruptions to our manufacturing operations, disruptions in the supply of critical manufacturing components and in our workforce as circumstances surrounding the global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continue to change. Please see “Risks Related to Our Revenues” and “Risks Related to our Business and Operations” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on potential negative impacts to us resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Adoption of Lease Accounting Standard
Effective December 30, 2018, we adopted ASC Topic 842, Leases (ASC 842). Our adoption of ASC 842 generally resulted in (a) the recognition of lessee right-of-use (ROU) assets for the right to use assets subject to operating leases; (b) the recognition of lessee lease liabilities for our obligation to make payments under operating leases; and (c) the acceleration of when we recognize certain revenue and costs as a lessor of equipment provided to end-user hospitals at no up-front charge under deferred equipment agreements with fixed multi-year sensor purchase commitments. See “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” below and Note 2 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to our adoption of this accounting standard.
Stock Repurchase Program
In July 2018, our Board approved a stock repurchase program authorizing us to purchase up to 5.0 million shares of our common stock over a period of up to three years (2018 Repurchase Program). The 2018 Repurchase Program may be carried out at the discretion of a committee comprised of our CEO and CFO through open market purchases, one or more Rule 10b5-1 trading plans, block trades and in privately negotiated transactions. For additional information regarding our current and prior stock repurchase programs, see Part II, Item 5 and Note 17 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cercacor
Cercacor Laboratories, Inc. (Cercacor) is an independent entity spun off from us to our stockholders in 1998. Joe Kiani, our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer (CEO), is also the Chairman and CEO of Cercacor. We are a party to a cross-licensing agreement with Cercacor, which was amended and restated effective January 1, 2007 (the Cross-Licensing Agreement), which governs each party’s rights to certain intellectual property held by the two companies. See Note 3 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to Cercacor.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our results of operations expressed as U.S. Dollar amounts and as a percentage of revenue (dollars in thousands).
Comparison of the Year ended January 2, 2021 to the Year ended December 28, 2019
Revenue. Total revenue increased $205.9 million, or 22.0%, to $1,143.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, from $937.8 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. The following table details our total product revenues by the geographic area to which the products were shipped for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Product revenues increased $207.3 million, or 22.1%, to $1,143.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021 from $936.4 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. This increase was primarily due to higher revenue from monitors, consumables, boards and services, a portion of which we believe is related to a continued overall demand for our products due to the global COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the impact of approximately $0.5 million of favorable foreign exchange rate movements from the prior year that increased the U.S. Dollar translation of foreign sales that were denominated in various foreign currencies. During the year ended January 2, 2021, we shipped approximately 472,300 noninvasive technology boards and monitors, an increase of approximately 226,100 units, or 91.8%, from approximately 246,200 units shipped during the year ended December 28, 2019.
Product revenue generated through our direct and distribution sales channels increased $142.0 million, or 17.4%, to $958.8 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to $816.8 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. Revenues from our OEM channel increased $65.4 million, or 54.7%, to $185.0 million for the year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to $119.6 million for the year ended December 28, 2019.
Royalty and other revenue historically consisted primarily of royalties received from Medtronic plc (Medtronic) and revenue from non-recurring engineering services for a certain OEM customer. For the year ended January 2, 2021, there was no royalty and other revenue compared to $1.4 million of royalty and other revenue reported for the year ended December 28, 2019, primarily due to a reduction in royalties from Medtronic as a result of the expiration of its obligation to pay us sales-based royalties after October 6, 2018. We received our final royalty payment from Medtronic during the three months ended March 30, 2019. We currently do not expect any significant royalty or other revenue in the future.
Gross Profit. Gross profit consists of total revenue less cost of goods sold. Our gross profit for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Cost of goods sold includes labor, material, overhead and other similar costs related to the production, supply, distribution and support of our products and the rendering of non-recurring engineering (NRE) services. Cost of goods sold increased $92.0 million to $400.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, from $308.7 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, primarily due to higher material, manufacturing and distribution costs associated with the increase in product sales volumes, product mix, and increased manufacturing complexity associated with the impact of COVID-19.
Product gross margins decreased to 65.0% for the year ended January 2, 2021 from 67.1% for the year ended December 28, 2019, primarily due to unfavorable product mix associated with the increase in board and monitor sales, increased manufacturing complexity associated with the impact of COVID-19, and higher distribution costs. Royalty and other revenue gross profit decreased by $1.3 million for the year ended January 2, 2021 compared to the year ended December 28, 2019 due to lower royalties from Medtronic as a result of the expiration of its obligation to pay us royalties after October 6, 2018.
Selling, General and Administrative. Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, stock-based compensation and related expenses for sales, marketing and administrative personnel, sales commissions, advertising and promotion costs, professional fees related to legal, accounting and other outside services, public company costs and other corporate expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $54.4 million, or 17.3%, to $369.1 million for the year ended January 2, 2021 from $314.7 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to higher compensation and other employee-related costs of approximately $28.3 million, higher advertising and marketing related expenses of approximately $16.7 million, higher legal and professional fees of approximately $12.5 million and higher contributions of approximately $3.7 million, which were partially offset by a reduction in travel costs of approximately $10.3 million.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries, stock-based compensation and related expenses for engineers and other personnel engaged in the design and development of our products. These expenses also include third-party fees paid to consultants, prototype and engineering supply expenses and the costs of clinical trials. Research and development expenses for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Research and development expenses increased $25.4 million, or 27.2%, to $118.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021 from $93.3 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, primarily due to higher compensation-related costs of approximately $19.8 million, higher professional fees of approximately $1.5 million, higher office equipment-related expenses of approximately $1.3 million and higher occupancy and facilities-related expense of approximately $1.0 million.
Non-operating Income. Non-operating income consists primarily of interest income, interest expense and foreign exchange losses. Non-operating income for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Non-operating income was $7.9 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, as compared to $13.0 million of non-operating income for the year ended December 28, 2019. This net decrease of approximately $5.0 million was primarily due to approximately $8.4 million in lower interest income, which was offset by approximately $3.3 million of net realized and unrealized gains on foreign currency denominated transactions during the year ended January 2, 2021.
Provision for Income Taxes. Our provision for income taxes for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Our provision for income taxes was $23.5 million for the year ended January 2, 2021 compared to $38.0 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. Our effective tax rate was 8.9% for the year ended January 2, 2021 compared to 16.2% for the year ended December 28, 2019. This decrease in our effective tax rate for the year ended January 2, 2021 resulted primarily from an increase in the amount of excess tax benefits realized from stock-based compensation pursuant to ASU No. 2016-09, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting (ASU 2016-09) of approximately $14.5 million compared to the year ended December 28, 2019, an increase in R&D tax credits, and a decrease in nondeductible compensation related expenses.
We have made no provision for U.S. income taxes or foreign withholding taxes on approximately $142.8 million in accumulated earnings from our foreign subsidiaries as we expect that such amounts will continue to be indefinitely reinvested in operations outside the U.S. Our effective tax rate was lower than the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily due to a portion of our earnings being generated from countries other than the U.S., where such earnings are generally subject to lower tax rates than the U.S., excess tax benefits from U.S. stock-based compensation and research and development tax credits. While we expect our worldwide consolidated effective tax rate will continue to be lower than the U.S. federal statutory rate, our actual future effective income tax rate will depend on various factors, including the geographic composition of our pre-tax income, the amount of excess tax benefits realized from U.S. stock-based compensation, the amount of our research and development tax credits, the deductibility of executive compensation, changes in tax laws, changes in deferred tax asset valuation allowances and the recognition and derecognition of tax benefits associated with uncertain tax positions.
Comparison of the Year ended December 28, 2019 to the Year ended December 29, 2018
For a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 28, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 29, 2018, please refer to the discussion under the heading “Comparison of the Year ended December 28, 2019 to the Year ended December 29, 2018” in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 19, 2020.
Liquidity
Our principal sources of liquidity consist of our existing cash and cash equivalent balances, future funds expected to be generated from operations and available borrowing capacity under our credit facility. As of January 2, 2021, we had approximately $867.3 million in working capital, of which approximately $641.4 million was cash and cash equivalents. In addition to net working capital, we had approximately $148.3 million of available borrowing capacity (net of outstanding letters of credit) under our Credit Agreement (Credit Facility) as compared to approximately $823.8 million in working capital, approximately $567.7 million in cash and cash equivalents and $120.0 million in short-term investments at December 28, 2019.
In managing our day-to-day liquidity and capital structure, we generally do not rely on foreign earnings as a source of funds. As of January 2, 2021, we had cash totaling $71.7 million held outside of the U.S., of which approximately $32.8 million was accessible without additional tax cost and approximately $38.9 million was accessible at an incremental estimated tax cost of up to $0.4 million. We currently have sufficient funds on-hand and cash held outside the U.S. that is available without additional tax cost to fund our global operations. In the event funds that are treated as permanently reinvested are repatriated, we may be required to accrue and pay additional U.S. taxes to repatriate these funds.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended January 2, 2021 was $211.0 million and was primarily driven by net income including noncontrolling interests of $240.3 million. This was increased by non-cash activities including stock-based compensation of $42.2 million, depreciation and amortization of $29.3 million and a deferred income tax benefit of $5.0 million. Additional increases in operating cash resulted from increases in accrued compensation, deferred revenue and other contract-related liabilities, accrued liabilities and accounts payable of $15.5 million, $10.9 million, $9.4 million and $7.6 million, respectively, primarily due to the timing of payments. Partially offsetting this was $94.4 million of purchases of inventory to both increase finished goods days on hand as well as secure raw material supply to ensure we are able to support higher customer demand during the COVID-19 pandemic, and to support product launches. Additional reductions to net income including noncontrolling interests were changes in operating assets, including an increase in other current assets of $30.0 million, primarily due to the timing of various tax payments and refunds, and an increase in lease receivables of $7.7 million.
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 28, 2019 was $221.6 million and was driven primarily by net income of $196.2 million. Non-cash activity included stock-based compensation of $39.2 million, depreciation and amortization of $23.5 million and a deferred income tax benefit of $6.0 million. Additional sources of cash related to changes in operating assets and liabilities included increases in accounts payable, deferred revenue and other contract-related liabilities, and accrued compensation of $9.9 million, $7.7 million and $5.3 million, respectively, primarily due to the timing of payments. These sources of cash were partially offset by other changes in operating assets and liabilities related to increases in accounts receivable and lease receivable of $23.6 million and $12.0 million, respectively, primarily due to the timing of cash receipts, an increase in inventory of $21.3 million, primarily due to the growth in our business and the timing of shipments, and an increase in other current assets of $8.5 million, primarily due to the timing of various tax payments and refunds.
Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 was $82.8 million, consisting primarily of $120.0 million for maturities of short-term investments, $112.71 million of business combinations, $72.5 million for purchases of property and equipment of which $16.4 million related to the purchase of a building, $6.8 million related to the acquisition of a strategic investment and $7.4 million for intangible assets related to capitalized patent and trademark costs.
Cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 was $197.7 million, consisting primarily of $280.0 million for purchases of short-term investments, $68.4 million for purchases of property and equipment of which $35.6 million related to the purchase of two buildings, $5.2 million related to the acquisition of a strategic investment and $4.1 million for intangible assets related to capitalized patent and trademark costs, which were offset by $160.0 million of maturities of short-term investments.
Financing Activities. Cash used in financing activities for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 was $54.3 million, resulting primarily from cash paid for common stock repurchase transactions that settled during the year of $110.5 million, which were partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of common stock (upon exercise of options) of $58.4 million.
Cash used in financing activities for the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 was $9.3 million, resulting primarily from cash paid for common stock repurchase transactions that settled during the year of $37.6 million, which were partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of common stock (upon exercise of options) of $28.3 million.
Capital Resources and Prospective Capital Requirements
We currently maintain a Credit Agreement (Credit Facility) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent and a Lender, and Bank of the West, as a Lender (collectively, the Initial Lenders). The Credit Facility provides for up to $150.0 million of unsecured borrowings, with an option, subject to certain conditions, for us to increase the aggregate borrowing capacity to up to $550.0 million in the future with the Initial Lenders and additional Lenders, as required. The Credit Facility also provides for a sublimit of up to $25.0 million for the issuance of letters of credit and a sublimit of $75.0 million for borrowings in specified foreign currencies. All unpaid principal under the Credit Facility will become due and payable on December 17, 2023. Proceeds from the Credit Facility are expected to be used for general corporate, capital investment and working capital needs. For additional information regarding the Credit Facility, see Note 15 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In July 2018, our Board approved the 2018 Repurchase Program, authorizing us to purchase up to 5.0 million additional shares of its common stock over a period of up to three years. The 2018 Repurchase Program became effective in September 2018 upon the expiration of our previous repurchase program. For additional information regarding our stock repurchase programs, see Note 17 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We expect to fund our future operating, investing and financing activities through our available cash, future cash from operations, our Credit Facility and other potential sources of capital. In addition to funding our working capital requirements, we anticipate additional capital expenditures primarily related to investments in infrastructure growth. Possible additional uses of cash may include the acquisitions and/or strategic investments in technologies or technology companies, investments in property and equipment as well as repurchases of stock under our authorized stock repurchase program. However, any repurchases of common stock will be subject to numerous factors, including the availability of our stock, general market conditions, the trading price of our stock, available capital, alternative uses for capital and our financial performance. In addition, the amount and timing of our actual investing activities will vary significantly depending on numerous factors, including the timing and amount of capital expenditures, costs of product development efforts, our timetable for infrastructure expansion, stock repurchase activity and costs related to our domestic and international regulatory requirements. Despite these investment requirements and potential expenditures, we anticipate that our existing cash and cash equivalents and amounts available under our new Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital requirements, capital expenditures and other operational funding needs for at least the next 12 months.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not currently have, nor have we ever had, any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for other contractually narrow or limited purposes. In addition, we do not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts. As a result, we are not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in these relationships.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our outstanding contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of January 2, 2021 and the effect those obligations are expected to have on our cash liquidity and cash flow in future periods (in thousands). The estimated payments reflected in this table are based on management’s estimates and assumptions about these obligations. As a result, the actual cash outflows in future periods will vary, possibly materially, from those reflected in this table.
______________
(1)Undiscounted lease payments for operating leases.
(2)Certain inventory items under non-cancellable purchase orders.
(3)Includes optional renewal periods for certain leases.
Other obligations. As of January 2, 2021, our estimated liabilities related to uncertain tax positions, including interest, were $11.8 million. Due to the high degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of potential cash flows associated with these liabilities, we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the amounts and periods in which these liabilities might be made.
In addition, we had the following annual minimum royalty commitments to Cercacor, as of January 2, 2021 (in thousands):
______________
(1)Subsequent to 2025, the royalty arrangement requires a $5.0 million minimum annual royalty payment unless the agreement is amended, restated or terminated.
See Note 3 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to Cercacor.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgements that affect the reported amounts of net revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities. These estimates and judgements are based on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, and form the basis for making management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. Although we regularly evaluate these estimates and assumptions, changes in judgments and uncertainties relating to these estimates could potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. If these estimates differ significantly from actual results, the impact to the consolidated financial statements may be material. We believe that the critical accounting policies that are the most significant for purposes of fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results include the following:
Revenue Recognition, Deferred Revenue and Other Contract Liabilities
We derive the majority of our product revenue from four primary sources: (i) direct sales under deferred equipment agreements with end-user hospitals where we provide up-front monitoring equipment at no up-front charge in exchange for a multi-year sensor purchase commitment; (ii) other direct sales of noninvasive monitoring solutions to end-user hospitals, emergency medical response organizations and other direct customers; (iii) sales of noninvasive monitoring solutions to distributors who then typically resell to end-user hospitals, emergency medical response organizations and other customers; and (iv) sales of integrated circuit boards to OEM customers who incorporate our embedded software technology into their multiparameter monitoring devices. Subject to customer credit considerations, the majority of such sales are made on open account using industry standard payment terms based on the geography within which the specific customer is located.
We generally recognize revenue following a single, principles-based five-step model to be applied to all contracts with customers and generally provide for the recognition of revenue in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled, net of allowances for estimated returns, discounts or sales incentives, as well as taxes collected from customers that are remitted to government authorities, when control over the promised goods or services are transferred to the customer. Revenue related to equipment supplied under sales-type lease arrangements is recognized once control over the equipment is transferred to the customer, while revenue related to equipment supplied under operating-type lease arrangements is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
While the majority of our sales transactions contain standard business terms and conditions, there are some transactions that contain non-standard business terms and conditions. As a result, contract interpretation and analysis is required to determine the appropriate accounting, including: (i) the amount of the total consideration, including variable consideration, (ii) whether the arrangement contains an embedded lease, and if so, whether such embedded lease is a sales-type lease or an operating lease, (iii) the identification of the distinct performance obligations contained within the arrangement, (iv) how the arrangement consideration should be allocated to each performance obligation when multiple performance obligations exist, including the determination of standalone selling price, and (v) when to recognize revenue on the performance obligations. Changes in judgments on these assumptions and estimates could materially impact the timing of revenue recognition.
We enter into agreements to sell our monitoring solutions and services, sometimes as part of arrangements with multiple performance obligations that include various combinations of distinct product sales, equipment leases and services. In the case of contracts with multiple performance obligations, the authoritative guidance provides that the total consideration be allocated to each performance obligation on the basis of relative standalone selling prices. When a standalone selling price is not readily observable, we estimate the standalone selling price by considering multiple factors including, but not limited to, features and functionality of the product, geographies, type of customer, contractual prices pursuant to Group Purchasing Organization (GPO) contracts, our pricing and discount practices, and other market conditions.
Sales under deferred equipment agreements are generally structured such that we agree to provide certain monitoring-related equipment, software, installation, training and/or warranty support at no up-front charge in exchange for the customer’s commitment to purchase sensors over the term of the agreement, which generally ranges from three to six years. We allocate contract consideration under deferred equipment agreements containing fixed annual sensor purchase commitments to the underlying lease and non-lease components at contract inception. In determining whether any underlying lease components are related to a sales-type lease or an operating lease, we evaluate the customer’s rights and ability to control the use of the underlying equipment throughout the contract term, including any equipment substitution rights retained by us, as well as our expectations surrounding potential contract/lease extensions or renewals and the customer’s likelihood to exercise any purchase options. Revenue allocable to non-lease components is generally recognized as such non-lease components are satisfied. Revenue allocable to lease components under sales-type lease arrangements is generally recognized when control over the equipment is transferred to the customer. Revenue allocable to lease components under operating lease arrangements is generally recognized over the term of the operating lease. We generally do not expect to derive any significant value in excess of such asset’s unamortized book value from equipment underlying our operating leases arrangements.
Revenue from direct sales of our products to end-user hospitals, emergency medical response organizations, other direct customers, distributors and OEM customers is generally recognized by us when control of such products transfer to the customer based upon the terms of the contract or underlying purchase order. Revenue related to OEM rainbow® parameter software licenses is recognized by us upon the OEM’s shipment of its product to its customer, as reported to us by the OEM.
We provide certain customers with various sales incentives that may take the form of discounts or rebates. We estimate and provide allowances for these programs as a reduction to revenue at the time of sale. In general, customers do not have a right of return for credit or refund. However, we allow returns under certain circumstances. At the end of each period, we estimate and accrue for these returns as a reduction to revenue. We estimate the revenue constraints related to these forms of variable consideration based on various factors, including expected purchasing volumes, prior sales and returns history, and specific contractual terms and limitations.
Inventory
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using a standard cost method, which approximates FIFO (first-in, first-out). Inventory valuation reserves are recorded for materials that have become obsolete or are no longer used in current production and for inventory that has a net realizable value less than the carrying value in inventory. We generally purchase raw materials in quantities that we anticipate will be fully used within one year. However, changes in operating strategy and customer demand, and frequent unpredictable fluctuations in market values for such materials, can limit our ability to effectively utilize all of the raw materials purchased and sold through resulting finished goods to customers for a profit. We regularly monitor potential inventory excess, obsolescence and lower market values compared to standard costs and, when necessary, reduce the carrying amount of our inventory to its market value.
We determine any required inventory valuation adjustments based on an evaluation of the expected future use of our inventory on an item by item basis. We apply historical obsolescence rates to estimate the loss on inventory expected to have a recovery value below cost. Our historical obsolescence rates are developed from our company specific experience for major categories of inventory, which are then applied to excess inventory on an item by item basis. We also record other specific inventory valuation adjustments when we become aware of other unique events that result in a known recovery value below cost. For inventory items that have been written down, the reduced value becomes the new cost basis. If our estimates for potential inventory losses prove to be too low, our future earnings will be affected when any related additional inventory losses are recorded.
Lessee ROU Assets and Lease Liabilities
We determine if an arrangement contains a lease at inception. ROU assets represent our right to use an asset underlying an operating lease for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from an operating lease. ROU assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. We generally estimate the applicable discount rate used to determine the net present value of lease payments based on available information at the lease commencement date. Many of our lessee agreements include options to extend the lease, which we do not include in our lease terms unless they are reasonably certain to be exercised. We utilize a portfolio approach to account for the ROU assets and liabilities associated with certain equipment leases. We have also made a policy election not to separate lease and non-lease components for our real estate leases and to exclude short-term leases with a term of twelve months or less from our ROU assets and lease liabilities. Rental expense for lease payments related to operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Stock-Based Compensation
Our stock-based compensation awards are currently comprised of stock options, restricted stock units (RSUs) and performance share units (PSUs), all of which are equity-classified awards. For equity-classified awards granted on or after January 1, 2006, we estimate the fair value of the award on the date of grant and expense stock-based compensation over the requisite service period. In the case of PSUs, the amount of expense recognized is also dependent upon the expected achievement level for the specified performance criteria. The fair value of RSU and PSU awards is the closing price of our common stock on the grant date. To calculate the fair value of stock option awards, we use the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which, in addition to the closing price of our stock on the grant date and the option strike price, requires the input of subjective assumptions. These assumptions include the estimated length of time employees will retain their stock options before exercising them (the expected term), the estimated volatility of our stock price over the expected term and the dividend yield on our common stock. We estimate expected term based on both our specific historical option exercise experience, as well as expected term information available from a peer group of companies with similar vesting schedules. The estimated volatility is based on both the historical and implied volatilities of our share price.
Changes in the types and quantity of equity awards, as well as the fair market value of our stock may impact the cost of future stock option grants. In general, to the extent that the fair market value of our stock increases, the overall cost of granting these options will also increase. For further details regarding our stock-based compensation see Note 18 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, under which we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and for net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. A tax position that meets a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is recognized in the first reporting period that it becomes more-likely-than-not such tax position will be sustained upon examination. A tax position that meets this more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is recorded at the largest amount of tax benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Previously recognized income tax positions that fail to meet the recognition threshold in a subsequent period are derecognized in that period. Differences between actual results and our assumptions, or changes in our assumptions in future periods, are recorded in the period they become known. We record potential accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
As a multinational corporation, we are subject to complex tax laws and regulations in various jurisdictions. The application of tax laws and regulations is subject to legal and factual interpretation, judgment and uncertainty. Tax laws themselves are subject to change as a result of changes in fiscal policy, changes in legislation, evolution of regulations and court rulings. We have concluded all U.S. federal income tax matters for years through 2016 and all material state, local and foreign income tax matters for years through 2013. Given the foregoing, our actual liability for U.S. or foreign taxes may be materially different from our estimates, which could result in the need to record additional liabilities or potentially to reverse previously recorded tax liabilities.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is recorded against any deferred tax assets when, in the judgment of management, it is more likely than not that all or part of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all positive and negative evidence, including recent financial performance, scheduled reversals of temporary differences, projected future taxable income, availability of taxable income in carryback periods and tax planning strategies.
Litigation Costs and Contingencies
We record a charge equal to at least the minimum estimated liability for a loss contingency or litigation settlement when both of the following conditions are met: (i) information available prior to issuance of the financial statements indicates that it is probable that a liability had been incurred at the date of the financial statements and (ii) the range of loss can be reasonably estimated. The determination of whether a loss contingency or litigation settlement is probable or reasonably possible involves a significant amount of management judgment, as does the estimation of the range of loss given the nature of contingencies. Liabilities related to litigation settlements with multiple elements are recorded based on the fair value of each element. Legal and other litigation related expenses are recognized as the services are provided. We record insurance and other indemnity recoveries for litigation expenses when both of the following conditions are met: (i) the recovery is probable and (ii) collectability is reasonably assured. The insurance recoveries recorded are only to the extent the litigation costs have been incurred and recognized in the financial statements; however, it is reasonably possible that the actual recovery may be significantly different from our estimates. There are many uncertainties associated with any litigation, and we cannot provide assurance that any actions or other third-party claims against us will be resolved without costly litigation or substantial settlement charges. If any of those events were to occur, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially and adversely affected.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that once control is obtained, all the assets acquired, liabilities assumed and noncontrolling interest in the acquired entity, if applicable, are recorded at their respective fair values at the date of acquisition. The determination of fair values of identifiable assets and liabilities requires estimates and the use of valuation techniques when market value is not readily available. For intangible assets acquired in a business combination, we typically use the income method. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, the amount and timing of future cash flows, growth rates, discount rates and useful lives. The excess of the purchase price over fair values of identifiable assets, liabilities, and noncontrolling interest in the acquired entity, if applicable, is recorded as goodwill.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For details regarding any recently adopted and recently issued accounting standards, see Note 2 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.