ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS AND RISK FACTORS
The Company, from time to time, may make or may have made certain forward-looking statements, whether orally or in writing, such as forecasts and projections of the Company’s future performance or statements of management’s plans and objectives. These statements are “forward-looking” statements as that term is defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements may be contained in, among other things, SEC filings such as Forms 10-K, 10-Q and 8-K, the Annual Report to Shareholders, press releases made by the Company, the Company’s Internet websites (including websites of its subsidiaries), and oral statements made by the officers of the Company. Except for historical information contained in these written or oral communications, such communications contain forward-looking statements. These include, for example, all references to 2021 or future years. New risk factors emerge from time to time and it is not possible for the Company to predict all such risk factors, nor can it assess the impact of all such risk factors on the Company’s business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. Accordingly, forward-looking statements cannot be relied upon as a guarantee of future results and involve a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected in the statements, including but not limited to the factors that are described in Part I, Item 1A under the caption of “Risk Factors” of this Form 10-K, which section is incorporated herein by reference. The Company is not required, and undertakes no obligation, to revise or update forward-looking statements or any factors that may affect actual results, whether as a result of new information, future events, or circumstances occurring after the date of this report.
OVERVIEW
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is designed to provide a discussion of the Company’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect its future results from the perspective of management. The discussion that follows is intended to provide information that will assist in understanding the changes in the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements from year to year, the primary factors that accounted for those changes, and how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II below. Discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of Matson for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 can be found in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
MD&A is presented in the following sections:
◾ Fourth Quarter 2020 Discussion and Update on Business Conditions
◾ Consolidated Results of Operations
◾ Analysis of Operating Revenue and Income by Segment
◾ Liquidity and Capital Resources
◾ Contractual Obligations, Commitments, Contingencies and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
◾ Critical Accounting Estimates
◾ Other Matters
Fourth Quarter 2020 Discussion and Update on Business Conditions
Ocean Transportation: The Company’s container volume in the Hawaii service in the fourth quarter 2020 was 0.8 percent higher year-over-year primarily due to an additional westbound sailing and higher demand for sustenance and home improvement goods, partially offset by lower tourism activity as a result of the pandemic. The State of Hawaii eased visitor travel restrictions to the islands in October and saw an improvement in the daily passenger counts, but tourism activity remained significantly below the levels achieved in the prior year period. Tourism levels are expected to remain low until the pandemic subsides and to have a meaningfully negative impact on Hawaii’s economy.
In China, the Company’s container volume in the fourth quarter 2020 was 139.1 percent higher year-over-year due to volume from the CLX+ service in addition to higher volume on the CLX service as a result of our increased capacity in the tradelane. Matson continued to realize a rate premium in the fourth quarter 2020 and achieved average freight rates that were higher than in the year ago period. The Company expects elevated consumption of e-commerce and other commodities coupled with other supply and demand factors in the tradelane to largely remain favorable in the first half of 2021 as the pandemic persists. As the pandemic subsides with widespread vaccination, we expect some of the supply and demand factors that we are currently benefitting from to remain and continue to drive demand for our CLX and CLX+ services.
In Guam, the Company’s container volume in the fourth quarter 2020 increased 4.2 percent year-over-year primarily due to higher demand for sustenance and home improvement goods, partially offset by lower tourism activity as a result of the pandemic. In the near-term, we expect depressed tourism levels to have a negative impact on the Guam economy.
In Alaska, the Company’s container volume for the fourth quarter 2020 increased 18.9 percent year-over-year as a result of higher northbound volume primarily due to two additional sailings and higher demand for sustenance and home improvement goods, and modestly higher southbound volume. The Alaska economy continues to be negatively impacted by the economic effects from the COVID-19 pandemic and a low oil price environment. In the near-term, we expect the economy to slowly recover, but remain challenged until the pandemic subsides.
The contribution in the fourth quarter 2020 from the Company’s SSAT joint venture investment was $10.9 million, or $7.9 million higher than the fourth quarter 2019. The increase was driven by higher lift volume.
Logistics: In the fourth quarter 2020, operating income for the Company’s Logistics segment was $9.6 million, or $2.0 million higher compared to the operating income achieved in the fourth quarter 2019. The increase was due primarily to a higher contribution from transportation brokerage as a result of elevated goods consumption and inventory restocking and tight supply and demand fundamentals in our core markets.
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following analysis of the financial results of operations of Matson for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II below.
Consolidated Results: 2020 compared with 2019:
Fiscal Year: Fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include 52 weeks.
Consolidated Operating Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $180.2 million, or 8.2 percent, compared to the prior year. The increase was due to an increase in Ocean Transportation revenue of $187.3 million offset by a decrease in Logistics revenue of $7.1 million.
Operating Costs and Expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $29.0 million, or 1.4 percent, compared to the prior year. The increase was due to an increase in Ocean Transportation operating costs and expenses of $33.3 million which was partially offset by a decrease in Logistics operating costs and expenses of $4.3 million.
Operating Income for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $151.2 million, or 117.1 percent, compared to the prior year. The increase was due to an increase in Ocean Transportation operating income of $154.0 million which was partially offset by an decrease in Logistics operating income of $2.8 million.
The reasons for changes in operating revenue, operating costs and expenses, and operating income are described below, by business segment, in the Analysis of Operating Revenue and Income by Segment.
Interest Expense was $27.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $22.5 million in the prior year. The increase in interest expense was due to a lower offset amount of capitalized interest associated with new vessel construction, partially offset by a reduction in outstanding debt.
Other Income (Expense), net was $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.2 million in the prior year, and relates to the amortization of certain components of net periodic benefit costs or gains related to the Company’s pension and post-retirement plans, and interest income received from income tax refunds. The increase in Other income (expense) was due to favorable adjustments reflected in the Company’s pension and post-retirement plan liabilities and higher interest received from income tax refunds during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $65.9 million, or 25.4 percent of income before income taxes, compared to $25.1 million, or 23.3 percent of income before income taxes in the prior year. The 2019 income tax rate benefited from a $2.9 million, or 2.7 percent of non-cash benefit included in income tax expense, resulting from applying the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Tax Act”).
Net Income during the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $110.4 million, or 133.5 percent, compared to the prior year.
ANALYSIS OF OPERATING REVENUE AND INCOME BY SEGMENT
The following analysis of operating revenue and income by segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 should be read in conjunction with the Company’s reportable segments information included in Item 6 of Part II and Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II.
Ocean Transportation: 2020 compared with 2019:
(1) Approximate volumes included for the period are based on the voyage departure date, but revenue and operating income are adjusted to reflect the percentage of revenue and operating income earned during the reporting period for voyages in transit at the end of each reporting period.
(2) Includes containers from services in various islands in Micronesia and the South Pacific, and Okinawa, Japan.
Ocean Transportation revenue increased $187.3 million, or 11.2 percent, during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher freight revenue in the China service, including revenue associated with the CLX+ service, partially offset by lower fuel-related surcharge revenue and lower revenue in Hawaii.
On a year-over-year FEU basis, Hawaii container volume decreased 0.6 percent primarily due to lower volume as a result of the pandemic and its effects on tourism, partially offset by volume associated with the dry-docking of one of Pasha’s vessels in the second quarter and higher demand for sustenance and home improvement goods; Alaska volume increased by 4.6 percent primarily due to higher northbound volume, including volume associated with the dry-docking of a competitor’s vessel and one additional sailing, partially offset by modestly lower southbound volume; China volume was 85.8 percent higher primarily due to volume from the CLX+ service in addition to higher volume on the CLX service as a result of our increased capacity in the tradelane; Guam volume was 2.6 percent lower primarily due to lower demand for retail-related goods resulting from the pandemic and its related effects; and Other container volume increased 3.6 percent.
Ocean Transportation operating income increased $154.0 million, or 169.6 percent, during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a higher contribution from the China service, including the contribution from the CLX+ service, and lower vessel operating costs, including the impact of one less vessel operating in the Hawaii service, partially offset by a lower contribution from the Hawaii service.
The Company’s SSAT terminal joint venture investment contributed $26.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a contribution of $20.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was largely attributable to lower operating costs.
Logistics: 2020 compared with 2019:
Logistics revenue decreased $7.1 million, or 1.3 percent, during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower transportation brokerage and freight forwarding revenue.
Logistics operating income decreased $2.8 million, or 7.3 percent, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due primarily to a lower contribution from freight forwarding.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Sources of liquidity available to the Company at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, were as follows:
Cash and Cash Equivalents, Restricted Cash and Accounts Receivable: Cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and accounts receivable, net, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
(1) Eligible accounts receivable of $1.7 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were assigned to the CCF.
Changes in the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
(1) Changes in Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities: Changes in net cash provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
The change in the amortization of operating lease right of use assets and operating lease liabilities primarily relates to the timing of adopting the lease accounting standard during the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company’s share of income from SSAT was $26.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $20.8 million in the prior year, while distributions from SSAT was $55.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $25.2 million of distributions received in the prior year. Deferred dry-docking payments were $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $25.9 million in the prior year. The decrease in deferred dry-docking payments was due to a reduction in vessel dry-docking activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year. Changes in accounts receivable are primarily due to increased revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, and also due to the timing of collections as of December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year. Changes in prepaid expenses and other assets are due to the timing of prepaid income taxes, changes in the amount of insurance related receivables and changes in other prepaid amounts as of December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year. Changes in accounts payable, accruals and other liabilities are primarily due to increased operating costs during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, and also due to the timing of payments associated with those liabilities.
(2) Changes in Net Cash Used in Investing Activities: Changes in net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
Capitalized vessel construction expenditures (including capitalized interest and owners’ items) was $87.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $219.1 million in the prior year. The decrease in capitalized vessel
construction expenditures (including cash deposited into the CCF less cash withdrawals from the CCF which are used for vessel construction related payments) is due to fewer progress payments related to the construction of new vessels during 2020, compared to the prior year. Other capital expenditures (excluding capitalized vessel construction expenditures) was $104.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $91.2 million for the prior year. The increase was primarily due to higher levels of capital expenditures related to the installation of scrubbers on vessels and the Hawaii Sand Island terminal expansion and modernization program during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year. Proceeds from the disposal of property and equipment was $15.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.4 million for the prior year. Disposals of property and equipment during the year ended December 31, 2020 included net proceeds of approximately $14.3 million from the sale and leaseback of container and equipment.
(3) Changes in Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities: Changes in net cash provided by (used in) financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company received $325.5 million of proceeds from two new Title XI debt issuances, paid $47.1 million in scheduled principal payments, and prepaid $169.5 million of private debt at par, compared to $42.1 million in scheduled principal payments in the prior year. Net repayments of the Company’s revolving credit facility totaled $307.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net borrowings of $144.1 million in the prior year. The decrease in borrowing under the revolving credit facility was primarily due to an increase in cash provided by operating activities, proceeds from the issuance of Title XI debt, and a reduction in vessel construction payments. The Company paid $18.5 million in financing costs related to the Title XI debt issuance during the year ended December 31, 2020. No financing costs were incurred in the prior year.
Debt: Total debt as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
Total debt decreased by $198.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease in the Company’s revolving credit facility during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to increased cash provided by operating activities, a reduction in progress payments related to the construction of new vessels, and proceeds from new Title XI financing that was used to pay down the revolving credit facility. The increase in fixed interest debt was due to the new Title XI financing agreements entered into during 2020 which were partially offset by scheduled debt payments made during the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $570.1 million of unused capacity under the revolving credit facility, which matures on June 29, 2022. The leverage ratio under the debt agreements as of December 31, 2020 was approximately 1.7 times. The Company’s debt is described in Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II.
Working Capital: The Company had a working capital deficiency of $205.6 million at December 31, 2020, compared to a working capital deficiency of $147.1 million at December 31, 2019. Working capital is impacted by the use of cash to reduce the Company’s long-term revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2020, by the amount and timing of collections associated with accounts receivable and other assets, and by the amount and timing of payments associated with accounts payable, accruals and other liabilities. Working capital deficiency increased as of December 31, 2020, primarily due to the reduction in prepaid expenses and other assets as a result of the collection of income tax and insurance receivables, and an increase in other liabilities due to employee incentives and other accruals.
Capital Expenditures: In 2021, the Company expects to make the following capital expenditures: (i) maintenance related capital expenditures of approximately $60 - $70 million; (ii) acquisition of equipment to support growth in the CLX+ and AAX services of approximately $55 million; (iii) construction of a new barge of approximately $25 million; and (iv) dry-dock scrubber installation costs of approximately $20 million. Such capital expenditures are expected to be financed through cash provided by operating activities and the Company’s revolving credit facility.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS, COMMITMENTS, CONTINGENCIES AND OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Contractual Obligations:
At December 31, 2020, the Company had the following estimated contractual obligations:
(1) Total debt obligations include principal repayments of outstanding debt (see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II below, for additional information).
(2) Operating lease obligations primarily consist of real estate and terminal leases, vessel charter leases, operations equipment and other leases entered into under non-cancellable arrangements (see Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II below, for additional information).
(3) Estimated interest on debt is determined based on: (i) the stated interest rate for fixed debt, and (ii) the estimated variable interest on revolving credit facility assuming the balance at December 31, 2020 remains outstanding until maturity.
(4) Qualified defined benefit pension, non-qualified pension and post-retirement benefit obligations include estimated payments for the next ten years. The amounts noted in the column labeled “Thereafter” represent estimated benefit payments for 2026 through 2030 (see Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II below, for additional information).
(5) Multi-employer withdrawal obligations relate to the discounted liability associated with Horizon’s mass withdrawal from Puerto Rico’s multi-employer ILA-PRSSA and the partial withdrawal liability associated with the Local 153 Fund of the OPEIU (see Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II below, for additional information).
(6) Vendor and other obligations include: (i) non-cancellable contractual capital project obligations; (ii) dry-docking related obligations; and (iii) other contractual obligations. Amounts are considered obligations if a contract has been agreed to specifying significant terms of the contract, and the amounts are not reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Estimated timing and amount of payments related to unrecognized tax benefits of $18.3 million as of December 31, 2020 are excluded from the table due to the uncertainty of such timing and payments, if any.
Commitments, Contingencies and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements:
Commitments and Contingencies: A description of other commitments and contingencies is set forth in Note 9, Note 11 and Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II below, and is incorporated herein by reference.
Off-balance sheet Arrangements: Except as described below, the Company is not party to any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Future minimum payments under operating leases are $302.3 million as of December 31, 2020. In addition, the Company provided a lessor with a maximum residual value guarantee related to the lease of a vessel. Additional information related to leases and the vessel lease guarantee is set forth in Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II below, and is incorporated herein by reference.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II below. The preparation of Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, upon which the Company’s Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based, requires that management exercise judgment when making accounting estimates about future events that may affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty and actual results will, inevitably, differ from those accounting estimates. These differences could be material.
The Company considers an accounting estimate to be critical if: (i)(a) the accounting estimate requires the Company to make assumptions that are difficult or subjective about matters that were highly uncertain at the time that the accounting estimate was made, (b) changes in the estimate are reasonably likely to occur in periods after the period in which the estimate was made, or (c) use of different estimates by the Company could have been used; and (ii) changes in those accounting estimates would have had a material impact on the financial condition or results of operations of the Company. The critical accounting policies and estimates inherent in the preparation of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements are described below. Management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
Long-Lived Assets, Intangible Assets and Goodwill: The Company evaluates its long-lived assets, intangible assets and goodwill for possible impairment in the fourth quarter, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than its carrying amount. The Company has reporting units within the Ocean Transportation and Logistics reportable segments.
Long-lived Assets and Finite-lived Intangible Assets: Long-lived assets and finite-lived intangible assets are grouped at the lowest level reporting unit for which identifiable cash flows are available. In evaluating for impairment, the estimated future undiscounted cash flows generated by each of these asset groups are compared with the carrying value recorded for each asset group to determine if its carrying value is recoverable. If this review determines that the amount recorded will not be recovered, the amount recorded for the asset group is reduced to its estimated fair value. These asset impairment analyses are highly subjective because they require management to make assumptions and apply considerable judgments to, among other things, estimates of the timing and amount of future cash flows, expected useful lives of the assets, potential impact of future events, including changes in economic conditions and operating performance, and future costs of maintenance and improvements of the assets. If management uses different assumptions or if different conditions occur in future periods, the Company’s financial condition or its future operating results could be materially impacted. The Company has evaluated its long-lived assets and finite-lived intangible assets for impairment and determined that there was no impairment for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Indefinite-life Intangible Assets and Goodwill: The Company’s intangible assets include goodwill, customer relationships and a trade name, and are grouped at the lowest level reporting unit for which identifiable cash flows are available. In estimating the fair value of a reporting unit, the Company uses a combination of a discounted cash flow model and fair value based on market multiples of earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”). The discounted cash flow approach requires the Company to use a number of assumptions, including market factors specific to the business, the amount and timing of estimated future cash flows generated by the business over an extended period of time, long-term growth rates for the business, and a discount rate that considers the risks related to the amount and timing of the cash flows. Although the assumptions used by the Company in its discounted cash flow model are consistent with the assumptions the Company used to generate its internal strategic plans and forecasts, significant judgment is required to estimate the amount and timing of future cash flows from the reporting unit and the risk of achieving those cash flows. When using market multiples of EBITDA, the Company makes judgments about the comparability of multiples in closed and proposed transactions. Accordingly, changes in assumptions and estimates, including, but not limited to, changes driven by external factors, such as industry and economic trends, and those driven by internal factors, such as changes in the Company’s business strategy and its internal forecasts, could have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition or its future operating results. The Company has evaluated its indefinite-life intangible assets and goodwill for impairment and determined that there was no impairment for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Insurance Related Liabilities: The Company is uninsured for certain risks but when feasible, many of these risks are mitigated by insurance. The Company purchases insurance with deductibles or self-insured retentions. Such insurance includes, but is not limited to, employee health, workers’ compensation, marine liability, cybersecurity, auto liability and physical damage to property and equipment. For certain risks, the Company elects to not purchase insurance because of the excessive cost of such insurance or the perceived remoteness of the risk. In addition, the Company retains all risk of loss that exceeds the limits of the Company’s insurance policies, or for other risks where insurance is not commercially available.
When estimating its reserves for retained risks and related liabilities, the Company considers a number of factors, including historical claims experience, demographic factors, current trends, and analyses provided by independent third-parties. Periodically, management reviews its assumptions and estimates used to determine the adequacy of the Company’s reserves for retained risks and other related liabilities. The Company’s retained risks and other related liabilities contain uncertainties because management is required to apply judgment and make long-term assumptions to estimate the ultimate cost to settle reported claims, and of claims incurred but not reported, as of the balance sheet date. If management uses different assumptions or if different conditions occur in future periods, the Company’s financial condition or its future operating results could be materially impacted.
Pension and Post-Retirement Plans: The estimation of the Company’s pension and post-retirement benefit expenses and liabilities requires the Company to make various assumptions. These assumptions include factors such as discount rates, expected long-term rate of return on pension plan assets, salary growth, health care cost trend rates, inflation, retirement rates, mortality rates and expected contributions. Actual results that differ from the assumptions made could materially affect the Company’s financial condition or its future operating results. The effects of changing assumptions are included in unamortized net gains and losses, which directly affect accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). Additionally, these unamortized gains and losses are amortized and reclassified to income (loss) over future periods.
Additional information about the Company’s pension and post-retirement plans and assumptions used is included in Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II below.
Income Taxes: The Company’s income tax expense requires the Company to make various estimates and judgments. These estimates and judgments are applied in the calculation of taxable income, tax credits, tax benefits and deductions, and in the calculation of certain deferred tax assets and liabilities, which arise from differences in the timing of recognition of revenue, costs and expenses for tax purposes. The calculation of deferred tax assets and liabilities may be impacted by various factors including but not limited to changes in tax rates; changes in tax laws, regulations, and rulings; changes in interpretations of existing tax laws, regulations and rulings; and changes in the evaluation of the Company’s ability to realize deferred tax assets including operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted to the extent necessary to reflect tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. Significant changes to these estimates may result in an increase or decrease to the Company’s income taxes in a subsequent period.
The Company records a valuation allowance if, based on the weight of available evidence, management believes that it is more likely than not that some portion or all of a recorded deferred tax asset would not be realized in future periods.
Additional information about the Company’s income taxes is included in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II below.
OTHER MATTERS
New Accounting Pronouncements: See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II below for additional information on new accounting pronouncements.