Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements involving significant risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth in "Risk Factors," our actual results may differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements.
Management overview
Our mission is to help insurance carriers and distributors target and acquire customers more efficiently and at greater scale through technology and data science. Our technology platform brings leading insurance carriers and high-intent consumers together through a real-time, transparent, and results-driven ecosystem. We believe we are the largest online customer acquisition channel in our core verticals of property & casualty insurance, health insurance, and life insurance, supporting over $1.4 billion in Transaction Value across our platform over the last two years.
We have multi-faceted relationships with top-tier insurance carriers and distributors. A buyer or a demand partner within our ecosystem is generally an insurance carrier or distributor seeking to reach high-intent insurance consumers. A seller or a supply partner is typically an insurance carrier looking to maximize the value of non-converting or low LTV consumers, or an insurance-focused research destination looking to monetize the high-intent insurance shoppers on their websites. On a monthly basis, an average of 31.2 million consumers shop for insurance products through the websites of our diversified group of supply partners and our proprietary websites, driving an average of over 6.6 million Consumer Referrals on our platform for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We generate revenue by earning a fee for each Consumer Referral sold on our platform. A transaction becomes payable only on a qualifying consumer action, such as a click, call or lead, and is not contingent on the sale of a product to the consumer.
We believe in the disruptive power of transparency. Traditionally, insurance customer acquisition platforms operated in a black box. We recognized that a consumer may be valued differently by one insurer versus another; therefore, insurers should be able to determine pricing granularly based on the value that a particular customer segment is expected to bring to their business. As a result, we developed a technology platform that powers an ecosystem where buyers and sellers can transact with full transparency, control, and confidence, aligning the interests of the parties participating on our platform.
We believe our technology is a key differentiator and a powerful driver of our performance. We maintain deep, custom integrations with partners representing the majority of our Transaction Value to enable automated, data-driven processes that optimize our partners’ customer acquisition spend and revenue. Through our platform, our insurance carrier partners can target and price across over 35 separate consumer attributes to manage customized acquisition strategies.
Financial Highlights
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we earned $584.8 million of revenue representing a 43.3% increase over the $408.0 million of revenue we earned for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily driven by increases in revenue in our P&C insurance vertical of $178.2 million or 81.2% and Health insurance revenue by $35.5 million or 34.1%, partially offset by a decline in revenue in our Other vertical of $34.3 million or 66.8%, primarily driven by decline in our Travel vertical due reduced consumer search volume and budget contraction as a result of COVID-19.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we earned $10.6 million in net income, compared to $17.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 40.7% that was driven primarily by increased professional fee expenses and equity-based compensation incurred in connection with the IPO.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss attributable to MediaAlpha, Inc. of $4.4 million, compared to $0.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 on account of loss attributable to MediaAlpha, Inc. and non-controlling interest subsequent to IPO and pre-IPO Reorganization Transactions. For period prior to the Reorganization Transactions net income attributable to QLH was $19.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $17.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we earned $58.1 million in Adjusted EBITDA, compared to $42.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 35.3% that was primarily driven by strong year over year growth in contribution from our P&C and Health verticals.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we earned in $85.4 million in gross profit (revenue less cost of revenue), compared to $65.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 31.2% due to increased revenue contribution from our core insurance verticals, offset by increased equity-based compensation.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, gross margin (revenue less cost of revenue divided by revenue) decreased to 14.6% compared to 16.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 8.5% due to increased equity-based compensation and increased revenue from strategic supply partners at lower revenue share.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our Contribution increased to $92.6 million, compared to $69.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 33.6% due to increased volume of consumer referrals and resulting revenue contribution from our core insurance verticals.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, Contribution Margin decreased to 15.8% compared to 17.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to increased volume of consumer referrals and resulting revenue contribution from strategic supply partners at lower revenue share to MediaAlpha.
Adjusted EBITDA, Contribution, and Contribution Margin are business and operating metrics that are not presented in accordance with GAAP. We use such metrics, together with financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP, to measure our operating performance. See “-Key business and operating metrics” below. We also present Transaction Value, which is an operating metric not presented in accordance with GAAP. Although Transaction Value is a driver of revenue in accordance with GAAP, we do not believe Transaction Value is a financial measure because it only measures the gross transaction activity across our platform. Transaction activity on the platform translates to earnings that are recorded as revenue as described below under “-Key components of our results of operations-revenue.” As described below under “-Key business and operating metrics-Transaction value,” we present Transaction Value because we believe it is useful to investors to assess the overall level of activity on our platform and to better understand the sources of our revenue across our different transaction models and verticals.
Key factors affecting our business
Revenue
We believe that our future performance will depend on many factors, including those described below and in the section titled “Risk factors” included elsewhere in this Report.
Secular trends in the insurance industry
Our technology platform was created to serve and grow with our core insurance end markets. As such, we believe secular trends in the insurance industry are a critical driver of our revenue and will continue to provide strong tailwinds for our business. More insurance consumers are shopping online and direct-to-consumer marketing, which fuels our revenue, is the fastest growing insurance distribution channel. In addition, insurance customer acquisition spending is growing. As mass-market customer acquisition spend is becoming more costly, insurance carriers and distributors are increasingly focusing on optimizing customer acquisition spend, which is at the core of the service we deliver on our platform. As long as these secular trends persist, we expect growth in digital insurance customer acquisition spend to continue, and we believe we are well-positioned to benefit from the industry’s growth.
Transaction Value
Transaction Value from open platform transactions is a direct driver of our revenue, while Transaction Value from private platform transactions is an indirect driver of our revenue (see “Key business and operating metrics” below). Transaction Value on our platform grew to $815.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $560.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We have developed multi-faceted, deeply integrated partnerships with insurance carriers and distributors, who are often both buyers and sellers on our platform. We believe the versatility and breadth of our offerings, coupled with our focus on high-quality products, provide significant value to insurance carriers and distributors, resulting in strong retention rates. As a result, many insurance carriers and distributors use our platform as their central hub for broadly managing digital customer acquisition and monetization. For the year ended December 31, 2020, 96.7% of total Transaction Value executed on our platform came from demand partner relationships from 2019.
Our demand and supply partners
Our success depends on our ability to retain and grow the number of demand and supply partners on our platform. The aggregate number of demand and supply partners on our platform increased to 1,460 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 1,200 for the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by increased engagement in our P&C and Health verticals, partially offset by decreased engagement in our travel sub-vertical (other) as advertising spend in this vertical decreased period over period. We retain and attract demand partners by finding high-quality sources of Consumer Referrals to make available to our demand partners. We seek to develop, acquire and retain relationships with high-quality supply partners by developing flexible platforms to enable our supply partners to maximize their revenue, manage their demand side relationships in scalable and flexible ways and focus on long-term sustainable economics with respect to revenue share. Our relationships with our partners are deep, long standing and involve the top-tier insurance carriers in the industry. In terms of buyers, 15 of the top 20 largest auto insurance carriers by customer acquisition spend are on our platform. Approximately half of our supply partners have been on our platform since 2016.
Consumer Referrals
Our results also depend on the number of Consumer Referrals purchased on our platform. The aggregate number of consumer clicks, calls and leads purchased by insurance buyers on our platform grew to 79.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 60.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We seek to increase the number and scale of our supply relationships and drive consumers to our proprietary properties through a variety of paid traffic acquisition sources. We are investing in diversifying our paid media sources to extend beyond search engine marketing, which historically represented the bulk of our paid media spend, and into other online media sources, including native, social, and display advertising.
Seasonality
Our results are subject to significant fluctuation as a result of seasonality. For our quarters ending December 31, our property & casualty insurance vertical is characterized by seasonal weakness due to lower supply of Consumer Referrals during the holiday period on a cost-effective basis and lower customer acquisition budgets from some buyers. In our quarters ending March 31, this trend generally reverses with greater supply of Consumer Referrals and often customer acquisition budgets at the beginning of the year for our partners with fiscal years ending December 31. Our quarters ending March 31 and December 31 are typically characterized by seasonal strength for our health insurance vertical due to open enrollment for health insurance and annual enrollment for Medicare, with a material increase in consumer search volume for health products and a related increase in buyer customer acquisition budgets.
Other factors affecting our partners’ businesses include macro factors such as credit availability in the market, the strength of the economy and employment.
Regulations
Our earnings may fluctuate from time to time as a result of federal, state, international and industry-based laws, directives and regulations and developing standards with respect to the enforcement of those regulations. Our business is affected directly because we operate websites, conduct telemarketing and email marketing and collect, process, store, share, disclose, transfer and use consumer information and other data. Our business is affected indirectly as our clients adjust their operations as a result of regulatory changes and enforcement activity within their industries. For example, the recent enactment of the CCPA, which became effective on January 1, 2020, may affect our business. While the CCPA has already been amended multiple times, it is unclear how this legislation will be further modified or how it will be interpreted. The effects of this legislation potentially are far-reaching, however, and may require us to modify our data processing practices and policies and incur substantial compliance-related costs and expenses. For a description of laws and regulations to which we are generally subject, see Item 1 “Business” and Item 1A “Risk Factors.”
COVID-19 and impact on travel
In 2015, we began to expand into the travel vertical, which is ultimately driven by consumer spending on airfare, hotels, rentals and other travel products. However, as a result of COVID-19, we have experienced a dramatic decline in revenue from the travel vertical and expect this trend to continue indefinitely. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and, 2019 revenue from the travel vertical comprised approximately 2.1% and 11.1%, respectively, of our total revenue. While we have sought to maintain our commercial relationships in the travel vertical and remain positioned to capitalize on transactions in the travel vertical when travel activity resumes, we do not expect that revenue from the travel vertical will match our historical results or have any material impact on our overall revenue or profitability for the foreseeable future.
Key business and operating metrics
In addition to traditional financial metrics, we rely upon certain business and operating metrics that are not presented in accordance with GAAP to estimate the volume of spending on our platform, estimate and recognize revenue, evaluate our business performance and facilitate our operations. Such business and operating metrics should not be considered in isolation from, or as an alternative to, measures presented in accordance with GAAP and should be considered together with other operating and financial performance measures presented in accordance with GAAP. Also, such business and operating metrics may not necessarily be comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define “Adjusted EBITDA” as net income excluding interest expense, income tax benefit (expense), depreciation expense on property and equipment, and amortization of intangible assets, as well as equity-based compensation expense and transaction expenses. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that we present to supplement the financial information we present on a GAAP basis. We monitor and present Adjusted EBITDA because it is a key measure used by our management to understand and evaluate our operating performance, to establish budgets and to develop operational goals for managing our business. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA helps identify underlying trends in our business that could otherwise be masked by the effect of the expenses that we exclude in the calculations of Adjusted EBITDA. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects. In addition, presenting Adjusted EBITDA provides investors with a metric to evaluate the capital efficiency of our business.
Adjusted EBITDA is not presented in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures presented in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of Adjusted EBITDA rather than net income, which is the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. These limitations include the fact that Adjusted EBITDA excludes interest expense on debt, income tax benefit (expense) and depreciation and amortization. In addition, other companies may use other measures to evaluate their performance, including different definitions of “Adjusted EBITDA,” which could reduce the usefulness of our Adjusted EBITDA as a tool for comparison.
The following table reconciles Adjusted EBITDA with net income, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, for the year ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
(1)
For the twelve-months ended December 31, 2020, transaction expenses include $5.9 million in legal, and other consulting fees, $3.6 million in transaction bonus related to the Reorganization Transaction and IPO, $2.0 million in loss on extinguishment of debt related to the termination of 2019 Credit Facilities, and $0.3 million related to reversal of tax indemnification receivable created in connection with the Reorganization Transaction. For the twelve-months ended December 31, 2019, transaction expenses included $7.2 million in legal, investment banking and other consulting fees and $1.6 million in transaction bonuses related to a transaction with Insignia in February 2019.
Contribution and Contribution Margin
We define “Contribution” as revenue less revenue share payments and online advertising costs, or, as reported in our consolidated statement of operations, revenue less cost of revenue (i.e., gross profit), as adjusted to exclude the following items from cost of revenue: equity-based compensation; salaries, wages, and related; internet and hosting; amortization; depreciation; other services; and merchant-related fees. We define “Contribution Margin” as Contribution expressed as a percentage of revenue for the same period. Contribution and Contribution Margin are non-GAAP financial measures that we present to supplement the financial information we present on a GAAP basis. We use Contribution and Contribution Margin to measure the return on our relationships with our supply partners (excluding certain fixed costs), the financial return on and efficacy of our online advertising costs to drive consumers to our proprietary websites, and our operating leverage. We do not use Contribution and Contribution Margin as measures of overall profitability. We present Contribution and Contribution Margin because they are used by our management and board of directors to manage our operating performance, including evaluating our operational performance against budget and assessing our overall operating efficiency and operating leverage. For example, if Contribution Margin increases and our headcount costs remain steady, our Adjusted EBITDA and operating leverage increase. If Contribution Margin decreases, we may choose to re-evaluate and re-negotiate our revenue share agreements with our supply partners, to make optimization and pricing changes with respect to our bids for keywords from primary traffic acquisition sources, or to change our overall cost structure with respect to headcount, fixed costs and other costs. Other companies may calculate Contribution and Contribution Margin differently than we do. Contribution and Contribution Margin have their limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of our results presented in accordance with GAAP.
The following table reconciles Contribution and Contribution Margin with gross profit, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, for years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Transaction Value
We define “Transaction Value” as the total gross dollars transacted by our partners on our platform. Transaction Value is a direct driver of revenue, with differing revenue recognition based on the economic relationship we have with our partners. Our partners use our platform to transact via open and private platform transactions. In our open platform model, revenue recognized represents the Transaction Value and revenue share payments to our supply partners represent costs of revenue. In our private platform model, revenue recognized represents a platform fee billed to the demand partner or supply partner based on an agreed-upon percentage of the Transaction Value for the Consumer Referrals transacted, and accordingly there are no associated costs of revenue. We utilize Transaction Value to assess revenue and to assess the overall level of transaction activity through our platform. We believe it is useful to investors to assess the overall level of activity on our platform and to better understand the sources of our revenue across our different transaction models and verticals.
The following table presents Transaction Value by platform model for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
The following table presents Transaction Value by vertical for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Consumer Referrals
We define “Consumer Referral” as any consumer click, call or lead purchased by a buyer on our platform. Click revenue is recognized on a pay-per-click basis and revenue is earned and recognized when a consumer clicks on a listed buyer’s advertisement, presented subsequent to the consumer’s search (e.g. auto insurance quote search or health insurance quote search). Call revenue is earned and recognized when a consumer transfers to a buyer and remains engaged for a requisite duration of time, as specified by each buyer. Lead revenue is recognized when we deliver data leads to buyers. Data leads are generated through insurance carriers or insurance-focused research destination websites who make the data leads available to buy through our platform or when users complete a full quote request on our proprietary websites. Delivery occurs at the time of lead transfer. The data we generate from each Consumer Referral feeds into our analytics model to generate conversion probabilities for each unique consumer, enabling discovery of predicted return and cost per sale across the platform and helping us to improve our platform technology. We monitor the number of Consumer Referrals on our platform in order to measure Transaction Value, revenue and overall business performance across our verticals and platform models. For the years ended December 31, 2020, Transaction Value generated from clicks, calls and leads was 79.9%, 8.1% and 12.0%, respectively.
Number of demand and supply partners
The aggregate number of demand and supply partners on our platform determines in part the level of Consumer Referral demand and supply on our platform. We use the number of demand and supply partners on our platform to evaluate our current business performance and future business prospects.
Key components of our results of operations
Revenue
We operate primarily in the property & casualty insurance, health insurance and life insurance verticals and generate revenue through the purchase and sale of Consumer Referrals.
The price and amount of Consumer Referrals purchased and sold on our platform varies and is a function of a number of market conditions and consumer attributes, including (i) geographic location of consumers, (ii) demographic attributes of consumers, (iii) the source of Consumer Referrals and quality of conversion by source, (iv) buyer bids and (v) buyer demand and budget.
In our open platform transactions, we have control over the Consumer Referrals that are sold to our demand partners. In these arrangements, we have separate agreements with demand partners and suppliers. Suppliers are not party to the contractual arrangements with our demand partners, nor are the suppliers the beneficiaries of our demand partner agreements. We earn fees from our demand partners and separately pay (i) a revenue share to suppliers and (ii) a fee to internet search companies to drive consumers to our proprietary websites. We are the
principal in the open platform transactions. As a result, the fees paid by demand partners are recognized as revenue and the fees paid to suppliers are included in cost of revenue.
With respect to our private platform transactions, buyers and suppliers contract with one another directly and leverage our platform to facilitate transparent, real-time transactions utilizing the reporting and analytical tools available to them from use of our platform. We charge a platform fee on the Consumer Referrals transacted. We act as an agent in the private platform transactions and recognize revenue on the platform fee received. There are no separate payments made by us to suppliers in our private platform.
We adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), as issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB"), which governs how we recognize revenue derived from Consumer Referrals. We recognize revenue when we transfer promised goods or services to clients in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we are entitled. We recognize revenue pursuant to the framework contained in ASC 606: (i) identify the contract with a client; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when we satisfy the performance obligations.
Generally, our contracts with buyers specify a period of time covered and a budget governing spend limits. While contracts can specify a term, most of our contracts can be terminated at any time without penalty upon 30- or 60-days’ notice. As a result, the transaction price for the delivery of each Consumer Referral is determined and recorded in real time and no estimation of variable consideration or future consideration is required. We satisfy our performance obligations as services are provided. We do not promise to provide any other significant goods or services to our partners after delivery and generally do not offer a right of return.
Cost and operating expenses
Cost and operating expenses consist primarily of cost of revenue, sales and marketing expenses, product expenses and general and administrative expenses.
Cost of revenue
Our cost of revenue is comprised primarily of revenue share payments to suppliers and traffic acquisition costs paid to top tier search engines as well as telephony infrastructure costs, internet and hosting, merchant fees, salaries and related expenses, amortization expense and other expenses.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of an allocation of personnel expenses for employees engaged in demand side and supply side business development, marketing and media acquisition activities and includes salaries, wages and benefits, including non-cash equity-based compensation. Sales and marketing expenses also include costs related to attracting partners to our platform, including marketing and promotions, tradeshow and related travel and entertainment expenses. Sales and marketing expenses also include an allocated portion of rent and facilities expenses and depreciation and amortization expense.
Product development
Product development expenses consist primarily of an allocation of personnel expenses for employees engaged in technology, engineering and product development and includes salaries, wages and benefits, including non-cash equity-based compensation. Product development expenses also include an allocated portion of rent and facilities expenses and depreciation and amortization expense.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of an allocation of personnel expenses for executive, finance, legal, human resources, and business analytics employees, and includes salaries, wages and benefits, including non-cash equity-based compensation. General and administrative expenses also include professional services and an allocated portion of rent and facilities expenses and depreciation expense.
Other expense
Other expenses consist of the loss on extinguishment recognized in connection with the termination of the 2019 Credit Facilities in 2020.
Interest expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense associated with outstanding borrowings under our loan and security agreements and the amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discounts associated with these arrangements. See “-Liquidity and capital resources-Financing activities” below.
Provision for income taxes
Prior to the Reorganization Transactions and IPO, the Company was not subject to corporate income taxation. As such, income tax expense (benefit) recorded during 2020 reflected the expected tax expense on the net earnings subsequent to the Reorganization Transactions and IPO related to MediaAlpha, Inc.'s economic interest in QLH.
The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was (13.4)%, compared to the effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 of 0.0% and 0.0%, respectively. The 2020 income tax benefit was different than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21% primarily due to QLH being treated as a partnership and Media Alpha, Inc. is only responsible for paying taxes on its allocable share of income from the partnership. The 2019 and 2018 income tax expense was different than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21% primarily due to QLH being a pass-through entity and generally does not pay income taxes on its taxable income. Instead, the members are liable for paying the tax on their proportionate share of tax. The change in the effective tax rate between the periods was primarily a result of a mix of earnings between entities and the change in the noncontrolling interest as a result of the Reorganization Transactions and the IPO.
Net income (loss) attributable to QLH prior to Reorganization Transactions
Net income (loss) incurred prior to the Reorganization Transactions i.e. October 27, 2020 is attributed to QLH. Net income attributable to QLH prior to Reorganization Transactions was $19.2 million for the period January 1, 2020 to October 27, 2020 compared to $17.8 million and $18.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Net income (loss) attributable to Non-controlling interest
Net income (loss) is attributed to non-controlling interests in accordance with QLH’s limited liability company agreement. We allocate the share of net income (loss) incurred subsequent to the Reorganization Transactions to the non-controlling interest holders pari-passu to their holding at period-end. The non-controlling interests balance represents the Class B-1 units held at QLH. Net loss attributable to non-controlling interest was $4.2 million for year ended December 31, 2020 and $0.0 for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Results of operations
The following table sets forth our operating results and related percentage of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Revenue
The following table presents our revenue, disaggregated by vertical, for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, and the dollar and percentage changes between the two periods:
2020 compared to 2019
Property & casualty insurance revenue increased $178.2 million, or 81.2%, from $219.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to an increase in spend from auto and home insurance carriers, driven by improving carrier profitability and the growing trend of property & casualty insurance carriers allocating customer acquisition budgets to the DTC channel, which in turn allowed our supply partners to drive more consumers through their websites. These dynamics led to a period over period increase in supply from both new and existing supply partners.
Health insurance revenue increased $35.5 million, or 34.1%, from $104.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven by increased customer acquisition budget allocation from Health and Medicare insurance carriers, which in turn allowed our supply partners to drive more consumers through their websites, and increased supply from our proprietary properties as we increased the volume of media spend to satisfy the increased demand.
Life insurance revenue decreased $2.7 million, or 8.2%, from $33.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was driven by lower allocation from carriers and brokers, as budgets from Demand Partners contracted due to COVID-19 mortality concerns.
Other revenue decreased $34.3 million, or 66.8%, from $51.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was driven primarily by a decrease in Travel comparison shopping, due to concerns around COVID-19.
2019 compared to 2018
Property & casualty insurance revenue increased $57.4 million, or 35.4%, from $162.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was due to an increase in spend from auto insurance carriers, driven by improving carrier profitability and the growing trend of property & casualty insurance carriers allocating customer acquisition budgets to the DTC channel, which in turn allowed our supply partners to drive more consumers through their websites. These dynamics led to a period over period increase in supply from both new and existing supply partners.
Health insurance revenue increased $32.8 million, or 45.9%, from $71.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was driven by increased customer acquisition budget allocation from health insurance carriers, which in turn allowed our supply partners to drive more consumers through their websites, and increased supply from our proprietary properties as we increased the volume of media spend to satisfy the increased demand.
Life insurance revenue increased $4.5 million, or 15.7%, from $28.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was driven by increased customer acquisition budget allocation from life insurance carriers, which in turn led to improved monetization and allowed our supply partners to drive more consumers through their websites.
Other revenue increased $16.4 million, or 47.1%, from $34.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was driven primarily by growth in our travel vertical as we increased our market share with new supply partners. For the year ended December 31, 2019, revenue from travel grew to $45.2 million from $26.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Cost of revenue
The following table presents our cost of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 and the dollar and percentage changes between the two periods:
2020 compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of revenue increased by $156.5 million, or 45.6%, from $342.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was driven primarily by the increase in revenue and corresponding increase in revenue share payments to suppliers of $132.4 million as supply partners increased volume. Additionally, there was an increase of $21.3 million in media costs as we increased paid media acquisition to drive more consumers to our proprietary websites to meet buyer demand and increased equity-based compensation of $2.6 million.
As we experience growth in revenue, we expect the relationship between our costs and revenue to remain in line with our historical results.
2019 compared to 2018
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cost of revenue increased by $95.2 million, or 38.5%, from $247.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was driven primarily by the increase in revenue and corresponding increase in revenue share payments to suppliers of $74.4 million as supply partners increased volume. Additionally, there was an increase of $20.2 million in media costs as we increased paid media acquisition to drive more consumers to our proprietary websites to meet buyer demand.
As we experience growth in revenue, we expect the relationship between our costs and revenue to remain in line with our historical results.
Sales and marketing
The following table presents our sales and marketing expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 and the dollar and percentage changes between the two periods:
2020 compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, sales and marketing expenses increased by $6.7 million, or 48.2%, from $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in sales and marketing expense was primarily due to the increase in equity-based compensation expense of $5.2 million, and an increase in personnel-related costs of $2.0 million driven by increased headcount to support current and future business growth, and one-time bonuses paid in connection with the IPO. These costs were partially offset by a decrease in amortization expense of $0.2 million, as certain intangible assets were fully amortized.
2019 compared to 2018
For the year ended December 31, 2019, sales and marketing expenses increased by $2.1 million, or 17.7%, from $11.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in sales and marketing expense was primarily due to the increase in equity-based compensation expense of $1.0 million and an increase in personnel-
related costs of $1.4 million, as we increased our headcount to support current and future growth of the business, and an increase in other expense of $0.1 million partially offset by a decrease in amortization expense of $0.4 million, as certain intangible assets were fully amortized.
Product development
The following table presents our product development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, and the dollar and percentage changes between the two periods:
2020 compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, product development expenses increased by $5.4 million, or 76.8%, from $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to an increase in equity-based compensation of $4.2 million, an increase in personnel-related costs of $2.6 million, as we continued to hire engineering and product development talent to further enhance our technology and one-time bonuses paid in connection with the IPO partially offset by a decrease in amortization expense of $1.5 million, as certain intangible assets were fully amortized.
2019 compared to 2018
For the year ended December 31, 2019, product development expenses decreased by $3.3 million, or 31.9%, from $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in product development expense was primarily due to the decrease in amortization expense of $5.8 million, as certain intangible assets were fully amortized. This decrease was offset by an increase in personnel-related costs of $1.9 million, as we continued to hire engineering and product development talent to further enhance our technology, an increase in equity-based compensation of $0.4 million, and other expenses of $0.2 million.
General and administrative
The following table presents our general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the dollar and percentage changes between the two periods:
2020 compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expenses increased by $13.5 million, or 69.7%, from $19.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to an increase in equity-based compensation expense of $10.0 million, an increase in other expenses of $1.8 million, driven by professional fees incurred in connection with the IPO, and an increase in personnel-related costs of $1.7 million, as we hired additional leadership talent to support our growth and one-time bonuses paid in connection with the IPO.
2019 compared to 2018
For the year ended December 31, 2019, general and administrative expenses increased by $11.5 million, or 147.2%, from $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in general and administrative expenses in both dollars and as a percentage of revenue was primarily due to an increase of $7.2 million in legal, investment banking and other consulting fees related to the February 2019 transaction with Insignia, $2.4 million in personnel-related, an increase in equity-based compensation expense of $1.3 million, and a $0.6 million increase in other expenses.
Equity-based compensation
The following table presents our equity-based compensation expense that was included in cost and operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 and the dollar and percentage changes between the two periods:
2020 compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, equity-based compensation expense increased $21.9 million, or 610.5%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This change was primarily driven by grants of stock awards to Senior Executives and Legacy Profit Interest Holders and restricted stock units under the 2020 Omnibus Incentive plan.
2019 compared to 2018
For the year ended December 31, 2019, equity-based compensation expense increased $2.8 million, or 336.2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, reflecting equity-based compensation recognized in connection with a transaction with Insignia in February 2019.
Depreciation
The following table presents our depreciation expense that was included in cost and operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, and the dollar and percentage changes between the two periods:
2020 compared to 2019
There were no material changes in depreciation expense in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with the same period ended December 31, 2019.
2019 compared to 2018
There were no material changes in depreciation expense in the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared with the same period ended December 31, 2018.
Amortization
The following table presents our amortization of intangible asset expense that was included in cost and operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the dollar and percentage changes between the two periods:
2020 compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, amortization of intangible asset expense decreased $2.2 million or 40.5%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This change was primarily driven by intangible assets that were fully amortized in 2019.
2019 compared to 2018
For the year ended December 31, 2019, amortization of intangible asset expense decreased $6.4 million or 54.3%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This change was primarily driven by intangible assets that were fully amortized in 2019.
Other expenses
The following table presents our other expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 the dollar and percentage changes between the two periods:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, other expenses represented a loss on extinguishment recognized in connection with the termination of the 2019 Credit Facilities. There was no other expense in 2019 or 2018.
Interest expense
The following table presents our interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 and the dollar and percentage changes between the two periods:
2020 compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense increased by $0.9 million or 13.1% from $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, higher outstanding balance as of December 31, 2020 due to the 2020 credit facility, compared to the 2019 credit facility.
2019 compared to 2018
For the year ended December 31, 2019, interest expense increased by $5.8 million from $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in interest expense was driven by the additional borrowings of $85.0 million through the 2019 Credit Facilities.
Income tax (benefit)
The following table presents our income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 and the dollar and percentage changes between the two periods:
Prior to its reorganization in October 2020, QLH was organized as a limited liability company and incurred no income taxes. Subsequent to the Reorganization Transactions, MediaAlpha, Inc. is subject to U.S. federal, state and foreign income taxes with respect to its allocable share of any taxable income or loss of QLH.
Segment information
We operate in the United States and in a single operating segment. Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise about which separate financial information is available that is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker, or decision-making group, in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing performance. Our chief operating decision maker is our chief executive officer, who reviews financial information presented on a consolidated basis for purposes of allocating resources and evaluating financial performance. No expense or operating income is evaluated at a segment level. Since we operate in one operating segment and reportable segment, all required financial segment information can be found in the consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity and capital resources
Overview
Prior to the completion of our IPO in October 2020, our liquidity needs were funded primarily through cash flow generated from operations. Our principal uses of cash have been to fund operations as well as make distributions to holders of Class A and Class B units at QLH, interest payments and mandatory principal payments on our long-term debt.
On October 30, 2020, we closed our IPO selling 7,027,606 shares of Class A common stock at a public offering price of $19.00 per share, which includes 769,104 shares issued pursuant to the underwriters’ over-allotment option. We received $124.2 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions, which we used in part to repurchase 4,772,449 Class B-1 units of MediaAlpha, Inc.
MediaAlpha, Inc. contributed (i) $84.3 million of the net proceeds to Intermediate Holdco for Intermediate Holdco to repurchase 4,772,449 Class B-1 units of QLH (which Class B-1 units are converted into Class A-1 units) and (ii) $23.6 million of the net proceeds to Intermediate Holdco for further contribution to QLH, and in turn to QL, to repay outstanding borrowings under the 2020 Term Loan Facility. The remaining net proceeds of $16.3 million were contributed to Intermediate Holdco for further contribution to QLH and QL to pay for costs associated with the IPO and to use for working capital, capital expenditures and general corporate purposes. Immediately following the completion of the IPO, there were 33,169,141 shares of Class A common stock outstanding, representing an approximately 56.5% ownership interest in QLH. Additionally, immediately following the completion of the IPO, there were 25,536,043 shares of Class B common stock outstanding, equivalent to all but 41,620 Class B-1 units of QLH not held by us, representing an approximately 43.5% ownership interest in QLH.
Cash Flows
As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, our cash and cash equivalents totaled $23.5 million and $10.0 million, respectively.
We believe that our current sources of liquidity, which include cash flow generated from operations, cash and funds available under the 2020 Credit Facilities, will be sufficient to meet our projected operating and debt service requirements for at least the next 12 months. To the extent that our current liquidity is insufficient to fund future activities, we may need to raise additional funds. In the future, we may attempt to raise additional capital through the sale of equity securities or through debt financing arrangements. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, the ownership of our existing stockholders will be diluted. The incurrence of additional debt financing would result in debt service obligations, and any future instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that could restrict our operations.
The following table presents a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 and the dollar and percentage changes between the periods:
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities primarily consists of net income, adjusted for certain (i) non-cash items including equity-based compensation expense, depreciation on property and equipment and amortization of intangible assets and deferred debt issuance costs and (ii) changes in operating assets and liabilities (accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and other current assets, accounts payable, accrued expenses and deferred rent).
Collection of accounts receivable depends upon the timing of our receipt of payments. We aim to align our separate payment obligations to supply partners and traffic acquisition sources for our proprietary websites with the timing of our receipt of separate payments from our demand partners. With respect to supply partners who are also demand partners, we maintain separate agreements for selling and buying and, in the majority of cases, such partners do not have a right of offset with respect to their buy-side payments, nor do we have a right of offset with respect to sell-side payments to such partners. If we were to experience a delay in receiving a payment from a buyer within a quarter, our operating cash flows for that quarter could be adversely impacted.
Cash flows provided by operating activities were $51.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $22.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to higher non-cash adjustment related to equity-based compensation expense and higher working capital usage primarily driven by growth in our business and expenses incurred in connection with the IPO partially offset by lower net income.
Cash flows provided by operating activities were $22.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $22.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease is primarily on account of lower net income, excluding the impact of non-cash charges partially offset by higher working capital usage driven primarily by growth in our business.
Investing activities
Our investing activities primarily consist of purchases of property and equipment, acquisition of intangible assets and investments.
Cash flows used in investing activities were $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is due to our investment in a cost method investment during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash flows used in investing activities were $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease is primarily on account of higher purchases of property and equipment during the year ended December 31, 2018.
Financing activities
Our financing activities primarily consist of proceeds from and repayments on our term debt facilities, and revolving line of credit, payments of debt issue costs, transactions related with our common stock, and member contributions and distributions prior to the IPO.
Cash flows used in financing activities were $27.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $17.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to members’ distribution, repayment of term debt related to extinguishment of 2019 Credit Facilities and partial prepayment of 2020 Credit Facilities, and payments to Legacy Profit Interest Holders and Senior executives in exchange for Class B-1 units of QLH. The increase was partially offset by proceeds from the 2020 Credit Facilities and net proceeds from issuance of Class A common stock in connection with the IPO.
Cash flows used in financing activities were $17.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $25.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease is on account of higher members’ distributions, repurchase of Class A units at QLH, and repayment of term debt partially offset by proceeds from the 2019 Credit Facilities and members’ contributions.
Senior secured credit facilities
As of December 31, 2020, we had $182.7 million of outstanding borrowings, net of deferred debt issuance costs of $3.7 million, under the 2020 Credit Facilities consisting of (i) a $210 million term loan and (ii) a $5.0 million revolving credit facility.
On September 23, 2020, we terminated and repaid in full the 2019 Credit Facilities, and QL entered into the 2020 Credit Agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as lender and administrative agent, and the other lenders from time-to-time party thereto, providing for the 2020 Credit Facilities consisting of (i) the 2020 Term Loan Facility and (ii) the 2020 Revolving Credit Facility. On December 1, 2020, we prepaid $23.6 million of the term loan on the 2020 Credit Facility pursuant to the contractual repayment option not subject to a penalty.
Our obligations under the 2020 Credit Facilities are guaranteed by QLH and the domestic subsidiaries of QL, subject to certain exceptions. The 2020 Credit Facilities are secured by substantially all of the tangible and intangible assets of QL and the guarantors under the 2020 Credit Agreement (including, without limitation, all of the equity interests in QL held by QLH), subject to permitted liens and certain exceptions. QL and its subsidiaries are subject under the 2020 Credit Facilities to customary affirmative and negative covenants, including limitations on their ability to incur additional indebtedness and engage in certain business transactions, such as distributions and other restricted payments, acquisitions and other investments and mergers. In addition, the 2020 Credit Agreement contains two financial maintenance covenants, requiring QL to (1) comply with a maximum Consolidated Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the 2020 Credit Agreement) and (2) maintain a minimum Consolidated Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the 2020 Credit Agreement). Events of default under the 2020 Credit Agreement include, among other things, nonpayment of principal when due; nonpayment of interest, fees or other amounts after a grace period; material inaccuracy of representations and warranties; violation of covenants (subject, in the case of certain affirmative covenants, to a grace period); cross-event of default to material debt; bankruptcy events; certain ERISA events; material judgments; change of control; and actual or asserted invalidity of the 2020 Credit Agreement and non-perfection of the security interest on any material portion of the collateral. If an event of default occurs, the lenders will be permitted to declare all outstanding borrowings immediately due and payable. There can be no guarantee that we will be in compliance with all covenants related to the 2020 Credit Facilities in the future and, if we are not in compliance with any such covenants, that waivers will be obtained.
Proceeds from the 2020 Term Loan Facility were used to refinance the 2019 Credit Facilities and pay related fees and expenses and fund a distribution to equity holders of QLH. The 2020 Revolving Credit Facility is available for general corporate purposes and includes a letter of credit sub-facility of up to $2.5 million. The 2020 Credit Facilities also include an uncommitted incremental facility, which, subject to certain conditions, provides for additional term loan facilities, an increase in commitments under the 2020 Term Loan Facility and/or an increase in commitments under the 2020 Revolving Credit Facility, in an aggregate amount of up to $50.0 million.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth certain contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the timing and effect that such commitments are expected to have on our liquidity and capital requirements in future periods.
(1) See Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements - Long -term debt” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) See Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements - Income Taxes” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Tax Receivable Agreement
Our purchase (through Intermediate Holdco) of Class B-1 units of QLH from certain unitholders (including the Selling Class B-1 Unit Holders) in connection with the IPO as well as any future exchanges of Class of Class B-1 units of QLH, together with an equal number of shares of our Class B common stock, for shares of our Class A common stock (or, at our election, cash of an equivalent value), and the Pre-IPO Leveraged Distribution and other actual or deemed distributions by QLH to its members pursuant to the Exchange Agreement (See Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements - Organization and Background” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K) are expected to result in increases in our allocable tax basis in the assets of QLH. These increases in tax basis are expected to increase (for tax purposes) depreciation and amortization deductions allocable to us and, therefore, reduce the amount of tax that we otherwise would be required to pay in the future. This increase in tax basis may also decrease gain (or increase loss) on future dispositions of certain assets to the extent tax basis is allocated to those assets.
In connection with the IPO, we entered into the Tax Receivables Agreement (“TRA”) with Insignia, the Senior Executives, and White Mountains related to the tax basis step-up of the assets of QLH and certain net operating losses of Intermediate Holdco. The agreement requires us to pay Insignia and the Senior Executives 85% of the cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax we realize (or are deemed to realize) as a result of (i) any increases in tax basis of assets of QLH resulting from any exchange of Class B-1 units of QLH, as discussed above, and (3) certain other tax benefits related to making our payments under the TRA. The TRA also requires us to pay White Mountains 85% of the amount of the cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax that we realize (or are deemed to realize) as a result of the utilization of the net operating losses of Intermediate Holdco attributable to periods prior to the IPO and the deduction of any imputed interest attributable to our payment obligations under the TRA.
In addition to tax expenses, we will also make payments under the TRA, which we expect to be significant. We will account for the income tax effects and corresponding TRA’s effects resulting from future exchanges of Class B-1 units by us by recognizing an increase in our deferred tax assets, based on enacted tax rates at the date of the exchange. Further, we will evaluate the likelihood that we will realize the benefit represented by the deferred tax asset and, to the extent that we estimate that it is more likely than not that we will not realize the benefit, we will reduce the carrying amount of the deferred tax asset with a valuation allowance. The amounts to be recorded for both the deferred tax assets and the liability for our obligations under the TRA will be estimated at the time of any purchase or redemption as a reduction to shareholders’ equity, and the effects of changes in any of our estimates after this date will be included in net income (loss). Similarly, the effect of subsequent changes in the enacted tax rates will be included in net income (loss). Judgement is required in assessing the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements. A change in our assessment of such consequences, such as realization of deferred tax assets, changes in tax laws or interpretations thereof could materially impact our results.
Income taxes
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and TRA liability reflect management’s best assessment of estimated current and future taxes. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the consolidated income tax expense, deferred tax assets and TRA liability. Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including projected future taxable income and results of recent operations. In projecting future taxable income, we begin with historical results and incorporate assumptions about the amount of future state and federal pre-tax operating income adjusted for items that do not have tax consequences. The assumptions about future taxable income require significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage our business.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Regulation S-K.
Recent accounting pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting pronouncements recently adopted and not yet adopted, See Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements - Summary of significant accounting policies” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, and in doing so, we have to make estimates, assumptions and judgments affecting the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates, assumptions and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Different assumptions and judgments would change the estimates used in the preparation of our condensed consolidated financial statements, which, in turn, could change our results from those reported. We evaluate our critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments on an ongoing basis.
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if the nature of the estimates or assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change, and the effect of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance. The accounting policies we believe to reflect our more significant estimates, judgments and assumptions that are most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are: revenue recognition, goodwill and intangible assets, impairment of long-lived assets, equity-based compensation, income taxes, and payable to related parties under the tax receivable agreement.
Also, See Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements - Summary of significant accounting policies” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue recognition
For a description of our policies with respect to revenue recognition, see “-Key components of our results of operations-Revenue” in this section.
Business combinations
We account for business combinations in accordance with ASC 805, which requires, among other things, the acquiring entity in a business combination to recognize the fair value of all the assets acquired and liabilities assumed; the recognition of acquisition-related costs in the consolidated results of operations; the recognition of restructuring costs in the consolidated results of operations for which the acquirer becomes obligated after the acquisition date; and contingent purchase consideration to be recognized at their fair values on the acquisition date with subsequent adjustments recognized in the consolidated results of operations. The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the identified assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Operating results of the acquired entity are reflected in our consolidated financial statements from date of acquisition.
We perform valuations of assets acquired and liabilities assumed for an acquisition and allocate the purchase price to its respective net tangible and intangible assets. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management to use significant judgment and estimates including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenue, costs, and cash flows, discount rates and selection of comparable companies and comparable transactions. For material acquisitions, we engage the assistance of valuation specialists in concluding on fair value measurements of certain assets acquired or liabilities assumed in a business combination. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill.
Impairment of Goodwill
Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the purchase consideration paid in a business combination over the fair value of the assets acquired less liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is evaluated for impairment on an annual basis, or whenever indications of potential impairment exist. In the absence of any indications of potential impairment, the evaluation of goodwill is performed during the fourth quarter of each year. For the purposes of goodwill impairment testing, the Company has one reporting unit.
Goodwill impairment is the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. When testing goodwill for impairment, we first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is necessary to perform a goodwill impairment test. We are required to perform a goodwill impairment test only if we conclude that it is more likely than not that the reporting unit’s fair value is less than the carrying value of its assets. Should this be the case, the next step is to identify whether a potential impairment exists by comparing the estimated fair value of the reporting unit with the carrying value, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value, goodwill is not considered to be impaired and no additional steps are necessary. If, however, the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then the amount of the impairment loss is the amount by which the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no impairments recognized for goodwill.
Impairment of long-lived assets
Long-lived assets such as property and equipment and intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset group may not be recoverable. Factors that we consider in deciding when to perform an impairment review include significant underperformance of our business in relation to expectations, significant negative industry or economic trends and significant changes or planned changes in the use of our assets. An impairment loss is recognized on long-lived assets in the consolidated statement of operations when indicators of impairment are present and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the carrying amount of the assets. In such cases, the carrying value of these assets are adjusted to their estimated fair values and assets held for sale are adjusted to their estimated fair values less selling expenses.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no impairments recognized for long-lived assets.
Equity-based compensation
Prior to the IPO, certain of our employees (including the Founders) were granted Class B units, directly or indirectly, in QLH for services in connection with our operations and were considered to fall within the scope of equity-based compensation.
We use a contingent claims analysis framework that relies on a Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the fair value of the QLH Class B units. As of each valuation date of QLH Class B units, the contingent claims analysis framework relies on the fair value of the total equity of QLH; management’s expected term to an exit event such as an event leading to a sale or an initial public offering of QLH; an estimate of equity volatility applicable to units of QLH commensurate to the term from the valuation to an exit date; a dividend yield and a risk-free rate as of each valuation date; and a calculated breakpoint that is akin to a strike price, above which the QLH Class B units contractually share in the proceeds to QLH upon an exit event. Fair value of total equity for QLH is established using both a market multiples approach and a discounted cash flow method; as well as a price established from certain equity transactions with third-party investors. Compensation expense of those awards is recognized, over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur. Upon IPO because all of the QLH Class B profits interests were either (1) settled or (2) cancelled and replaced upon the IPO, there are 0 QLH Class B units outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
We are subject to U.S. federal, state and foreign income taxes with respect to our allocable share of any taxable income or loss of QLH, as well as any stand-alone income or loss we generate. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision or benefit for income taxes and in evaluating uncertain tax positions.
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events included in our consolidated financial statements. Under this method, we determine deferred tax assets and liabilities on the basis of the differences between the consolidated financial statements and tax bases of assets and liabilities by using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized on our consolidated statement of operations in the period in which the enactment date occurs.
We record valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets when they are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent results of operations.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized from such positions are measured based on the largest benefit having a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized.
Payable to Related Parties Pursuant to the tax receivable agreement
As described in Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements - Organization and Background” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are a party to the Tax Receivable Agreement (TRA) under which we are contractually committed to pay the non-controlling interest holders in QLH 85% of the amount of any tax benefits that we actually realize, or in some cases are deemed to realize as a result of certain transactions. Amounts payable under the TRA are contingent upon, among other things, the generation of future taxable income. The projection of future taxable income involves significant judgment. In projecting future taxable income, we consider our historical results and incorporate certain assumptions including the growth rate of the Company and the amount, character, and timing of the taxable income in the future. Actual taxable income may differ from our estimates, which could significantly impact the liability under the TRAs.
Additionally, we estimate the amount of TRA Payments expected to be paid within the next 12 months and classify this amount as current on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. This determination is based on our estimate of taxable income for the next fiscal year. To the extent our estimate differs from actual results, we may be required to reclassify portions of our liabilities under the TRA between current and non-current. If all of the remaining Class B-1 unitholders were to exchange all of their LLC Units, the Company would recognize a deferred tax asset of approximately $275 million and a TRA liability of approximately $293 million, assuming (i) that the Class B-1 unitholders redeemed or exchanged all of their Class B-1 Units immediately as of December 31, 2020 at a price of $39.07 per share of its Class A common stock, (ii) no material changes in relevant tax law, (iii) a constant corporate tax rate of 23.7%, (iv) that the Company earns sufficient taxable income in each year to realize on a current basis all tax benefits that are subject to the TRA, and (v) that the attributes from Intermediate Holdco are not limited pursuant to section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code. The actual amount of deferred tax assets and related liabilities are impacted by the timing of the exchanges, the valuation of Corporation, the price of the Company’s shares of Class A common stock at the time of the exchange, and the tax rates then in effect. The Company may elect to completely terminate the TRA early only with the written approval of each of a majority of its independent directors, although it has no plans to do so at this time. As a result, the Company would be required to make an immediate cash payment equal to the present value of the anticipated future tax benefits that are the subject of the TRA.