ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
We are a partner and innovator in Earth Intelligence and Space Infrastructure. We help government and commercial customers monitor, understand and navigate our changing planet; deliver global broadband communications; and explore and advance the use of space. Our approach combines decades of deep mission understanding and a proven commercial and defense foundation to deploy solutions and deliver insights with speed, scale and cost effectiveness. Our businesses are organized and managed in two reportable segments: Earth Intelligence and Space Infrastructure, as described below under “Segment Results”.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Completion of the sale of MDA
On April 8, 2020, we completed the previously announced sale by Maxar and Maxar Technologies Holdings Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of Maxar (“Maxar Holdings” and, together with Maxar, the “Sellers”), of the MDA Business, the Company’s former Canadian subsidiary (“MDA Business”), pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement dated as of December 29, 2019 (as amended from time to time, the “MDA Agreement”) between the Sellers and Neptune Acquisition Inc., a corporation existing under the laws of the Province of British Columbia and an affiliate of Northern Private Capital Ltd. for an aggregate purchase price of $729 million (C$1.0 billion) (“MDA Transaction”) subject to customary purchase price adjustments set forth therein, including for working capital, cash and debt and as otherwise set forth in the MDA Agreement.
Acquisition of Vricon
On June 23, 2020, we announced our intent to exercise our call option to take full ownership of 3D data and analytics firm Vricon, Inc., (“Vricon Acquisition”) for approximately $143 million, or approximately $120 million net of cash at closing. To fund the transaction, we issued $150 million in aggregate principal amount of new senior secured notes, discussed below. The call option was exercised on June 25, 2020, and the Vricon Acquisition closed on July 1, 2020.
Vricon is a global leader in satellite-derived 3D data for defense and intelligence markets, with software and products that enhance 3D mapping, Earth intelligence data, military simulation and training and precision-guided munitions. The company was formed as a joint venture between Maxar and Saab in 2015 to combine patented Saab IP with our commercial satellite imagery to build highly accurate, immersive 3D products at scale.
Sale of senior secured notes and repurchase of debt
On June 25, 2020, we issued $150 million aggregate principal amount of 7.54% Senior Secured Notes due 2027 (“2027 Notes”). The 2027 Notes were offered and sold to qualified institutional buyers in the U.S. pursuant to Rule 144A and outside the U.S. pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The 2027 Notes have an interest rate of 7.54% per annum and were issued at a price equal to 98.25% of their face value. Proceeds from the 2027 Notes were used for general corporate purposes, including the financing of the Vricon Acquisition.
Separately, on June 25, 2020, we repurchased, in a privately negotiated transaction, $150 million aggregate principal amount of our 9.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2023 (“2023 Notes”). The 2023 Notes were repurchased (“2023 Notes Repurchase”) at approximately 112.45% of the principal amount on June 25, 2020.
The Company accounted for the issuance of the 2027 Notes and 2023 Notes Repurchase as debt modifications.
During the three months ended June 30, 2020, we also repaid $511 million of borrowings under Term Loan B using proceeds from the MDA Transaction.
Ukrainian customer lawsuit resolution
On March 31, 2020, an arbitral tribunal issued a final decision in favor of the Company related to claims asserted against us by a Ukrainian customer, dismissing the customer’s claims in their entirety. As previously disclosed in our SEC filings, we entered into an agreement with the Ukrainian customer in 2010 to provide a communication satellite system. In 2014, following the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, we declared force majeure with respect to the program and subsequently terminated the contract. In July 2018, the Ukrainian customer issued a statement of claim in the arbitration it had commenced against us, challenging our right to terminate for force majeure and seeking to recover approximately $227 million. Following a hearing on the merits in December 2019, the arbitral tribunal dismissed the customer’s claims, and awarded us costs and attorney’s fees. See Note 23, “Commitments and contingencies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1, “Financial Information” for further details. We have recognized a $39 million recovery of the previously recorded liability in relation to the Company’s dispute with the Ukrainian customer within the Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax line item within the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
COVID-19 operational posture and current impact
We have activated our standing pandemic crisis response plan to protect the health and safety of our team members, families, customers and communities while continuing to meet our commitments to customers. Our mitigation strategies cover employee preparation, travel, security, supply chain, virtual work, facility preparation and communications.
All our locations are currently operational through a combination of work from home and limited personnel working on-site for essential operations, though in some cases capacity utilization and productivity are below normalized levels. As aerospace manufacturing, communications and defense are federal critical infrastructure sectors, we are allowed to keep some of our workforce on-site to maintain critical operations. And in doing so, we continue to diligently follow safety protocols including social distancing, alternating shifts, temperature checks, deep cleaning and isolation strategies for essential personnel working at our sites.
The near and long-term impacts of the current pandemic on the cost and schedule of the numerous programs in our existing backlog and the timing of new awards remains uncertain. We are observing stress in our supplier base in and outside the U.S. and we will continue to monitor and assess the actual and potential COVID-19 impacts on employees, customers, suppliers and the productivity of the work being done, all of which, to some extent, will affect revenues, estimated costs to complete projects, earnings and cash flow. Our current estimates at completion on our satellite manufacturing contracts assume, among other things, that we remain in a COVID-19 operating posture in our factories through the spring of 2021.
Our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, include the current estimated impact of COVID-19. We had COVID-19 related estimated total costs at completion (“EAC”) growth of $27 million within the Space Infrastructure segment for the year ended December 31, 2020, which negatively impacted earnings for the same period. The changes in the EACs are due to increases in estimated program costs associated with the COVID-19 operating posture and the estimated impact of certain items such as supplier delays and increased labor hours along with actuals realized during the year ended December 31, 2020. These costs are considered incremental and separable from normal operations.
Segment Results
Our CODM measures performance of our reportable segments based on revenue and Adjusted EBITDA. Our operating and reportable segments are: Earth Intelligence and Space Infrastructure. With our announcement of the MDA Transaction on December 30, 2019, and the subsequent closing of the MDA Transaction on April 8, 2020, the MDA segment has been classified within Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and is no longer considered a reportable segment. All prior-period amounts have been adjusted to reflect the reportable segment change.
Earth Intelligence
In the Earth Intelligence segment, we are a global leader in high resolution space-based optical and radar imagery products and analytics. We launched the world’s first high resolution commercial imaging satellite in 1999 and currently operate a four-satellite imaging constellation, providing us with a 125 petabyte historical ImageLibrary of the highest-resolution, commercially available imagery. Our imagery solutions provide customers with timely, accurate and mission-critical information about our changing planet and support a wide variety of government and commercial applications, including mission planning, mapping and analysis, environmental monitoring, disaster management, crop management, oil and gas exploration and infrastructure management. Our principal customers in the Earth Intelligence segment are U.S. and other international government agencies (primarily defense and intelligence agencies), as well as a wide variety of commercial customers in multiple markets. We are a market leader in the commercial satellite Earth observation industry.
We also provide geospatial services that combine imagery, analytic expertise and innovative technology to deliver intelligence solutions to customers. Our cleared developers, analysts, and data scientists provide analytic solutions that accurately document change and enable geospatial modeling and analysis that help predict where events will occur. Our primary customer of geospatial services is the U.S. government, but we also support intelligence requirements for other U.S. allied governments, global development organizations and commercial customers.
As a result of the Vricon Acquisition, the results of Vricon are now consolidated within the Earth Intelligence segment.
Space Infrastructure
In the Space Infrastructure segment, we design, build, integrate and test solutions for space-based communications satellites, Earth observation, on-orbit servicing, robotic assembly, and space exploration. We address a broad spectrum of needs for our customers, including mission systems engineering, product design, spacecraft manufacturing, assembly integration and testing. We provide advanced, reliable, and affordable spacecraft that enable our commercial customers to deliver valuable global services, and we are successfully partnering with the U.S. government in new space opportunities. Our principal customers in the Space Infrastructure segment are commercial satellite operators and government agencies worldwide.
MDA
As discussed above, in connection with the MDA Transaction, the financial results from this segment were classified as discontinued operations for all periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and it is no longer considered a reportable segment. The MDA Business developed and delivered advanced surveillance and intelligence solutions, defense and maritime systems, radar geospatial imagery, space robotics, satellite antennas and communication subsystems. Subsequent to the MDA Transaction, MDA continues to be a supplier of certain components and subsystems to us.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table provides selected annual financial information for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
*Not meaningful.
Product and service revenue
Total revenues increased to $1,723 million from $1,666 million, or by $57 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in revenue in our Space Infrastructure segment partially offset by a decrease in revenue in our Earth Intelligence segment. The decrease was primarily driven by a $40 million decrease in the recognition of deferred revenue related to the EnhancedView Contract.
We recognized $120 million of deferred revenue from the EnhancedView Contract for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $80 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as it was fully recognized as of August 31, 2020.
Further discussion of the drivers behind the decrease in revenues within the “Results by Segment” section below.
Total revenues decreased to $1,666 million from $1,804 million, or by $138 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in revenue in our Space Infrastructure segment partially offset by an increase in revenue in our Earth Intelligence segment. Further discussion of the drivers behind the decrease in revenues within the “Results by Segment” section below.
See Note 17, “Segment Information” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for product and service revenues by segment.
Product and service costs
Total cost of product and services increased to $993 million from $975 million, or by $18 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in costs was primarily driven by an increase in costs within our Earth Intelligence segment partially offset by a decrease within our Space Infrastructure segment.
Total cost of product and services decreased to $975 million from $1,088 million, or by $113 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease is primarily driven by lower costs within the Space Infrastructure segment driven by lower volume which was partially offset by an increase in costs in our Earth Intelligence segment which was primarily driven by an increase in the labor associated with providing geospatial services.
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative costs increased to $332 million from $325 million, or by $7 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase is primarily due to an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $23 million. Stock-based compensation expense increased primarily due to a higher stock price. The increase is also due to an increase in labor related expenses of $16 million driven primarily by an increase in headcount and employee compensation. These increases were partially offset by a $15 million decrease in restructuring expenses, a $9 million decrease in transaction and integration related expenses and a $7 million decrease in travel related expenses driven by our COVID-19 operating posture.
Selling, general and administrative costs decreased to $325 million from $446 million, or by $121 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in research and development spend of $78 million, a $19 million decrease in integration expense related to the DigitalGlobe Transaction and a decrease in labor related expenses due to a reduction of headcount from actions taken during the first quarter of 2019.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased to $348 million from $376 million, or by $28 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in amortization expense for backlog acquired as part of the DigitalGlobe Transaction. We recognized a full year of amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to approximately nine months for the year ended December 31, 2020, as all of the U.S. government acquired backlog was fully amortized in October 2020. The decrease was also driven by a decrease in depreciation expense related to asset retirements made in the second half of 2019 and in the first quarter of 2020, the extension of the useful life of one satellite in the fourth quarter of 2019 and two satellites in the fourth quarter of 2020 and the sale of our owned properties in Palo Alto in December 2019. These decreases were partially offset due to the inclusion of depreciation and amortization expense from property, plant and equipment and intangible assets acquired as part of the Vricon Acquisition on July 1, 2020, compared to no such expense in the same period of 2019.
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased to $376 million from $439 million, or by $63 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in depreciation and amortization expense following asset impairments in the second half of 2018.
Impairment losses
*Not meaningful.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized impairment losses of $47 million primarily related to the write-off of a $33 million prepaid asset with a commercial provider of ground station services under a contract which was above current market value. In December 2020, we executed a new multi-year contract with the provider for services at reduced cost. As a result of the prior contract being terminated and the new contract being at market value, we concluded the remaining prepaid asset from the prior contract with the provider had no continuing value. In addition, during 2020 we recognized an impairment loss of $14 million related to our orbital receivables within the Space Infrastructure segment. This impairment loss was primarily due to a decrease in credit ratings associated with our largest orbital receivable.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized impairment losses of $14 million primarily related to orbital receivables within the Space Infrastructure segment due to a decrease in customer credit ratings.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized $586 million of impairment losses. We recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment loss of $159 million related to our Earth Intelligence and Space Infrastructure segments which was a result of the sustained decline in our stock price and the further decline in the geostationary satellite manufacturing business (“GeoComm”) in our Space Infrastructure segment. We also recognized impairment losses of $122 million related to intangible assets and $121 million related to property, plant and equipment within the Space Infrastructure segment. Additionally, we recorded a $22 million impairment related to orbital receivables within the Space Infrastructure segment primarily due to a decrease in customer credit rating. In December 2018, we lost the imaging capability of our WorldView-4 satellite, resulting in a loss of $162 million on the satellite, related assets, and future premium payments.
Satellite insurance recovery
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received insurance recoveries of $183 million related to the loss of imaging capability of our WorldView-4 satellite in December 2018. There were no insurance recoveries during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2018.
Loss (gain) on sale of assets
*Not meaningful.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 we recognized a $1 million net reduction in the gain on sale of assets.
The net reduction in the gain on the sale of assets is primarily related to a $4 million reduction in the gain on our sale leaseback of our owned properties in Palo Alto, California due to the extension of our lease term on one of the properties. The reduction in the gain on sale of assets was partially offset by a $3 million gain on the disposal of assets within the Earth Intelligence segment.
During the year ended December 31, 2019 we recorded a gain of $136 million related to the sale and subsequent leaseback of our owned properties in Palo Alto, California.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recorded a gain of $33 million related to the sale of one of our buildings in Palo Alto, California.
Interest expense, net
*Not meaningful.
Under the EnhancedView Contract, we received advanced payments from the U.S. government during the construction phase of the WorldView-1 satellite, which was more than one year before capacity was made available to them. The effect of imputing interest on these advanced payments was to increase contract liabilities with an offsetting charge to interest expense. As capacity was provided to the customer, revenue was recognized and the contract liabilities balance decreased. There was no contract liability balance associated with our EnhancedView Contract as of December 31, 2020 as the remaining revenue was fully recognized as of August 31, 2020.
Interest expense, net decreased to $175 million from $219 million, or by $44 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a $15 million increase in the loss on debt extinguishment for
the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2020, an increase in capitalized interest of $14 million related to the building of our WorldView Legion constellation and a $12 million decrease in interest on advance payments from customers.
Interest expense, net increased to $219 million from $200 million, or by $19 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The increase is primarily due to a $23 million increase in interest on long-term debt and a $22 million loss on debt extinguishment. These increases were partially offset by an increase in capitalized interest of $12 million primarily related to the building of our WorldView Legion constellation and a $11 million decrease in interest on advance payments from customers.
Other (income) expense, net
*Not meaningful.
Other income, net increased to $104 million from $1 million, or by $103 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily driven by a gain of $85 million recorded as a result of the remeasurement of our previously held equity interest in Vricon due to the Vricon Acquisition. In addition, the increase was driven by a $5 million foreign exchange gain for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a $2 million foreign exchange loss for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other (income) expense, net remained relatively unchanged year over year as it increased to income of $1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to a net loss of $1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Income tax benefit
*Not meaningful.
Income tax (benefit) expense changed to a benefit of $22 million from an expense of $5 million, or by $27 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. This change was primarily due to the release of a $17 million valuation allowance related to the deferred tax liability recorded in connection with the Vricon Acquisition and the reduction of the federal Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax (“BEAT”) expense estimated at December 31, 2019.
Income tax expense (benefit) increased to an expense of $5 million from a benefit of $48 million, or by $53 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to the recognition of a 2018 tax benefit associated with interest expense in continuing operations and the applicability of the base erosion and anti-abuse tax (“BEAT”) to certain payments made in 2019.
Equity in income from joint ventures, net of tax
*Not meaningful.
As we acquired Vricon effective July 1, 2020, Vricon’s results were included in our consolidated results going forward and were no longer presented in equity in income from joint ventures, net of tax. See Note 5, “Business Combination” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item I, “Financial Information” for additional detail on the Vricon Acquisition.
Equity in income from joint ventures, net of tax increased to $11 million from $2 million, or by $9 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018. The increase, which was substantially all in the fourth quarter of 2019, is primarily related to growth in our Vricon joint venture of which we owned approximately 50% of prior to the completion of the Vricon Acquisition in 2020.
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
*Not meaningful.
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax increased to $349 million from $26 million, or by $323 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. The increase is primarily driven by the after-tax gain on disposal of the MDA Business of $317 million. The increase was also impacted by a $39 million recovery of a previously recorded liability in relation to the Company’s dispute with a Ukrainian customer for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax increased to $26 million in net income from a net loss of $377 million, or by $403 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018. This increase was primarily driven by the decrease in impairment losses recorded in 2019 of $12 million compared to a goodwill impairment of $477 million in 2018. The 2019 results were impacted by a decrease in revenue of $53 million which was partially offset by a decrease in costs. The 2019 results were also impacted by a liability recorded in relation to the Company’s dispute with a Ukrainian customer of $32 million.
RESULTS BY SEGMENT
We analyze financial performance by segments, which group related activities within our business. We report our financial performance based on two reportable segments: Earth Intelligence and Space Infrastructure. Intrasegment transactions have been eliminated from the segmented financial information discussed below.
*Not meaningful.
Adjusted EBITDA disclosures throughout this section, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” are non-GAAP measures. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for further discussion of Adjusted EBITDA disclosures.
Earth Intelligence
The following table provides selected financial information for the Earth Intelligence segment.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, Earth Intelligence segment revenues decreased to $1,081 million from $1,085 million, or by $4 million, compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a $40 million decrease in the recognition of deferred revenue related to the EnhancedView Contract. We recognized $120 million of deferred revenue from the EnhancedView Contract for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $80 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as it was fully recognized as of August 31, 2020. These decreases were partially offset by a $15 million increase in revenue from new contracts with the U.S. government, an $11 million increase in revenue from international defense and intelligence customers, and a $10 million increase in revenue driven by the inclusion of Vricon’s revenue for two quarters in 2020 compared to none in 2019 as it was accounted for as an equity method investment. Revenue from international defense and intelligence customers increased primarily due to the usage of new direct access facilities which became operational and contracts that signed in the second half of 2019.
Revenues from the Earth Intelligence segment increased to $1,085 million from $1,059 million, or by $26 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018. The increase was primarily driven by new
contract awards and expansion of programs with the U.S. government of $63 million, offset by a net decrease of $36 million in revenues from our direct access program primarily due to the loss of WorldView-4 revenues.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased to $513 million from $548 million, or by $35 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a $40 million decrease in the recognition of revenue related to the EnhancedView Contract and a $10 million decrease related to equity in income from our Vricon joint venture which was acquired and consolidated in our results in 2020. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in revenue from new contracts with the U.S. government.
Adjusted EBITDA from the Earth Intelligence segment increased to $548 million from $516 million, or by $32 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018. The increase is primarily related to a decrease in selling, general and administrative costs of $28 million partially related to headcount reductions taken in the first half of the year and a shift of certain functions to corporate, and an increase in equity in income from our Vricon joint venture of $9 million. These increases were partially offset by a net decrease in margins from our revenue contracts, which were primarily driven by the loss of WorldView-4 revenues, which had higher margins.
Space Infrastructure
The following table provides selected financial information for the Space Infrastructure segment.
Changes in revenues from year to year are influenced by the size, timing and number of satellite contracts awarded in the current and preceding years and the length of the construction period for satellite contracts awarded. Revenues on satellite contracts are recognized using the cost-to-cost method of accounting to determine the percentage of completion over the construction period, which typically ranges between 20 to 36 months and up to 48 months in certain situations. Adjusted EBITDA margins can vary from quarter to quarter due to the mix of our revenues and changes in our estimated costs to complete as our risks are retired and as our estimated costs to complete are increased or decreased based on contract performance.
Revenues from the Space Infrastructure segment increased to $721 million from $706 million, or by $15 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. Revenues increased primarily as a result of an increase in volume related to U.S. government contracts of $137 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. This increase in revenue was partially offset by the impact of reduced volumes on commercial programs of $122 million including a $9 million impact due to increases in estimated costs and an associated change in the EAC profit margin of a commercial satellite program due to the identification of a design anomaly in the final stage of a testing process. Revenues were also negatively impacted by $27 million of estimated COVID-19 related EAC growth during the period and are included in the above-mentioned results. The increases in the EACs are due to increases in estimated program costs associated with the COVID-19 operating posture and the estimated impact of certain items such as supplier delays and increased labor hours. These costs are considered incremental and separable from normal operations.
Revenues from the Space Infrastructure segment decreased to $706 million from $823 million, or by $117 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018. Revenues decreased primarily as a result of the impact of reduced volume in our GeoComm business and an increase in estimated costs to complete programs. The reduced volume was a result of new business not fully replacing existing backlog contracts that were completed during the period.
Adjusted EBITDA was a loss of $3 million compared to a loss of $17 million, or an increase of $14 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. The increase in the Space Infrastructure segment is primarily related to higher margins and favorable EACs outside of the estimated COVID-19 impacts discussed below, on commercial programs of $68 million. This has been driven by a change in program mix related to the completion of less profitable programs offset by new, more profitable programs along with $8 million less of program losses on a developmental program for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. The increase in commercial programs are partially offset by an estimated $27 million negative impact related to our COVID-19 operating posture. The increase is also partially offset by a $16 million increase in costs due to a change in the compensation structure from retention payments to bonuses which were not included in segment Adjusted EBITDA in 2019, a $9 million negative impact on the above-mentioned commercial satellite program with a design anomaly and a recovery of a previously reserved amount of $7 million in 2019 which did not reoccur in 2020. The remainder of the change was related to a decrease in cost of product and services and selling, general, and administrative expenses.
Adjusted EBITDA from the Space Infrastructure segment was a loss of $17 million compared to a loss of $75 million, or an increase of $58 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018. The increase is primarily related to reduced research and development spend of $72 million and headcount reductions from restructuring initiatives resulting in lower costs and the impact of no new liquidated damages being incurred compared to $28 million of liquidated damages in 2018. These increases were partially offset by decreases from the effects of lower revenues and higher estimated costs to complete on certain projects along with losses incurred on developmental builds.
On January 27, 2021, Sirius XM Holdings Inc. (“Sirius XM”) announced in its public filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission that there is an evaluation underway to determine the extent of damage to its SXM-7 satellite caused by certain events on January 16, 2021. The SXM-7 satellite was constructed by us and launched by Sirius XM on December 13, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the satellite was functioning as intended. See Note 25, “Subsequent events” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1, “Financial Information” for further details, including the potential financial impact.
Corporate and other expenses
Corporate and other expenses include items such as corporate office costs, regulatory costs, executive and director compensation, foreign exchange gains and losses, retention costs, and fees for legal and consulting services.
Corporate and other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $61 million from $86 million, or by $25 million, compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a $24 million decrease in retention costs related to a 2019 program within the Space Infrastructure segment. The decrease was also driven by a $5 million foreign exchange gain for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a $2 million foreign exchange loss for the year ended December 31, 2019. These decreases were partially offset by a $13 million increase in stock-based compensation expense primarily driven by a higher stock price.
Corporate and other expenses increased to $86 million from $49 million, or by $37 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in retention costs related to the Space Infrastructure segment of $24 million and an increase as a result of a shift of certain functions to corporate and other increases in selling, general and administrative expense of approximately $12 million.
Intersegment eliminations
Intersegment eliminations are related to projects between our segments, primarily WorldView Legion. Intersegment eliminations have decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, primarily related to a decrease in satellite construction activity.
Intersegment eliminations have increased for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018, primarily related to an increase in satellite construction activity.
BACKLOG
Our backlog by segment from continuing operations is as follows:
Order backlog, representing the estimated dollar value of firm funded contracts for which work has not been performed (also known as the remaining performance obligations on a contract), increased to $1.9 billion from $1.6 billion, or by approximately $300 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. Order backlog generally does not include unexercised contract options and potential orders under indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity contracts. Approximately 58% of the total $1.9 billion backlog as of December 31, 2020 is expected to be converted into revenue in 2021.
Backlog in the Space Infrastructure segment is primarily comprised of multi-year awards, such as satellite builds. Fluctuations in the backlog are driven primarily by the timing of large program wins. Backlog in the Earth Intelligence segment consists of both multi-year and annual contracts, which renew at various times throughout the year. As a result, the timing of when contracts are awarded and when option years are exercised may cause backlog to fluctuate significantly from period to period.
The increase in backlog was primarily driven by an increase in the Space Infrastructure segment due to new contracts with the U.S. government. There was also a decrease in the Earth Intelligence segment driven by revenue recognized during the period, partially offset by the annual exercise of the $300 million EnhancedView Contract option.
Although backlog reflects business that is considered to be firm, terminations, amendments or cancellations may occur, which could result in a reduction in our total backlog.
Unfunded contract options represent estimated amounts of revenue to be earned in the future from negotiated contracts with unexercised contract options and indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity contracts. Unfunded contract options as of December 31, 2020 were primarily comprised of the option years in the EnhancedView Contract (September 1, 2021 through August 31, 2023). This contract may be replaced by other contracting vehicles prior to the exercise of existing contract options.
LIQUIDITY & CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our sources of liquidity include cash provided by operations, access to existing credit facilities, collection or securitization of orbital receivables and, when available and efficient, access to the capital markets. We generally maintain limited cash on hand and use available cash to pay down borrowings on our Syndicated Credit Facility. Our primary short-term cash requirements are to fund working capital, including requirements on long-term construction contracts (including our geostationary satellite contracts), fixed overhead costs, and to fund increased capital expenditures, including the construction of our WorldView Legion constellation. Working capital requirements can vary significantly from period to period, particularly as a result of the timing of receipts and disbursements related to long-term construction contracts.
Our medium-term to long-term cash requirements are to service and repay debt and to invest, including in facilities, equipment, technologies, and research and development for growth initiatives. These capital investments include investments to replace the capability or capacity of satellites which have or will go out of service in the future. Over the
near-term to medium-term, it is also possible that our customers may fully or partially fund the construction of additional Legion satellites. Cash is also used to pay dividends and finance other long-term strategic business initiatives.
While our first maturity of long-term debt is in the fourth quarter of 2023, we had significant debt repayments in 2020 using proceeds from the MDA Transaction, as required pursuant to our Restated Credit Agreement. During the three months ended June 30, 2020, we repaid $511 million of borrowings under Term Loan B using proceeds from the MDA Transaction. On June 25, 2020, we repurchased $150 million aggregate principal amount of our 2023 Notes at a price of approximately 112.45% of the principal amount using the proceeds from the sale of the MDA Transaction (“2023 Notes repurchase”). On June 25, 2020, we issued $150 million in principal amount of our 2027 Notes in a private placement to institutional buyers. The 2027 Notes were issued at a price of 98.25% and bear interest at the rate of 7.54% per annum, payable semi-annually in cash in arrears, for which interest payments commenced in December 2020.
We have significant purchase obligations in the normal course of business for goods and services, under agreements with defined terms as to quantity, price and timing of delivery. Purchase obligations represent open purchase orders and other commitments for the purchase or construction of property, plant and equipment or intangible assets, operational commitments related to remote ground terminals, or with subcontractors on long-term construction contracts that we have with customers in the normal course of business. As of the year ended December 31, 2020, we have total short-term purchase obligations of $428 million and total long-term purchase obligations of $196 million. These amounts are based on volumes consistent with anticipated requirements to fulfill purchase orders or contracts for product deliveries received, or expected to be received, from customers.
We also have short and long-term requirements to fund our pension plans within the Space Infrastructure segment. Funding requirements under applicable laws and regulations are a major consideration in making contributions to our pension plans. Failure to satisfy the minimum funding thresholds with respect to appropriate laws and regulations could result in restrictions on our ability to amend the plans or make benefit payments. With respect to our qualified pension plan, we intend to contribute annually not less than the required minimum funding thresholds. In December 2020, we prefunded $16 million related to our qualified pension plan. Due to the December 2020 prefunding, there are no further required contributions for our qualified pension plan for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Our ability to fund our cash needs will depend, in part, on our ability to generate cash in the future, which depends on our future financial results. Our future results are subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative and regulatory factors that may be outside of our control. Our future access to, and the availability of credit on acceptable terms and conditions is impacted by many factors, including capital market liquidity and overall economic conditions.
We believe that our cash from operating activities generated from continuing operations during the year, together with available borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility, will be adequate for the next twelve months to meet our anticipated uses of cash flow, including working capital, capital expenditure, debt service costs, dividend and other commitments. While we intend to reduce debt over time using cash provided by operations, we may also seek to meet long-term debt obligations, if necessary, by obtaining capital from a variety of additional sources or by refinancing existing obligations. These sources include public or private capital markets, bank financings, proceeds from dispositions or other third-party sources.
Summary of cash flows
Operating activities
Cash flows from operating activities can vary significantly from period to period as a result of our working capital requirements, given our portfolio of large construction programs and the timing of milestone receipts and payments with customers and suppliers in the ordinary course of business. Investment in working capital is also necessary to build our business and manage lead times in construction activities. We expect working capital account balances to continue to vary from period to period. We efficiently fund our working capital requirements with the Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below).
Cash provided by operating activities related to continuing operations decreased to $243 million from $258 million, or by $15 million, in the year ended December 31, 2020 from the corresponding period in 2019. This change was primarily driven by favorable changes in working capital for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, offset by the insurance proceeds of $183 million related to the loss of the WorldView-4 satellite received in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash provided by operating activities related to continuing operations increased to $258 million from $114 million, or by $144 million, in the year ended December 31, 2019 from the corresponding period in 2018. The increase was primarily due to net income in 2019, compared to a net loss in 2018, adjusted for non-cash items and insurance proceeds of $183 million related to the loss of the WorldView-4 satellite. The insurance proceeds are included in operating cash flows as they are considered business interruption recovery and represent our satellite’s loss of capacity to produce imagery for sale to our customers.
Investing activities
Cash used in investing activities related to continuing operations increased to $406 million from $6 million, or by $400 million, in the year ended December 31, 2020 from the corresponding period in 2019. The primary investing activities included expenditures on property, plant and equipment of $221 million and $257 million, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and investments in software of $87 million and $57 million, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Property, plant and equipment expenditures in 2020 and 2019 primarily related to the build of our WorldView Legion satellite constellation. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we also used cash of $120 million, net of cash received, to acquire the remaining interest in Vricon. In 2019, these expenditures were partially offset by net proceeds of $280 million from the sale and subsequent leaseback of our properties in Palo Alto, California. California. Cash used in investing activities was also partially offset by a return of capital from discontinued operations of $20 million and $28 million, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash used in investing activities related to continuing operations decreased to $6 million from $129 million, or by $123 million, in the year ended December 31, 2019 from the corresponding period in 2018. The primary investing activities included expenditures on property, plant and equipment of $257 million and $150 million, for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, and investments in software of $57 million and $56 million, for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Property, plant and equipment expenditures in 2019 and 2018 primarily related to the build of our WorldView Legion satellite constellation. In 2019, these expenditures were partially offset by net proceeds of $280 million from the sale and subsequent leaseback of our properties in Palo Alto, California. In 2018, expenditures were partially offset by net proceeds of $68 million from the sale of one of our buildings in Palo Alto, California. Cash used in investing activities in 2019 was also partially offset by a return of capital from discontinued operations of $28 million.
Financing activities
Cash used in financing activities related to continuing operations increased to $555 million from $208 million, or by $347 million, in the year ended December 31, 2020 from the corresponding period in 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in financing activities from continuing operations included net proceeds from the issuance of the 2027 Notes of $147 million offset by debt repayments of $525 million, a repurchase of the 2023 Notes of $169 million, and settlement of securitization liability of $11 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in financing activities from continuing operations included net proceeds from bank borrowings of $980 million offset by debt repayments of $1,115 million, debt issuance costs and fees paid to creditors of $24 million, repurchases of orbital receivables of $24 million and settlement of securitization liability of $20 million
Cash used in financing activities from continuing operations in 2019 increased to $208 million versus cash provided by financing activities of $15 million in 2018, or by $223 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in financing activities from continuing operations included net proceeds from bank borrowings of $980 million offset by debt repayments of $1,115 million, debt issuance costs and fees paid to creditors of $24 million, repurchases of orbital receivables of $24 million and settlement of securitization liability of $20 million. During the year ended December 31, 2018, cash provided by financing activities from continuing operations included proceeds from bank borrowings of $104 million, proceeds from securitization of orbital receivables of $18 million and was offset by debt repayments of $27 million, settlement of securitization liability of $15 million and dividend payments of $65 million.
Long-term debt
The following table summarizes our long-term debt:
Syndicated Credit Facility
As of December 31, 2020, the senior secured syndicated credit facility (the “Original Syndicated Credit Facility”, as amended prior to December 31, 2019, including as described below, the “Syndicated Credit Facility”) is composed of: (i) a senior secured first lien revolving credit facility maturing in December 2023 (the “Revolving Credit Facility”) and (ii) a senior secured first lien term B facility maturing in October 2024 (the “Term Loan B”). The Revolving Credit Facility includes an aggregate $200 million sub limit under which letters of credit can be issued. As of December 31,
2020 and December 31, 2019, we had $31 million and $18 million of issued and undrawn letters of credit outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility.
Senior Secured Notes due 2023
In December 2019, we issued $1.0 billion in principal amount of 2023 Notes in a private placement to institutional buyers. The 2023 Notes were issued at a price of 98% and are recorded as long-term debt in our consolidated financial statements. The 2023 Notes bear interest at the rate of 9.75% per year, payable semi-annually in cash in arrears, for which interest payments commenced in June 2020. The 2023 Notes are guaranteed on a senior secured basis by each of the Company’s existing and future subsidiaries that guarantee the Syndicated Credit Facility.
Senior Secured Notes due 2027
On June 25, 2020, we issued $150 million in principal amount of 2027 Notes in a private placement pursuant to Regulation S under the securities act of 1933, as amended. The 2027 Notes were issued at a price of 98.25% and bear interest at the rate of 7.54% per annum, payable semi-annually in cash in arrears, for which interest payments commenced in December 2020. The 2027 Notes are guaranteed on a senior secured basis by each of the Company’s existing and future subsidiaries that guarantee the Syndicated Credit Facility and the 2023 Notes.
Leaseback Deferred Financing
In December 2019, we completed the sale and subsequent leaseback of our owned properties in Palo Alto, California for proceeds of $291 million. We determined that the leaseback terms were off-market. In accordance with ASC 842 - Leases, we accounted for the excess of the leaseback payments over the present value of market rental payments as additional financing, separate from the lease liability. This resulted in recognition of deferred financing liability of $33 million which is repayable over the 10-year leaseback term.
See Note 12, “Long-term debt and interest expense, net” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1, “Financial Information” for further details on our long-term debt.
Securitization liability
We have in place a revolving securitization facility agreement with an international financial institution. Under the terms of the Syndicated Credit Facility, we may offer to sell eligible orbital receivables from time to time with terms of seven years or less, discounted to face value using prevailing market rates. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company did not sell or repurchase any orbital receivables. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we did not sell any eligible receivables and repurchased $24 million of specifically identified orbital receivables. The orbital receivables were repurchased as a result of our customer transferring the obligation to another entity which did not meet the credit criteria of our lenders. During the year ended December 31, 2018, the Company sold orbital receivables for net proceeds of $18 million and did not repurchase any receivables. These sold orbital receivables were purchased in tranches that span multiple years and include longer-term maturities.
The orbital receivables that were securitized remain on our balance sheet as the accounting criteria for surrendering control of the orbital receivables were not met. The net proceeds received have been recognized as a securitization liability that has been subsequently measured at amortized cost using the effective interest rate method. The securitized orbital receivables and the securitization liabilities are being drawn down as payments are received from customers and passed on to the purchaser of the tranche. We continue to recognize orbital revenue on the orbital receivables that are subject to the securitization transactions and recognize interest expense to accrete the securitization liability.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding foreign exchange sales contracts. As of December 31, 2020, we had certain letters of credit guaranteed by the Syndicated Credit Facility, while indemnified by us. Such arrangements are not expected to have a material effect on our liquidity or capital resources, financial position or results of operations.
We use, from time to time, derivative financial instruments to manage existing foreign currency exposures. We consider the management of financial risks to be an important part of our overall corporate risk management policy. Foreign exchange forward contracts are used to hedge our exposure to currency risk on sales, purchases, cash, net investments and loans denominated in a currency other than the functional currency of our domestic and foreign operations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations discusses our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. For a summary of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2, “Summary of significant accounting policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
We consider the following accounting policies to be critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations because these policies require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments on the part of management in their application. Actual results could differ from our estimates and assumptions, and any such differences could be material to our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition
The recognition and measurement of revenue requires the use of judgments and estimates. Specifically, judgment is used in interpreting complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions and determining when all criteria for revenue recognition have been met.
Space Infrastructure
Revenue in the Space Infrastructure segment is primarily generated from long-term construction contracts. Due to the long-term nature of these contracts, we generally recognize revenue over time using the cost-to-cost method to measure progress. Under the cost-to-cost method, revenue is recognized based on the proportion of total costs incurred to estimated total costs-at-completion ("EAC"). An EAC includes all direct costs and indirect costs directly attributable to a program or allocable based on our program cost pooling arrangements. Estimates regarding the Company’s cost associated with the design, manufacture and delivery of products and services are used in determining the EAC. Changes to an EAC are recorded as a cumulative adjustment to revenue.
Our cost estimation process is based on the professional knowledge of our engineering, program management and financial professionals and draws on their significant experience and judgment. We prepare EACs for our contracts and calculate estimated revenues and costs over the life of our contracts. Since our contracts typically span a period of several years, estimation of revenue, cost, and progress toward completion requires the use of judgment. Judgements and estimates are re-assessed at least quarterly with most estimates being updated on a monthly basis. Adjustments in estimates could have a material impact on revenue recognition based on the significance of the adjustments. Factors considered in these estimates include our historical performance, the availability, productivity and cost of labor, the nature and complexity of work to be performed, availability and cost of materials, components and subcontracts, the risk and impact of delayed performance and the level of indirect cost allocations.
Earth Intelligence
Revenue in the Earth Intelligence segment is generated from imagery and geospatial intelligence service contracts. Revenue from imagery service contracts is recognized based on satellite capacity made available to the customer in a particular period, when imagery is delivered to the customer, or ratably over the subscription period. Many of our imagery service contracts relate to the transfer of a series of distinct goods or services over time for which management has determined are a single performance obligation. Revenue from our geospatial intelligence service contracts is recognized from the rendering of services that compensate us at a cost-plus-fixed-fee, firm fixed price, or on a time and materials basis.
Some of our contracts contain multiple performance obligations, which requires us to estimate the standalone selling price of each performance obligation in order to allocate consideration transferred from the customer. We have not historically been able to use third-party evidence for determining standalone selling price due to the unique nature of our products and services and lack of visibility into competitor pricing. Standalone selling prices are determined based on management estimates that involve significant judgment. Multiple factors are considered based on the nature of the deliverables included within the contract, which include market conditions, competitive landscape, geographic or regional specific factors, internal costs, profit margin objectives and pricing practices used by us.
Pension benefits
The determination of projected benefit obligations and the fair value of plan assets for our pension and pension expense requires the use of estimates and actuarial assumptions. We perform an annual review of our estimates and actuarial assumptions in consultation with our actuaries and investment advisors. We believe that the accounting estimates related to our pension plans are critical accounting estimates because they are highly susceptible to change from period to period based on the performance of plan assets, actuarial valuations and market conditions. The selection of assumptions is based on historical trends and known economic and market conditions at the time of valuation, as well as independent studies of trends performed by our actuaries. However, actual results may differ substantially from the estimates that were based on the critical assumptions.
The principal estimates and assumptions used in the measurement and recording of our pension benefit plans that have a significant effect on our Consolidated Financial Statements are the discount rate and expected return on plan assets.
Discount rates for the pension plans within the Space Infrastructure segment are calculated by actuaries using the Standard FTSE Pension Discount Curve. A singular discount rate is then determined, such that the resulting liability from discounting using the curve matches the liability resulting from discounting the same cash flows using the aforementioned singular discount rate.
The expected return on plan assets is based on our best estimate and input from plan investment advisors and actuaries. The rate is representative of a long-term expected return based on asset mix returns utilizing a 30-year annualized geometric return of net fees.
The pension and other postretirement plan benefits within the Space Infrastructure segment were frozen on December 31, 2013. For further information regarding our pension benefit plans see Note 2, “Summary of significant accounting policies” and Note 19, “Employee benefit plans” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Goodwill
We assess goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. Goodwill is tested annually for impairment as of October 1, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate the carrying value may be impaired. We identify potential impairment by comparing the fair value of each of our reporting units with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess.
We performed a qualitative goodwill assessment over the balance of goodwill held by the Company related to the Earth Intelligence reporting unit as of October 1, 2020. We determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the Earth Intelligence reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, including goodwill.
The Space Infrastructure reporting unit does not have any goodwill.
In circumstances where a qualitative analysis indicates that the fair value of a reporting unit does not exceed its carrying value, a quantitative analysis is performed using an income approach. To assess the reasonableness of our results, we reconcile the sum of the estimated fair values of the reporting units, including our Corporate balance sheet, to the Company’s market capitalization and market value of invested capital as of the date of our annual impairment test. The
income approach utilizes a discounted cash flow approach, which requires the use of significant judgments and estimates, including future cash flows, terminal growth rates, and discount rates. The projections for future cash flows are generated using our strategic growth plan and include assumptions about future revenue growth, operating margins, capital expenditures, income tax rates, and working capital requirements. The terminal growth rate is used to calculate the value of cash flows beyond the last projected period in our discounted cash flow analysis and reflects our best estimates for stable, perpetual growth of our reporting units. The discount rate is an estimate of the overall after-tax rate of return required by a market participant whose weighted average cost of capital includes both debt and equity, including a risk premium. The risk premium is a subjective adjustment that, by its very nature does not include market related data, but instead examines the prospects of the reporting unit relative to the broader industry to determine if there are specific factors, which may make it more “risky” relative to the industry.
The discounted cash flow approach requires management to make certain assumptions based upon information available at the time the valuations are performed. Actual results could differ from these assumptions. Management believes the assumptions used are reflective of what a market participant would have used in calculating fair value considering current economic conditions.
Additional risks for goodwill across all reporting units include, but are not limited to, the risks discussed in Item 1A, “Risk Factors” contained within this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and:
● a decline in our stock price and resulting market capitalization, if we determine the decline is sustained and is indicative of a reduction in the fair value below the carrying value of our reporting units;
● our failure to reach our internal forecasts could impact our ability to achieve our forecasted levels of cash flows and reduce the estimated discounted value of our reporting units;
● adverse technological events that could impact our performance;
● volatility in equity and debt markets resulting in higher discount rates; and
● significant adverse changes in the regulatory environment or markets in which we operate.
It is not possible at this time to determine if an impairment charge would result from these factors. We will continue to monitor our goodwill for potential impairment indicators in future periods.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States, Sweden, and other foreign jurisdictions. We compute the provision for income taxes using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the currently enacted tax rates that are expected to apply in years in which they are expected to be paid for or realized. All deferred income taxes are classified as non-current on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Significant judgments are required in order to determine the realizability of tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we evaluate all significant available positive and negative evidence, including historical operating results, estimates of future sources of taxable income, carry-forward periods available, the existence of prudent and feasible tax planning strategies and other relevant factors.
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“2017 Tax Act”) was enacted into law, which significantly changed U.S. tax law. The 2017 Tax Act, among other things, modified existing interest limitation regulations and created new provisions for the base erosion and anti-abuse tax (“BEAT”) and global intangible low-taxed income inclusion that taxes certain payments between U.S. corporations and their foreign subsidiaries. Beginning in 2022, the 2017 Tax Act also eliminates the option to deduct research and development expenditures currently (and requires taxpayers to amortize such expenditures over five years) and further limits interest deductions. As a result of our net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards, we do not anticipate these provisions to have a significant impact to our immediate cash tax payments, however we will continue to evaluate the impact on our business in future periods.
During 2019 and 2020, additional proposed and final regulations were released to clarify the provisions modified or created within the 2017 Tax Act. On March 27, 2020, the U.S. enacted the CARES Act. The effects of the final regulations and any proposed regulations that are anticipated to be enacted substantially in similar form were included in
our annual results. We continue to examine the impact the CARES Act and the 2017 Tax Act may have on our business in future periods.
For further information regarding our deferred tax assets and liabilities see Note 2, “Summary of significant accounting policies” and Note 21, “Income taxes” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 3, “New standards and interpretations not yet adopted” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
In addition to results reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we use certain non-GAAP financial measures as supplemental indicators of our financial and operating performance. These non-GAAP financial measures include EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA.
We define EBITDA as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, and Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA adjusted for certain items affecting comparability as specified in the calculation. Certain items affecting comparability include restructuring, impairments, satellite insurance recovery, gain (loss) on sale of assets, CEO severance and transaction and integration related expense. Transaction and integration related expense includes costs associated with de-leveraging activities, acquisitions and dispositions and the integration of acquisitions. Management believes that exclusion of these items assists in providing a more complete understanding of our underlying results and trends, and management uses these measures along with the corresponding U.S. GAAP financial measures to manage our business, evaluate our performance compared to prior periods and the marketplace, and to establish operational goals. Adjusted EBITDA is a measure being used as a key element of our incentive compensation plan. The Syndicated Credit Facility also uses Adjusted EBITDA in the determination of our debt leverage covenant ratio. The definition of Adjusted EBITDA in the Syndicated Credit Facility includes a more comprehensive set of adjustments that may result in a different calculation therein.
We believe that these non-GAAP measures, when read in conjunction with our U.S. GAAP results, provide useful information to investors by facilitating the comparability of our ongoing operating results over the periods presented, the ability to identify trends in our underlying business, and the comparison of our operating results against analyst financial models and operating results of other public companies.
The table below reconciles our net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018: