Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations of MBIA Inc. should be read in conjunction with this Form 10-K. In addition, this discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations includes statements of the opinion of MBIA Inc.’s management which may be forward-looking statements made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from historical earnings and those presently anticipated or projected. Refer to “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K for a further discussion of risks and uncertainties.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
INTRODUCTION
MBIA Inc., together with its consolidated subsidiaries, (collectively, “MBIA”, the “Company”, “we”, “us”, or “our”) operates within the financial guarantee insurance industry. MBIA manages its business within three operating segments: 1) United States (“U.S.”) public finance insurance; 2) corporate; and 3) international and structured finance insurance. Our U.S. public finance insurance portfolio is managed through National Public Finance Guarantee Corporation (“National”), our corporate segment is managed through MBIA Inc. and several of its subsidiaries, including our service company, MBIA Services Corporation (“MBIA Services”) and our international and structured finance insurance business is primarily managed through MBIA Insurance Corporation and its subsidiary (“MBIA Corp.”).
National’s primary objectives are to maximize the performance of its existing insured portfolio through effective surveillance and remediation activity and effectively manage its investment portfolio. Our corporate segment consists of general corporate activities, including providing support services to MBIA’s operating subsidiaries and asset and capital management. MBIA Corp.’s primary objectives are to satisfy all claims by its policyholders and to maximize future recoveries, if any, for its senior lending and surplus note holders, and then its preferred stock holders. MBIA Corp. is executing this strategy by, among other things, pursuing various actions focused on maximizing the collection of recoveries and reducing and mitigating potential losses on its insurance exposures. We do not expect National or MBIA Corp. to write significant new business.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
COVID-19
The global outbreak of the novel coronavirus COVID-19 (“COVID-19”), a respiratory disease caused by a new strain of coronavirus, was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization in March of 2020 and continues to affect a wide range of economic activities, domestic and global business and financial markets. In December of 2020, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved the distribution of two COVID-19 vaccines that, once widely adopted and utilized, may materially reduce the impact of COVID-19 going forward, although the impact of the virus including certain new strains remains uncertain. The impact, scope and duration of any new strains of the virus, and the ability to successfully distribute the vaccines, remain largely unknown. The attendant governmental policy and social responses, and economic and financial consequences, continue to be the subject of considerable attention and development. The Company’s employees have continued to work remotely since early March of 2020 when the Company successfully implemented its business continuity plans. We continue to perform all of our traditional operations, including surveilling and, as necessary, remediating, the credits in our insured portfolios.
Insured portfolios
The Company continues to regularly assess the financial impact of the pandemic on its operating insurance companies’ overall insured portfolios. It remains challenging to comprehensively quantify, or account for the impact of the outbreak on most of the specific credits within our insured portfolios, due to, in part, challenges in determining whether and to what extent the underlying credits will be able or willing to continue to meet their debt
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW (continued)
service obligations or avoid long term impairment in this environment. Adverse developments on macroeconomic factors resulting from the spread of COVID-19, including without limitation reduced economic activity and certainty, increased unemployment, increased loan defaults or delinquencies, and increased stress on municipal budgets, including due to reduced tax revenues and the ability to raise taxes or limit spending, could materially and adversely affect the performance of our insured portfolios. The impact of the pandemic on our financial guarantee credits is likely to vary based on the duration of the pandemic, the continued availability of federal aid to state and local governments, and the breadth and speed of economic recovery may all contribute to the ultimate degree and length of the economic stress incurred by the credits in our insured portfolios. Further, any national recession that may result from the pandemic and its aftermath could present additional but yet unknown credit risks to our insured portfolios.
Federal legislation passed to combat the economic impact of the pandemic, principally the $2.7 trillion Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act, included significant aid to public sector issuers including states, territories, healthcare, higher education and transportation issuers. In addition, the Federal Reserve has announced several actions in furtherance of its mandate from Congress to promote the stability of the financial system that are directly supportive of the municipal market. It is premature to assess whether these or any subsequent federal responses will prevent or reduce financial distress in the municipal sector. If the issuers of the obligations in National’s insured portfolio, including the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and its instrumentalities (“Puerto Rico”), are unable to raise taxes, reduce spending, or receive federal assistance, we may experience new or additional losses or impairments on those obligations, which could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and financial results. In December of 2020, Congress passed an additional $900 billion coronavirus relief bill, however, this latest aid package does not include direct funding to states and local governments. In January of 2021, a new $1.9 trillion relief plan was proposed that includes assistance to further stabilize the financial system, help with vaccine distribution, and direct funding for states and local governments.
Certain of MBIA Corp.’s structured finance policies, including those in which the underlying principal obligations are comprised of residential or commercial mortgages and mortgage-backed securities (“MBS”), could be negatively impacted by delays or failures of borrowers to make payments of principal and interest when due, or delays or moratoriums on foreclosures or enforcement actions with respect to delinquent or defaulted mortgages imposed by governmental authorities. MBIA Corp. has recorded significant loss reserves on its residential mortgage-backed securities (“RMBS”) and collateralized debt obligations (“CDO”) exposures, and there can be no assurance that these reserves will be sufficient if the pandemic causes further deterioration to the economy. These transactions are also subject to servicer risks, which relate to problems with the transaction’s servicer that could adversely impact performance of the underlying assets. Additionally, several of our credits, particularly within our international public finance sector, feature large, near term debt-service payments, and there can be no assurance that the liquidity position of MBIA Corp. will enable it to satisfy any claims that arise if the issuers of such credits are unable or unwilling to refinance or repay their obligations. MBIA Corp. has recorded substantial expected recoveries on certain RMBS transactions, and the forbearance options that mortgage borrowers who were facing financial difficulties took advantage of under the CARES Act, may delay or impair collections on these recoveries.
Liquidity
The Company continues to monitor its cash and liquid asset resources using cash forecasting and stress-scenario testing. Members of the Company’s senior management meet regularly to review liquidity metrics, discuss contingency plans and establish target liquidity levels. It remains premature to predict the full impact the pandemic may have on our future liquidity position and needs. Declines in the market value or rating eligibility of assets pledged against the Company’s obligations as a result of credit market deterioration caused by COVID-19 require additional eligible assets to be pledged in order to meet minimum required collateral amounts against these obligations. This could require the Company to sell assets, potentially with substantial losses or use free cash or other assets to meet the collateral requirements, thus negatively impacting the Company’s liquidity position. Associated declines in the yields in our insurance companies’ fixed-income portfolios could materially impact investment income.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW (continued)
2020 Business Developments
The following is a summary of 2020 business developments:
Puerto Rico (Refer to the “U.S. Public Finance Insurance Puerto Rico Exposures” section for additional information on our Puerto Rico exposures)
•
During 2020, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and certain of its instrumentalities (“Puerto Rico”) defaulted on scheduled debt service for National insured bonds and National paid gross claims in the aggregate of $391 million. On January 1, 2021, Puerto Rico also defaulted on scheduled debt service for National insured bonds and National paid gross claim payments in the aggregate of $51 million. As of December 31, 2020, National had $2.9 billion of debt service outstanding related to Puerto Rico.
•
In February of 2020, the Financial Oversight and Management Board (“Oversight Board”) created under the Puerto Rico Oversight, Management, and Economic Stability Act (“PROMESA”) filed a plan and disclosure statement in the Puerto Rico Commonwealth GO (“GO”) Title III case based on the Plan Support Agreement (“PSA”) previously announced in mid-2019 with certain GO and Puerto Rico Public Buildings Authority (“PBA”) bondholders. National was not a party to the PSA. Throughout 2020 and into 2021, at the urging of the Court and the Oversight Board, the PSA parties, as well as additional parties including monoline insurance companies who were not prior parties to the PSA, engaged in discussions on new economics for the PSA. On February 10, 2021, the Oversight Board filed a motion stating it had an agreement in principle with certain PSA parties, not including the monoline insurance companies, representing approximately $7 billion in GO and PBA Bonds, and requested until March 8, 2021 to file an amended plan. The Court approved the request. On February 22, 2021, National agreed to join a revised PSA, dated as of February 22, 2021 (the “2021 PSA”), among the Oversight Board, certain holders of GO Bonds and PBA Bonds, Assured Guaranty Corp. and Assured Guaranty Municipal Corp, and Syncora Guarantee Inc. in connection with the GO and PBA Title III cases. The 2021 PSA provides that, among other things, National shall receive a pro rata share of allocable cash, newly issued General Obligation bonds, a contingent value instrument and certain fees. National has the right to unilaterally terminate its participation in the 2021 PSA on or prior to March 31, 2021. The 2021 PSA contemplates a plan becoming effective on or before December 15, 2021; however there can be no assurance that such a plan will ever become effective, or on the contemplated timeline.
•
In the Puerto Rico Highway and Transportation Authority (“HTA”) Title III case, in September of 2020, the Court entered an order denying the motion of National and other monolines seeking to lift the automatic stay to protect HTA bondholders’ property interests in certain designated cash flows. On February 4, 2021, the First Circuit Court of Appeals heard argument on the monolines’ appeal of the Bankruptcy Court’s ruling. A decision is pending. In the event that National does not terminate its participation in the 2021 PSA on or prior to March 31, 2021, the Oversight Board and National shall jointly request the entry of an order in the Title III court staying National’s actions to lift the automatic stay in the GO and HTA Title III cases currently before the First Circuit Court of Appeals, and National shall take no further action with respect to the lift stay subject to the Commonwealth plan becoming effective.
•
In the second half of 2020, the Oversight Board was reconstituted with the reappointment of three existing members and appointment of four new members for three year terms, with the newly elected Governor sitting as an ex officio
member. This reconstitution of the board was confirmed in early 2021.
Credit Suisse
In November of 2020, the court overseeing MBIA Corp.’s litigation against Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC and DLJ Mortgage Capital, Inc. (collectively, “Credit Suisse”), issued a decision declaring that MBIA Corp. had succeeded at trial in establishing that a majority of the loans in the HEMT 2007-2 RMBS transaction sponsored by Credit Suisse were ineligible. In January of 2021, the Court issued an order declaring that Credit Suisse was liable to MBIA Corp. for approximately $604 million in damages. On February 9, 2021, the parties to the litigation entered into a settlement agreement pursuant to which Credit Suisse paid MBIA Corp. $600 million, and on February 11, 2021, the court entered an order dismissing the case. Refer to “Note 6: Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of our Credit Suisse put-back claims.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW (continued)
Financial Highlights
The following table presents our financial highlights. A detailed discussion of our financial results is presented within the “Results of Operations” section included herein. Refer to the “Capital Resources-Insurance Statutory Capital” section for a discussion of National’s and MBIA Insurance Corporation’s capital position under statutory accounting principles (“U.S. STAT”).
(1)-Adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted net income (loss) per diluted share are non-GAAP measures. Refer to the following “Results of Operations” section for a discussion of adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted net income (loss) per diluted share and a reconciliation of GAAP net income (loss) to adjusted net income (loss) and GAAP net income (loss) per diluted share to adjusted net income (loss) per diluted share.
Economic and Financial Market Trends
The U.S. economy continued to face significant challenges during the fourth quarter of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic which has remained an ongoing public health crisis around the world. The persistent spread of the coronavirus and the governmental measures taken to contain it have remained a burden on the economy. Some financial conditions have improved due to measures taken by Congress and the Federal Reserve to support the economy and enhance access to credit for U.S. households and businesses, however, economic activity and employment remain well below pre-pandemic levels. The path toward economic recovery is still significantly dependent on the course of the virus throughout the country which will impact economic activity and employment in the short term and may continue to pose meaningful risks to these measures over the medium term. Inflation remained low due to overall weak consumer demand and low oil prices.
Also, for 2021, it is expected that there will be government policy shifts as a result of the new presidential administration and a democratic majority in Congress. However, this will still largely depend on the nation’s handling of the COVID-19 pandemic including the significant challenge of managing the largest vaccination campaign in history.
The Federal Open Market Committee maintained its target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1
⁄4
percent at its January 2021 meeting. The Federal Reserve has committed to keeping interest rates at or near zero in order to lower borrowing costs until they are confident that the economy has stabilized and the health crisis has subsided. Furthermore, the Federal Reserve has remained committed to using all of its resources and tools to support the economy by assisting households, employers, and state and local governments during the coronavirus pandemic.
Economic and financial market trends could impact the Company’s financial results. As a result of the pandemic, many states and municipalities will experience financial distress through delayed tax collections, inability to reduce spending and not receiving timely financial assistance. Economic deterioration at the state and local level weakens the credit quality of the issuers of our insured municipal bonds, reduces the performance of our insured U.S. public finance portfolio and could increase the amount of National’s potential incurred losses. In addition, lower interest rates could result in decreased returns on our Company’s investment portfolios. Refer to the “COVID-19” section above for further information about the pandemic.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), which requires the use of estimates and assumptions. Refer to “Note 2: Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of our significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES (continued)
The following accounting estimates are viewed by management to be critical because they require significant judgment on the part of management. Management has discussed and reviewed the development, selection, and disclosure of critical accounting estimates with the Company’s Audit Committee. Financial results could be materially different if other methodologies were used or if management modified its assumptions.
Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves
Loss and loss adjustment expense (“LAE”) reserves are established by loss reserve committees in each of our major operating insurance companies (National and MBIA Insurance Corporation) and reviewed by our executive Loss Reserve Committee, which consists of members of senior management. Loss and LAE reserves include case basis reserves and accruals for LAE incurred with respect to non-derivative financial guarantees. Case basis reserves represent our estimate of expected losses to be paid under insurance contracts, net of expected recoveries, on insured obligations that have defaulted or are expected to default. These reserves require the use of judgment and estimates with respect to the occurrence, timing and amount of paid losses and recoveries on insured obligations. Given that the reserves are based on such estimates and assumptions, there can be no assurance that the actual ultimate losses will not be greater than or less than such estimates, resulting in the Company recognizing additional or reversing excess loss and LAE reserves through earnings.
We take into account a number of variables in establishing specific case basis reserves for individual policies that depend primarily on the nature of the underlying insured obligation. These variables include the nature and creditworthiness of the issuers of the insured obligations, expected recovery rates on unsecured obligations, the projected cash flow or market value of any assets pledged as collateral on secured obligations, and the expected rates of recovery, cash flow or market values on such obligations or assets. Factors that may affect the actual ultimate realized losses for any policy include economic conditions and trends, political developments, the extent to which sellers/servicers comply with the representations or warranties made in connection therewith, levels of interest rates, borrower behavior, the default rate and salvage values of specific collateral, and our ability to enforce contractual rights through litigation and otherwise. Our remediation strategy for an insured obligation that has defaulted or is expected to default may also have an impact on our loss reserves.
In establishing case basis loss reserves, we calculate the present value of probability-weighted estimated loss payments, net of estimated recoveries, using a discount rate equal to the risk-free rate applicable to the currency and the weighted average remaining life of the insurance contract. Yields on U.S. Treasury offerings are used to discount loss reserves denominated in U.S. dollars, which represent the majority of our loss reserves. Similarly, yields on foreign government offerings are used to discount loss reserves denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar.
Refer to “Note 6: Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our loss reserves and recoveries, including critical accounting estimates used in the determination of these amounts.
Valuation of Financial Instruments
We have categorized our financial instruments measured at fair value into the three-level hierarchy according to accounting guidance for fair value measurements and disclosures based on the significance of pricing inputs to the measurement in its entirety. Fair value measurements of financial instruments that use quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities are generally categorized as Level 1, fair value measurements of financial instruments that use quoted prices in markets that are not active where significant inputs are observable are generally categorized as Level 2, and fair value measurements of financial instruments where significant inputs are not observable are generally categorized as Level 3. We categorize our financial instruments based on the lowest level category at which we can generate reliable fair values. The determination of reliability requires management to exercise judgment. The degree of judgment used to determine the fair values of financial instruments generally correlates to the degree that pricing is not observable.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES (continued)
The fair value measurements of financial instruments held or issued by the Company are determined through the use of observable market data when available. Market data is obtained from a variety of third-party sources, including dealer quotes. If dealer quotes are not available for an instrument that is infrequently traded, we use alternate valuation methods, including either dealer quotes for similar contracts or modeling using market data inputs. The use of alternate valuation methods generally requires considerable judgment in the application of estimates and assumptions and changes to these variables may produce materially different values.
The fair value pricing of assets and liabilities is a function of many components which include interest rate risk, market risk, liquidity risk and credit risk. For financial instruments that are internally valued by the Company, as well as those for which the Company uses broker quotes or pricing services, credit risk is typically incorporated by using appropriate credit spreads or discount rates as inputs. Substantially all of the Company’s investments carried and reported at fair value are priced by independent third parties, including pricing services and brokers.
Instruments that trade infrequently and, therefore, have little or no price transparency are classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. Also included in Level 3 are financial instruments that have significant unobservable inputs deemed significant to the instrument’s overall fair value. Level 3 assets represented approximately 20% and 15% of total assets measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Level 3 liabilities represented approximately 68% and 72% of total liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Refer to “Note 7: Fair Value of Financial Instruments” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about our financial assets and liabilities that are accounted for at fair value, including valuation techniques and significant inputs used to estimate fair values.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Refer to “Note 3: Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of accounting guidance recently adopted by the Company.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Summary of Consolidated Results
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated financial results for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
2020 vs. 2019
The increase in consolidated total revenues was primarily due to favorable changes in revenues of consolidated variable interest entities (“VIEs”) and in credit losses on investments. These favorable changes were partially offset by unfavorable changes in net gains (losses) on financial instruments at fair value and foreign exchange and net investment income. The favorable change in revenues of consolidated VIEs was primarily due to higher gains from put-back claims on ineligible mortgage loans within a second-lien RMBS VIE in 2020. Credit losses on investments in 2019 primarily related to adverse financial conditions of an issuer of a security, which was sold during the first quarter of 2020. The unfavorable change in net gains (losses) on financial instruments at fair value and foreign exchange was primarily due to realized gains on the sales of uninsured Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority (“PREPA”) bonds and Puerto Rico Sales Tax Financing Corporation (“COFINA”) bonds in 2019. The unfavorable change in net investment income was primarily due to lower average asset balances in 2020, primarily due to claim payments and purchases of MBIA Inc. common shares.
Consolidated total expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included net insurance loss and LAE of $530 million and $242 million, respectively. The increase in loss and LAE was primarily due to an increase in losses on certain Puerto Rico credits and a decrease in expected salvage collections from insured CDOs. This increase in loss and LAE was partially offset by the impact of declines in the risk-free rates during 2020, which increased the present value of recoveries on certain Puerto Rico credits. Refer to the following “Loss and Loss Adjustment Expenses” sections of National and MBIA Corp. for additional information on our insurance losses and LAE.
Non-GAAP Adjusted Net Income (Loss)
In addition to our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, we also analyze the operating performance of the Company using adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted net income (loss) per diluted common share, both non-GAAP measures. Since adjusted net income (loss) is used by management to assess performance and make business decisions, we consider adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted net income (loss) per diluted common share fundamental measures of periodic financial performance which are useful in understanding our results. Adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted net income (loss) per diluted common share are not substitutes for net income (loss) and net income (loss) per diluted common share determined in accordance with GAAP, and our definitions of adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted net income (loss) per diluted common share may differ from those used by other companies.
Adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted net income (loss) per diluted common share include the after-tax results of the Company and remove the after-tax results of our international and structured finance insurance segment, comprising the results of MBIA Corp. which given its capital structure and business prospects, we do not expect its financial performance to have a material economic impact on MBIA Inc., as well as the following:
•
Mark-to-market gains (losses) on financial instruments
- We remove the impact of mark-to-market gains (losses) on financial instruments that primarily include interest rate swaps and hybrid financial instruments. These amounts fluctuate based on market interest rates, credit spreads and other market factors.
•
Foreign exchange gains (losses)
- We remove foreign exchange gains (losses) on the remeasurement of certain assets and liabilities and transactions in non-functional currencies. Given the possibility of volatility in foreign exchange markets, we exclude the impact of foreign exchange gains (losses) to provide a measurement of comparability of adjusted net income (loss).
•
Net gains (losses) on sales of investments, impaired securities and extinguishment of debt
- We remove gains (losses) on the sale of investments, net investment losses related to impairment of securities and net gains (losses) on extinguishment of debt since the timing of these transactions are subject to management’s assessment of market opportunities and conditions and capital liquidity positions.
•
Income taxes
- The Company applies a zero effective tax rate for federal income tax purposes to its pre-tax adjustments, if applicable.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
The following table presents our adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted net income (loss) per diluted common share and provides a reconciliation of GAAP net income (loss) to adjusted net income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1)-Reported within “Net gains (losses) on financial instruments at fair value and foreign exchange” on the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
(2)-Reported within “Provision (benefit) for income taxes” on the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
(3)-Adjusted net income (loss) per diluted common share is calculated by taking adjusted net income (loss) divided by GAAP weighted average number of diluted common shares outstanding.
Book Value Adjustments Per Share
In addition to GAAP book value per share, for internal purposes management also analyzes adjusted book value (“ABV”) per share, changes to which we view as an important indicator of financial performance. ABV is also used by management in certain components of management’s compensation. Since many of the Company’s investors and analysts continue to use ABV to evaluate MBIA’s share price and as the basis for their investment decisions, we present GAAP book value per share as well as the individual adjustments used by management to calculate its internal ABV metric.
Management adjusts GAAP book value to remove the book value of MBIA Corp. and for certain items which the Company believes will reverse from GAAP book value through GAAP earnings and comprehensive income, as well as add in the impact of certain items which the Company believes will be realized in GAAP book value in future periods. The Company has limited such adjustments to those items that it deems to be important to fundamental value and performance and for which the likelihood and amount can be reasonably estimated. The following provides a description of management’s adjustments to GAAP book value:
•
Negative Book value of MBIA Corp.
- We remove the negative book value of MBIA Corp. based on our view that given MBIA Corp.’s current financial condition, the regulatory regime in which it operates, the priority given to its policyholders, surplus note holders and preferred stock holders with respect to the distribution of assets, and its legal structure, it is not and will not likely be in a position to upstream any economic benefit to MBIA Inc. Further, MBIA Inc. does not face any material financial liability arising from MBIA Corp.
•
Net unrealized (gains) losses on available-for-sale (“AFS”) securities excluding MBIA Corp.
- We remove net unrealized gains and losses on AFS securities recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income since they will reverse from GAAP book value when such securities mature. Gains and losses from sales and impairments of AFS securities are recorded in book value through earnings.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
•
Net unearned premium revenue in excess of expected losses of National
- We include net unearned premium revenue in excess of expected losses. Net unearned premium revenue in excess of expected losses consists of the financial guarantee unearned premium revenue of National in excess of expected insurance losses, net of reinsurance and deferred acquisition costs. In accordance with GAAP, a loss reserve on a financial guarantee policy is only recorded when expected losses exceed the amount of unearned premium revenue recorded for that policy. As a result, we only add to GAAP book value the amount of unearned premium revenue in excess of expected losses for each policy in order to reflect the full amount of our expected losses. The Company’s net unearned premium revenue will be recognized in GAAP book value in future periods, however, actual amounts could differ from estimated amounts due to such factors as credit defaults and policy terminations, among others.
Since the Company has a full valuation allowance against its net deferred tax asset, the book value per share adjustments were adjusted by applying a zero effective tax rate.
The following table provides the Company’s GAAP book value per share and management’s adjustments to book value per share used in our internal analysis:
U.S. Public Finance Insurance
Our U.S. public finance insurance portfolio is managed through National. The financial guarantees issued by National provide unconditional and irrevocable guarantees of the payment of the principal of, and interest or other amounts owing on, insured obligations when due or, in the event National has exercised, at its discretion, the right to accelerate the payment under its policies upon the acceleration of the underlying insured obligations due to default or otherwise. National’s guarantees insure municipal bonds, including tax-exempt and taxable indebtedness of U.S. political subdivisions, as well as utility districts, airports, healthcare institutions, higher educational facilities, housing authorities and other similar agencies and obligations issued by private entities that finance projects that serve a substantial public purpose. Municipal bonds and privately issued bonds used for the financing of public purpose projects are generally supported by taxes, assessments, user fees or tariffs related to the use of these projects, lease payments or other similar types of revenue streams. As of December 31, 2020, National had total insured gross par outstanding of $41.9 billion.
National continues to monitor and remediate its existing insured portfolio and may also pursue strategic alternatives that could enhance shareholder value. Some state and local governments and territory obligors that National insures are experiencing financial and budgetary stress which may be exacerbated by COVID-19. As a result of COVID-19, we have increased our monitoring of certain credits. Financial and budgetary stress could lead to an increase in defaults by such entities on the payment of their obligations and losses or impairments on a greater number of the Company’s insured transactions. In particular, Puerto Rico had been experiencing significant fiscal stress and constrained liquidity, and in response, Congress passed PROMESA, which established the Oversight Board vested with the sole power to certify fiscal plans for Puerto Rico. Refer to the “U.S. Public Finance Insurance Puerto Rico Exposures” section for additional information on PROMESA and our Puerto Rico exposures. We continue to monitor and analyze these situations and other stressed credits closely, and the overall extent and duration of stress affecting our insured credits remains uncertain.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
The following table presents our U.S. public finance insurance segment results for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
n/m-Percent change not meaningful.
NET PREMIUMS EARNED Net premiums earned on financial guarantees represent gross premiums earned net of premiums ceded to reinsurers, and include scheduled premium earnings and premium earnings from refunded issues. The decrease in net premiums earned for 2020 compared with 2019 resulted from a $7 million decrease in scheduled premiums earned and a $2 million decrease in refunded premiums earned. Refunding activity over the past several years has accelerated premium earnings in prior years and reduced the amount of scheduled premiums that would have been earned in the current year. In addition, net premiums earned during 2019 included the elimination of $19 million due to the Company consolidating VIEs related to the COFINA transaction.
NET INVESTMENT INCOME The decrease in net investment income for 2020 compared with 2019 was primarily due to a lower average asset base resulting from claim payments and purchases of MBIA Inc. common shares.
NET GAINS (LOSSES) ON FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AT FAIR VALUE AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE For 2020, net gains (losses) on financial instruments at fair value and foreign exchange included gains from the sales of securities from the ongoing management of our U.S. public finance investment portfolio. For 2019, net gains (losses) on financial instruments at fair value and foreign exchange primarily comprised realized gains from the sales of uninsured PREPA bonds and from the COFINA bond exchange.
NET INVESTMENT LOSSES RELATED TO OTHER-THAN-TEMPORARY IMPAIRMENTS Net investment losses related to other-than-temporary-investments (“OTTI”) for 2019 were primarily related to an impaired security for which a credit loss was recognized in earnings. This OTTI resulted from adverse financial conditions of the issuer. This impaired security was sold during the first quarter of 2020.
REVENUES OF CONSOLIDATED VIEs VIEs within our U.S. public finance insurance segment included the National Custodial Trusts (the “Trusts”) established in connection with the COFINA Plan of Adjustment. For 2019, total revenues of consolidated VIEs were $21 million. This was primarily due to net gains from increases in the fair values of collateral since consolidating the VIEs, partially offset by a loss on the initial consolidation of the VIEs in February of 2019. We elected to record at fair value certain instruments that are consolidated under accounting
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
guidance for consolidation of VIEs and, as such, changes in fair values of these instruments, which included investments held and debt issued, were reflected in earnings. During 2019, all remaining investment assets of the Trusts were sold and National elected to make a voluntary additional payment with the effect of simultaneously reducing the Trust’s debt obligations to zero and satisfying in full the obligations under its original insurance policies.
LOSSES AND LOSS ADJUSTMENT EXPENSES For the year ended December 31, 2020, losses and LAE primarily related to certain Puerto Rico exposures as well as investor owned utility exposure. For the year ended December 31, 2019, losses and LAE primarily related to certain Puerto Rico exposures.
The following table presents information about our U.S. public finance insurance loss recoverable assets and loss and LAE reserves liabilities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1)-Reported within “Other assets” on our consolidated balance sheets.
(2)-Reported within “Other liabilities” on our consolidated balance sheets.
n/m-Percent change not meaningful.
The insurance loss recoverable as of December 31, 2020 increased compared with December 31, 2019 primarily as a result of expected recoveries related to claims paid on certain Puerto Rico exposures and changes in discount rates used to present value those future expected recoveries. Loss and LAE reserves as of December 31, 2020 increased compared with December 31, 2019 primarily due to an increase in expected net payments on our Puerto Rico exposures. This was partially offset by actual payments made and the impact of changes in discount rates used to present value the net future expected payments related to certain Puerto Rico exposures.
POLICY ACQUISITION COSTS AND OPERATING EXPENSES U.S. public finance insurance segment expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are presented in the following table:
Gross expenses represent total insurance expenses before the deferral of any policy acquisition costs.
The decrease in the amortization of deferred acquisition costs in 2020 was due to higher refunding activity in prior years. When an insured obligation refunds, we accelerate any remaining deferred acquisition costs associated with the policy covering the refunded insured obligation. We did not defer a material amount of policy acquisition costs during 2020 or 2019.
INSURED PORTFOLIO EXPOSURE Financial guarantee insurance companies use a variety of approaches to assess the underlying credit risk profile of their insured portfolios. National uses both an internally developed
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
credit rating system as well as third-party rating sources in the analysis of credit quality measures of its insured portfolio. In evaluating credit risk, we obtain, when available, the underlying rating(s) of the insured obligation before the benefit of National’s insurance policy from nationally recognized rating agencies, Moody’s Investor Services (“Moody’s”) and Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC (“S&P”). Other companies within the financial guarantee industry may report credit quality information based upon internal ratings that would not be comparable to our presentation. We maintain internal ratings on our entire portfolio, and our ratings may be higher or lower than the underlying ratings assigned by Moody’s or S&P.
The following table presents the credit quality distribution of National’s U.S. public finance outstanding gross par insured as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Capital appreciation bonds (“CABs”) are reported at the par amount at the time of issuance of the insurance policy. All ratings are as of the period presented and represent S&P underlying ratings, where available. If transactions are not rated by S&P, a Moody’s equivalent rating is used. If transactions are not rated by either S&P or Moody’s, an internal equivalent rating is used.
U.S. Public Finance Insurance Puerto Rico Exposures
The following is a summary of exposures within the insured portfolio of our U.S. public finance insurance segment related to Puerto Rico as of December 31, 2020.
(1)-Additionally secured by the guarantee of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
(2)-Includes CABs that reflect the gross par amount at the time of issuance of the insurance policy. As of December 31, 2020, gross par outstanding plus CABs accreted interest was $43 million.
On June 30, 2016, PROMESA was signed into law by the President of the United States. PROMESA provides for the creation of the Oversight Board with powers relating to the development and implementation of a fiscal plan for the Commonwealth and each of its instrumentalities as well as a court-supervised Title III process that allows Puerto Rico to restructure its debt if voluntary agreements cannot be reached with creditors through a collective action process. Following the resignation and replacement of several Oversight Board members, the Oversight
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
Board has been reconstituted with four new members while three existing members have been reappointed by the President for another three year term. The newly elected Governor of Puerto Rico has appointed himself as a non-voting member of the reconstituted Oversight Board.
On May 3, 2017, the Oversight Board certified and filed a petition under Title III of PROMESA for Puerto Rico with the District Court of Puerto Rico thereby commencing a bankruptcy-like case for the Commonwealth. Under separate petitions, the Oversight Board subsequently commenced Title III proceedings for COFINA, PRHTA, PREPA and PBA on May 5, 2017, May 21, 2017, July 2, 2017 and September 27, 2019, respectively. One of the proceedings was resolved on February 4, 2019, when the District of Puerto Rico entered the order confirming the Third Amended Title III Plan of Adjustment for COFINA. The plan became effective on February 12, 2019, and as of December 31, 2019, we no longer have exposure to COFINA. There can be no assurance that the other Title III proceedings will be resolved with similar outcomes.
As a result of prior defaults, various stays and the Title III cases, Puerto Rico failed to make certain scheduled debt service payments for National insured bonds. As a consequence, National has paid gross claims in the aggregate amount of $1.6 billion relating to GO bonds, PBA bonds, PREPA bonds and PRHTA bonds through December 31, 2020, inclusive of the commutation payment and the additional payment in the amount of $66 million on December 17, 2019 related to COFINA. Subsequently, National paid gross claims in the aggregate amount of approximately $51 million relating to debt service due on January 1, 2021.
On May 2, 2019, the Oversight Board and the Official Committee of Unsecured Creditors of all Title III Debtors (other than COFINA) (the “Committee”) filed lien avoidance adversary complaints against several hundred defendants, including National, challenging the existence, extent, and enforceability of GO bondholders’ liens. After an approximately five-month stay of litigation entered by the Court on July 24, 2019, these adversary proceedings resumed pursuant to an interim schedule entered by the Court in December 2019. On February 5, 2020, National and Assured Guaranty Municipal Corp. filed a motion to dismiss the adversary proceeding. The adversary proceeding hearing was stayed indefinitely by further order of the Court.
On June 17, 2019, the Oversight Board announced it had reached a plan support agreement (“PSA”) with certain Commonwealth GO bondholders and guaranteed PBA bondholders on a framework for a plan of adjustment to resolve $35.0 billion worth of debt and unsecured claims against the Commonwealth. On February 9, 2020, the Oversight Board posted an amended PSA. National was not a party to the amended PSA, and the Commonwealth also did not support the amended PSA. On February 10, 2021, following several months of Court recommended mediation, the Oversight Board filed a motion stating it had an agreement in principle with certain PSA parties representing approximately $7 billion in GO and PBA Bonds, and requested until March 8, 2021 to file an amended plan. The Court approved the request. On February 22, 2021, National agreed to join a revised PSA, dated as of February 22, 2021 (the “2021 PSA”), among the Oversight Board, certain holders of GO Bonds and PBA Bonds, Assured Guaranty Corp. and Assured Guaranty Municipal Corp, and Syncora Guarantee Inc. in connection with the GO and PBA Title III cases. The 2021 PSA provides that, among other things, National shall receive a pro rata share of allocable cash, newly issued General Obligation bonds, a contingent value instrument and certain fees. National has the right to unilaterally terminate its participation in the 2021 PSA on or prior to March 31, 2021. The 2021 PSA contemplates a plan becoming effective on or before December 15, 2021; however there can be no assurance that such a plan will ever become effective, or on the contemplated timeline. In the event that National does not terminate its participation in the 2021 PSA on or prior to March 31, 2021, the Oversight Board and National shall jointly request the entry of an order in the Title III court staying National’s actions to lift the automatic stay in the GO and HTA Title III cases and to appoint a trustee in the HTA Title III case pursuant to Section 926, both currently before the First Circuit Court of Appeals, together with other actions related to the clawback of HTA funds from the Commonwealth, and National shall take no further action with respect to those proceedings subject to the Commonwealth plan becoming effective.
On July 24, 2019, Judge Swain entered an order staying certain adversary proceedings and contested matters until December 31, 2019, and imposing mandatory mediation under Judge Houser. Among the matters stayed in which National is either a party in interest or intervenor are the (i) PBA adversary proceeding seeking to recharacterize the PBA bonds as financings and (ii) GO adversary and HTA adversary proceedings, both challenging bondholder liens. Pursuant to interim schedules entered by the Court in December 2019, the PBA
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
adversary proceeding and the HTA adversary proceeding were to remain stayed until March 11, 2020, but the Court subsequently stayed all such adversary proceedings indefinitely subject to the progress of the GO confirmation process.
PBA
On December 21, 2018, the Oversight Board filed an adversary complaint seeking to disallow the PBA’s administrative rent claims against the Commonwealth. The PBA bonds are payable from the rent the Commonwealth pays under its lease agreements with the PBA. The Oversight Board alleges that the Commonwealth has no obligation to make rent payments under section 365(d)(3) of the Bankruptcy Code and that the PBA is not entitled to a priority administrative expense claim under the leases. On April 16, 2019, Judge Swain entered an order setting a discovery schedule. The proceeding is currently stayed.
On September 27, 2019, the Oversight Board filed a Title III petition for the PBA.
PREPA
National’s largest exposure to Puerto Rico, by gross par outstanding, is to PREPA.
On October 3, 2018, National, together with Assured Guaranty Corp., Assured Guaranty Municipal Corp., and Syncora Guarantee Inc. (collectively, “Movants”) filed a motion in the Title III case for PREPA for relief from the automatic stay to allow Movants to exercise their statutory right to have a receiver appointed at PREPA (the “Receiver Motion”). This motion is stayed pending a resolution of the 9019 Order, discussed below.
On May 3, 2019, PREPA, the Oversight Board, the Puerto Rico Fiscal Agency and Financial Advisory Authority (“AAFAF”), the Ad Hoc Group of PREPA bondholders (the “Ad Hoc Group”), and Assured Guaranty Corp. and Assured Guaranty Municipal Corp. (“Assured”) entered into the RSA which was amended on September 9, 2019 to include National and Syncora Guarantee, Inc. (“Syncora”) as supporting parties. Approximately 90% of PREPA’s bondholders have joined the RSA.
The RSA initially contemplated the filing of a plan of adjustment for PREPA by March 31, 2020; the timing of that action is now uncertain.
Pursuant to the RSA, the Oversight Board filed a Rule 9019 motion with the Title III court in May 2019 seeking approval of the RSA (the “Settlement Motion”) and a Motion to Dismiss the Receiver Motion. The RSA requires, upon entry of the order approving the Settlement Motion (the “9019 Order”), that Movants will withdraw the Receiver Motion, and the Ad Hoc Group will support such withdrawal. The Receiver Motion and the Motion to Dismiss the Receiver Motion have been delayed several times, and most recently were adjourned due to the outbreak of COVID-19 until further notice. The debt restructuring contemplated by the RSA will not be effective until (i) confirmation of a plan of adjustment under the Puerto Rico Oversight, Management and Economic Stability Act (“PROMESA”), (ii) negotiation and consummation of definitive documentation and legal opinions, (iii) enactment and implementation of supportive Puerto Rico legislation and (iv) receipt of Puerto Rico regulatory approval, each of which outcome is uncertain and subject to varying degrees of risk. In addition, the restructuring the RSA contemplates has received criticism from various parties including members of the Puerto Rico government and other stakeholders. This opposition could adversely affect the ability of the Oversight Board and RSA Parties to obtain the Rule 9019 Order and approve the RSA.
As contemplated by the RSA, on July 1, 2019 the Oversight Board and AAFAF also filed an adversary complaint against the Trustee for the PREPA Bonds, challenging the validity of the liens arising under the Trust Agreement that secure insured obligations of National. The adversary proceeding is stayed until the earlier of (a) 60 days after the Court denies the 9019 Motion, (b) consummation of a Plan, (c) 60 days after the filing by the Oversight Board and AAFAF of a Litigation Notice, or (d) further order of the Court.
Certain objectors to the RSA have filed adversary proceedings challenging the payment priority arising under the PREPA Trust Agreement, alleging that they are entitled to be paid in full before National and other bondholders
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
have any lien on or recourse to PREPA’s assets, including pursuant to the RSA. All litigation on this matter has been stayed until the Court places the 9019 Motion back on the calendar for hearing.
On June 22, 2020, the Oversight Board and the Puerto Rico P3 Authority announced an agreement and contract with LUMA Energy, LLC (“LUMA”) which calls for LUMA to take full responsibility for the operation and maintenance of PREPA’s transmission and distribution system; the contract runs for 15-years following a transition period expected to take 12 months. PREPA retains ownership of the system as well as responsibility for the power generation system.
On September 18, 2020, FEMA and the PR COR3 Authority announced the commitment by FEMA to provide approximately $11.6 billion (net of the required 10% cost share) to fund projects built by PREPA and the PR Department of Education; approximately $9.4 billion (net) of this amount is designated for PREPA.
PRHTA
On May 20, 2019, the Oversight Board and the Committee filed a lien avoidance adversary complaint against fiscal agents, holders, and insurers of certain PRHTA bonds, including National. The complaint challenges the extent and enforceability of certain security interests in PRHTA’s revenues. Pursuant to an interim schedule entered by the Court in December 2019, the Court has stayed the proceedings, with the understanding that the issues raised in these proceedings would be addressed in new adversary proceedings filed by the Oversight Board on January 16, 2020. Subsequent to those filings, these proceedings were stayed by order of the Court.
On August 23, 2019, National and Assured (the “HTA Movants”) filed a motion in the Title III case for PRHTA for adequate protection or, in the alternative, relief from the automatic stay. The motion argues that the revenues securing the bonds insured by HTA Movants are being improperly diverted away from PRHTA, despite such revenues being the exclusive property of PRHTA and its bondholders. Pursuant to an interim schedule entered by the Court in December 2019, the HTA Movants, along with Ambac Assurance Corporation and FGIC, amended the motion on January 16, 2020. Following a preliminary hearing held on June 4, 2020, on July 2, 2020, Judge Swain held that the Movants had failed to satisfy its burden of presenting a colorable claim that they had a statutory, contractual or equitable lien on HTA Revenues, including Excise Taxes or Toll Revenues. On September 9, 2020, the Court entered a final order denying the HTA lift stay motion, finding a balancing of factors does not support stay relief. National filed a notice of appeal to the First Circuit on September 23, 2020. The First Circuit heard the appeal on February 4, 2021. A decision is pending. In the event that National does not terminate its participation in the 2021 PSA with respect to the Commonwealth plan on or prior to March 31, 2021, the Oversight Board and National shall jointly request the entry of an order in the Title III court staying National’s actions to lift the automatic stay in the GO and HTA Title III cases, and National shall take no further action subject to a plan resolving the GO Title III case becoming effective.
Status of Puerto Rico’s Fiscal Plans
In January of 2020, the Oversight Board requested that the Puerto Rico government submit a proposed updated Fiscal Plan for the Commonwealth in light of recent and recurring earthquakes and considering Puerto Rico’s current state of emergency. The Commonwealth submitted a revised fiscal plan on May 3, 2020. On May 27, 2020, after deeming the Puerto Rico government’s fiscal plan as non-compliant, the Oversight Board certified its own revised fiscal plan for the Commonwealth. The revised fiscal plan reflects a significantly reduced the cumulative surplus of $4.4 billion over the six-year projection period (after measures and structural reforms, but before contractual debt service) due primarily to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The new surplus is about 65% lower than the previous plan, which reflected a surplus of approximately $13.7 billion. For the remaining component units, the Oversight Board certified fiscal plans for both the University of Puerto Rico (the “University”) and PRHTA on June 12, 2020 and June 26, 2020, while certifying a revised Fiscal Plan for PREPA on June 29, 2020. The Oversight Board also certified the fiscal year 2020 budgets for Commonwealth, PREPA, the University and PRHTA.
University of Puerto Rico
The University is not a debtor in Title III and continues to be current on its debt service payment. However, the University is subject to a standstill agreement with its senior bondholders, which has been extended to February 28, 2021. National is not a party to the standstill agreement.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
The following table presents our scheduled gross debt service due on our Puerto Rico insured exposures as of December 31, 2020, for each of the subsequent five years ending December 31 and thereafter:
Corporate
Our corporate segment consists of general corporate activities, including providing support services to MBIA Inc.’s subsidiaries and asset and capital management. Support services are provided by our service company, MBIA Services, and include, among others, management, legal, accounting, treasury, information technology, and insurance portfolio surveillance, on a fee-for-service basis. Capital management includes activities related to servicing obligations issued by MBIA Inc. and its subsidiaries, MBIA Global Funding, LLC (“GFL”) and MBIA Investment Management Corp. (“IMC”). MBIA Inc. issued debt to finance the operations of the MBIA group. GFL raised funds through the issuance of medium-term notes (“MTNs”) with varying maturities, which were in turn guaranteed by MBIA Corp. GFL lent the proceeds of these MTN issuances to MBIA Inc. IMC, along with MBIA Inc., provided customized investment agreements, guaranteed by MBIA Corp., for bond proceeds and other public funds for such purposes as construction, loan origination, escrow and debt service or other reserve fund requirements. The Company has ceased issuing new MTNs and investment agreements and the outstanding liability balances and corresponding asset balances have declined over time as liabilities matured, terminated or were called or repurchased. All of the debt within the corporate segment is managed collectively and is serviced by available liquidity.
The following table summarizes the consolidated results of our corporate segment for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
n/m-Percent change not meaningful.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
NET INVESTMENT INCOME The decrease in net investment income for 2020 compared with 2019 was primarily due to lower yields on investment assets in 2020.
NET GAINS (LOSSES) ON FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AT FAIR VALUE AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE The unfavorable change in net gains (losses) on financial instruments at fair value and foreign exchange for 2020 compared with 2019 was primarily due to foreign exchange losses on Euro denominated liabilities in 2020 due to the weakening of the U.S. dollar versus foreign exchange gains in 2019 on Euro denominated liabilities due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar. This was partially offset by higher fair value losses in 2019 compared with 2020 on interest rate swaps, primarily due to decreases in interest rates in 2019. During 2019, we terminated a portion of these interest rate swaps and the termination amount paid in cash reflected the fair values of the swaps at the termination date and all collateral held by the counterparty to the interest rate swaps was returned to the Company.
International and Structured Finance Insurance
Our international and structured finance insurance portfolio is managed through MBIA Corp. The financial guarantees issued by MBIA Corp. generally provide unconditional and irrevocable guarantees of the payment of the principal of, and interest or other amounts owing on, non-U.S. public finance and global structured finance insured obligations when due or, in the event MBIA Corp. has the right, at its discretion, to accelerate insured obligations upon default or otherwise.
MBIA Corp. has insured sovereign-related and sub-sovereign bonds, privately issued bonds used for the financing of utilities, toll roads, bridges, airports, public transportation facilities, and other types of infrastructure projects serving a substantial public purpose. Global structured finance and asset-backed obligations typically are securities repayable from cash flows generated by a specified pool of assets, such as residential and commercial mortgages, insurance policies, consumer loans, corporate loans and bonds, trade and export receivables, and leases for equipment, aircraft and real estate property. MBIA Insurance Corporation insures the investment agreements written by MBIA Inc., and if MBIA Inc. were to have insufficient assets to pay amounts due upon maturity or termination, MBIA Insurance Corporation would be required to make such payments under its insurance policies. MBIA Insurance Corporation also insured debt obligations of other affiliates, including GFL, IMC and MZ Funding LLC (“MZ Funding”). MBIA Corp. had also written insurance policies guaranteeing the obligations under credit default swap (“CDS”) contracts of an affiliate, LaCrosse Financial Products, LLC and certain other derivative contracts. Certain policies covered payments potentially due under CDS, including termination payments that may become due in certain circumstances, including the occurrence of certain insolvency or payment defaults under the CDS or derivative contracts by the insured counterparty or by the guarantor. We no longer insure new CDS contracts except for potential transactions related to the restructuring of existing exposures. MBIA Insurance Corporation provides 100% reinsurance to its subsidiary, MBIA Mexico S.A. de C.V. (“MBIA Mexico”).
MBIA Corp. has contributed to the Company’s net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforward, which is used in the calculation of our consolidated income taxes. If MBIA Corp. becomes profitable, it is not expected to make any tax payments under our tax sharing agreement. Based on MBIA Corp.’s current projected earnings and our expectation that it will not write significant new business, we believe it is unlikely that MBIA Corp. will generate significant income in the near future. As a result of MBIA Corp.’s capital structure and business prospects, we do not expect its financial performance to have a material economic impact on MBIA Inc.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
The following table presents our international and structured finance insurance segment results for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
n/m-Percent change not meaningful.
As of December 31, 2020, MBIA Corp.’s total insured gross par outstanding was $7.7 billion.
NET PREMIUMS EARNED Our international and structured finance insurance segment generates net premiums from insurance policies accounted for as financial guarantee contracts. Certain premiums are eliminated in our consolidated financial statements as a result of the Company consolidating VIEs. In addition, we generate net premiums from insured credit derivatives that are included in “Realized gains (losses) and other settlements on insured derivatives” on our consolidated statements of operations. The following table provides net premiums earned from our financial guarantee contracts for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
Net premiums earned represent gross premiums earned net of premiums ceded to reinsurers, and include scheduled premium earnings and premium earnings from refunded issues. Negative VIE net premiums earned (eliminated in consolidation) are related to reversing previously eliminated net premiums primarily from a policy termination and premium receivable write-offs.
NET CHANGE IN FAIR VALUE OF INSURED DERIVATIVES Realized losses on insured derivatives include payments made net of premiums and fees earned and salvage received. For 2020 and 2019, realized losses on insured derivatives resulted from claim payments on commercial mortgage-backed securities (“CMBS”) exposure.
For 2020, unrealized gains on insured derivatives were driven by the reversal of a liability due to the termination of CMBS exposure at an amount below the previously recorded fair value. For 2019, unrealized gains on insured derivatives were principally due to the reversal of unrealized losses resulting from gross par amortization of transactions.
NET GAINS (LOSSES) ON FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AT FAIR VALUE AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE The net losses on financial instruments at fair value and foreign exchange for 2020 were primarily related to unfavorable mark-to-market fluctuations on derivatives. The net losses on financial instruments at fair value and foreign exchange for 2019 were primarily related to unfavorable mark-to-market fluctuations on derivatives and losses from foreign currency revaluations of loss reserves denominated in Mexican peso as a result of the weakening of the U.S. dollar and the foreign currency revaluations of premium receivables denominated in Chilean unidad de fomento as a result of the strengthening of the U.S. dollar.
REVENUES OF CONSOLIDATED VIEs For 2020, total revenues of consolidated VIEs were $163 million compared with $55 million for 2019. The increase in revenues of consolidated VIEs for 2020 compared with 2019 was primarily due to higher gains from put-back claims on ineligible mortgage loans within a second-lien RMBS VIE in 2020 and a reversal of an allowance for credit losses in 2020 versus losses on the deconsolidation of VIEs in 2019, partially offset by lower net investment income in 2020 due to the deconsolidation of a VIE in the first quarter of 2020.
LOSSES AND LOSS ADJUSTMENT EXPENSES For 2020, loss and LAE primarily related to a decrease in expected salvage collections from insured CDOs and declines in the risk-free rates used to discount expected claims and salvage during 2020, which increased the present value of net loss reserves, primarily on our insured first-lien RMBS transactions. These increases in losses and LAE were partially offset by an increase in expected net recoveries related to second-lien RMBS. For 2019, losses and LAE primarily related to a decrease in expected salvage collections related to CDOs and an increase in expected payments on insured first-lien RMBS transactions. As a result of the consolidations of VIEs, losses and LAE includes the elimination of a losses and LAE benefit of $144 million and $40 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our international and structured finance insured portfolio management group is responsible for monitoring international and structured finance insured obligations. The level and frequency of monitoring of any insured obligation depends on the type, size, rating and our assessed performance of the insured issue. As a result of COVID-19, we have increased our monitoring of certain credits. Refer to “Note 6: Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of the Company’s loss reserving policy and additional information related to its loss reserves. The following table presents information about our insurance loss recoverable and loss and LAE reserves as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1)-Reported within “Other assets” on our consolidated balance sheets.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
Insurance loss recoverable primarily relates to reimbursement rights arising from the payment of claims on MBIA Corp.’s policies insuring certain CDOs. Such payments also entitle MBIA Corp. to exercise certain rights and remedies to seek recovery of its reimbursement entitlements. Refer to “Note 1: Business Developments and Risks and Uncertainties” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our estimates of recoveries.
Refer to “Note 6: Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about our loss reserving policy, loss reserves and recoverables.
POLICY ACQUISITION COSTS AND OPERATING EXPENSES International and structured finance insurance segment expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are presented in the following table:
Gross expenses represent total insurance expenses before the deferral of any policy acquisition costs. We did not defer a material amount of policy acquisition costs during 2020 or 2019. Policy acquisition costs in these periods were primarily related to ceding commissions and premium taxes on installment policies written in prior periods.
International and Structured Finance Insurance Portfolio Exposures
Credit Quality
The credit quality of our international and structured finance insured portfolio is assessed in the same manner as our U.S. public finance insured portfolio. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, 24% and 27%, respectively, of our international and structured finance insured portfolio was rated below investment grade, before giving effect to MBIA’s guarantees, based on MBIA’s internal ratings, which are generally more current than the underlying ratings provided by S&P and Moody’s for this subset of our insured portfolio.
Selected Portfolio Exposures
The following is a summary of selected significant exposures within our residential mortgage insured portfolio of our international and structured finance insurance segment. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, MBIA Corp. insured $277 million of CDOs and related instruments. We may experience considerable incurred losses in certain of these sectors. There can be no assurance that the loss reserves recorded in our financial statements will be sufficient or that we will not experience losses on transactions on which we currently have no loss reserves, in particular if the economy deteriorates. We may seek to purchase, directly or indirectly, obligations guaranteed by MBIA Corp. or seek to commute policies. The amount of insurance exposure reduced, if any, and the nature of any such actions will depend on market conditions, pricing levels from time to time, and other considerations. In some cases, these activities may result in a reduction of loss reserves, but in all cases they are intended to limit our ultimate losses and reduce the future volatility in loss development on the related policies. Our ability to purchase guaranteed obligations and to commute policies will depend on management’s assessment of available liquidity.
Residential Mortgage Exposure
MBIA Corp. insures RMBS backed by residential mortgage loans, including second-lien RMBS transactions (revolving home equity lines of credit (“HELOC”) loans and closed-end second (“CES”) mortgages). MBIA Corp.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
also insures MBS backed by first-lien alternative A-paper (“Alt-A”) and subprime mortgage loans directly through RMBS securitizations. The following table presents the gross par outstanding of MBIA Corp.’s total direct RMBS insured exposure as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Amounts include the gross par outstanding related to transactions that the Company consolidates under accounting guidance for VIEs.
(1)-Includes international exposure of $237 million and $248 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
U.S. Public Finance and International and Structured Finance Reinsurance
Reinsurance enables the Company to cede exposure for purposes of syndicating risk. The Company generally retains the right to reassume the business ceded to reinsurers under certain circumstances, including a reinsurer’s rating downgrade below specified thresholds. Currently, we do not intend to use reinsurance to decrease the insured exposure in our portfolio. Refer to “Note 13: Insurance in Force” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion about reinsurance agreements.
Taxes
Provision for Income Taxes
The Company’s income taxes and the related effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are presented in the following table:
For 2020 and 2019, our effective tax rate applied to our loss before income taxes was lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate of 21% due to the full valuation allowance on the changes in our net deferred tax asset.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company’s valuation allowance against its net deferred tax asset was $966 million and $873 million, respectively. Notwithstanding the full valuation allowance on its net deferred tax asset, the Company believes that it may be able to use some of its net deferred tax asset before the expirations associated with that asset based upon expected earnings at National and potential future sources of taxable income to be identified by the Company. Accordingly, the Company will continue to re-evaluate its net deferred tax asset on a quarterly basis. There is no assurance that the Company will reverse any of its valuation allowance on its net deferred tax asset in the future. Refer to “Note 11: Income Taxes” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion of income taxes, including the valuation allowance against the Company’s net deferred tax asset and its accounting for tax uncertainties.
The CARES Act established new tax provisions including, but not limited to: (1) five-year carryback of NOLs generated in 2018, 2019 and 2020; (2) accelerated refund of alternative minimum tax (“AMT”) credit carryforwards; and (3) retroactive changes to allow accelerated depreciation for certain depreciable property. The
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
legislation does not have a material impact on the Company’s tax positions due to the lack of taxable income in the carryback periods. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had received a cash benefit for its remaining AMT credits as provided by the CARES Act.
On December 21, 2020, The Consolidated Appropriations Act (“Act”) was passed by Congress to respond to the health and economic impacts of COVID-19. The Act includes a number of tax law changes, including the expansion of the Employee Retention Credit, important changes to the Paycheck Protection Program, and extension of a variety of expiring tax provisions. The legislation does not have a material impact on the Company’s tax positions.
CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company manages its capital resources to minimize its cost of capital while maintaining appropriate claims-paying resources (“CPR”) for National and MBIA Corp. The Company’s capital resources consist of total shareholders’ equity, total debt issued by MBIA Inc. for general corporate purposes, surplus notes issued by MBIA Corp., and MBIA Corp.’s financing facility between MZ Funding and certain purchasers, pursuant to which the purchasers or their affiliates agreed to refinance the outstanding insured senior notes of MZ Funding (“Refinanced Facility”). Total capital resources were $1.6 billion and $2.4 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In addition to scheduled debt maturities, from time to time, we reduce unsecured debt through calls or repurchases. Also, MBIA Inc. may repurchase or National may purchase outstanding MBIA Inc. common shares when we deem it beneficial to our shareholders. Purchases or repurchases of debt and common stock may be made from time to time in the open market or in private transactions as permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements. We may also choose to redeem debt obligations where permitted by the relevant agreements. MBIA Inc. or National may acquire or redeem outstanding common shares of MBIA Inc. and outstanding debt obligations at prices when we deem it beneficial to our shareholders. Refer to “Note 17: Common and Preferred Stock” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information about MBIA Inc.’s share repurchases and National’s share purchases and “Note 10: Debt” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information about debt repurchases or redemptions. MBIA Inc. supports the MTN and investment agreement obligations issued by the Company. We seek to maintain sufficient liquidity and capital resources to meet the Company’s general corporate needs and debt service. Based on MBIA Inc.’s debt service requirements and expected operating expenses, we expect that MBIA Inc. will have sufficient resources to satisfy its debt obligations and its general corporate needs over time from distributions from its operating subsidiaries; however, there can be no assurance that MBIA Inc. will have sufficient resources to do so. In addition, the Company may also consider raising third-party capital. Refer to “Capital, Liquidity and Market Related Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K and the “Liquidity-Corporate Liquidity” section included herein for additional information about MBIA Inc.’s liquidity.
Insurance Statutory Capital
National and MBIA Insurance Corporation are incorporated and licensed in, and are subject to primary insurance regulation and supervision by New York State Department of Financial Services (“NYSDFS”). MBIA Mexico is regulated by the Comisión Nacional de Seguros y Fianzas in Mexico. MBIA Corp.’s Spanish Branch is subject to local regulation in Spain. National and MBIA Insurance Corporation each are required to file detailed annual financial statements, as well as interim financial statements, with the NYSDFS and similar supervisory agencies in each of the other jurisdictions in which it is licensed. These financial statements are prepared in accordance with New York State and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners’ statements of U.S. STAT and assist our regulators in evaluating minimum standards of solvency, including minimum capital requirements, and business conduct.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
CAPITAL RESOURCES (continued)
National
Capital and Surplus
National had statutory capital of $2.0 billion as of December 31, 2020 compared with $2.4 billion as of December 31, 2019. The decrease in National’s statutory capital was primarily driven by acquisitions of MBIA Inc. common shares, which the Company does not admit as assets supporting National’s statutory capital, and it’s statutory net loss of $82 million for year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, National’s unassigned surplus was $937 million. Refer to the “Claims-Paying Resources (Statutory Basis)” section below for additional information on National’s statutory capital.
In order to maintain its New York State financial guarantee insurance license, National is required to maintain a minimum of $65 million of policyholders’ surplus. National is also required to maintain contingency reserves to provide protection to policyholders in the event of extreme losses in adverse economic events. As of December 31, 2020, National was in compliance with its aggregate risk limits under New York Insurance Law (“NYIL”), but was not in compliance with certain of its single risk limits.
NYIL regulates the payment of dividends by financial guarantee insurance companies and provides that such companies may not declare or distribute dividends except out of statutory earned surplus. Under NYIL, the sum of (i) the amount of dividends declared or distributed during the preceding 12-month period and (ii) the dividend to be declared may not exceed the lesser of (a) 10% of policyholders’ surplus, as reported in the latest statutory financial statements or (b) 100% of adjusted net investment income for such 12-month period (the net investment income for such 12-month period plus the excess, if any, of net investment income over dividends declared or distributed during the two-year period preceding such 12-month period), unless the Superintendent of the NYSDFS approves a greater dividend distribution based upon a finding that the insurer will retain sufficient surplus to support its obligations.
National had positive earned surplus as of December 31, 2020 from which it may pay dividends, subject to the limitations described above. During 2020, National declared and paid a dividend of $81 million to its ultimate parent, MBIA Inc. We expect the as-of-right declared and paid dividend amounts from National to be limited to prior year adjusted net investment income for the foreseeable future.
Claims-Paying Resources (Statutory Basis)
CPR is a key measure of the resources available to National to pay claims under its insurance policies. CPR consists of total financial resources and reserves calculated on a statutory basis. CPR has been a common measure used by financial guarantee insurance companies to report and compare resources and continues to be used by MBIA’s management to evaluate changes in such resources. We have provided CPR to allow investors and analysts to evaluate National using the same measure that MBIA’s management uses to evaluate National’s resources to pay claims under its insurance policies. There is no directly comparable GAAP measure. Our calculation of CPR may differ from the calculation of CPR reported by other companies.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
CAPITAL RESOURCES (continued)
National’s CPR and components thereto, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are presented in the following table:
(1)-Calculated using a discount rate of 3.49% as of December 31, 2020 and 3.64% as of December 31, 2019.
(2)-Includes financial guarantee and insured derivative related premiums.
MBIA Insurance Corporation
Capital and Surplus
MBIA Insurance Corporation had statutory capital of $273 million as of December 31, 2020 compared with $476 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, MBIA Insurance Corporation’s negative unassigned surplus was $1.9 billion. For the year ended December 31, 2020, MBIA Insurance Corporation had a statutory net loss of $202 million. Refer to the “Claims-Paying Resources (Statutory Basis)” section below for additional information on MBIA Insurance Corporation’s statutory capital.
As of December 31, 2020, MBIA Insurance Corporation recognized estimated salvage on a statutory basis related to put-back claims against Credit Suisse, recoveries related to CDOs and excess spread recoveries on RMBS. In November of 2020, following a trial and post-trial briefing, the court overseeing the litigation issued a decision declaring that MBIA Corp. had succeeded in establishing that a majority of the loans in the transaction were ineligible. In January of 2021, the Court issued an order declaring that Credit Suisse was liable to MBIA Corp. for approximately $604 million in damages. On February 9, 2021, the parties to the litigation entered into a settlement agreement pursuant to which Credit Suisse paid MBIA Corp. $600 million, an amount materially in excess of its prior estimated recoveries.
In order to maintain its New York State financial guarantee insurance license, MBIA Insurance Corporation is required to maintain a minimum of $65 million of policyholders’ surplus. As of December 31, 2020, MBIA Corp. met the required minimum requirement. Under NYIL, MBIA Insurance Corporation is required to invest its minimum surplus and contingency reserves and 50% of its loss reserves and unearned premium reserves in certain qualifying assets. As of December 31, 2020, MBIA Insurance Corporation maintained its minimum requirement of policyholders’ surplus but did not have enough qualifying assets to support its contingency reserves and 50% of its loss reserves and unearned premium reserves. As of December 31, 2020, MBIA Insurance Corporation was in compliance with its aggregate risk limits under the NYIL, but was not in compliance with certain of its single risk limits. If MBIA Insurance Corporation does not comply with the above mentioned requirements, the NYSDFS may prevent MBIA Insurance Corporation from transacting any new financial guarantee insurance business.
Due to its significant earned surplus deficit, MBIA Insurance Corporation has not had the statutory capacity to pay dividends since December 31, 2009. Based on estimated future income, MBIA Insurance Corporation is not expected to have any statutory capacity to pay dividends.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
CAPITAL RESOURCES (continued)
The NYSDFS has not approved MBIA Insurance Corporation’s requests to make interest payments on MBIA Insurance Corporation’s Surplus Notes due January 15, 2033 (the “Surplus Notes”) since, and including, the January 15, 2013 interest payment. The NYSDFS has cited both MBIA Insurance Corporation’s liquidity and financial condition as well as the availability of “free and divisible surplus” as the basis for such non-approvals. As of January 15, 2021, the most recent scheduled interest payment date, there was $1.0 billion of unpaid interest on the par amount outstanding of $953 million of the Surplus Notes. Under Section 1307 of the NYIL and the Fiscal Agency Agreement governing the surplus notes, Surplus Note payments may be made only with the prior approval by the NYSDFS and if MBIA Insurance Corporation has sufficient “Eligible Surplus”, or as we believe, “free and divisible surplus” as an appropriate calculation of “Eligible Surplus.” As of December 31, 2020, MBIA Insurance Corporation had “free and divisible surplus” of $88 million. There is no assurance the NYSDFS will approve Surplus Note payments, notwithstanding the sufficiency of MBIA Insurance Corporation’s liquidity and financial condition. The unpaid interest on the Surplus Notes will become due on the first business day on or after which MBIA Insurance Corporation obtains approval to pay some or all of such unpaid interest. No interest has been accrued or will accrue on the deferred interest.
Claims-Paying Resources (Statutory Basis)
CPR is a key measure of the resources available to MBIA Corp. to pay claims under its insurance policies. CPR consists of total financial resources and reserves calculated on a statutory basis. CPR has been a common measure used by financial guarantee insurance companies to report and compare resources, and continues to be used by MBIA’s management to evaluate changes in such resources. We have provided CPR to allow investors and analysts to evaluate MBIA Corp., using the same measure that MBIA’s management uses to evaluate MBIA Corp.’s resources to pay claims under its insurance policies. There is no directly comparable GAAP measure. Our calculation of CPR may differ from the calculation of CPR reported by other companies.
MBIA Corp.’s CPR and components thereto, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are presented in the following table:
(1)-Calculated using a discount rate of 5.10% as of December 31, 2020 and 5.21% as of December 31, 2019.
(2)-Based on the Company’s estimate of the remaining life for its insured exposures.
(3)-This amount primarily consists of expected recoveries related to the Company’s put-backs, CDOs and excess spread.
LIQUIDITY
We use a liquidity risk management framework, the primary objective of which is to match liquidity resources to needs. We monitor our cash and liquid asset resources using cash forecasting and stress-scenario testing. Members of MBIA’s senior management meet regularly to review liquidity metrics, discuss contingency plans and establish target liquidity levels. We evaluate and manage liquidity on a legal-entity basis to take into account the legal, regulatory and other limitations on available liquidity resources within the enterprise. Additionally, we
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
LIQUIDITY (continued)
continue to monitor the current COVID-19 pandemic with respect to our cash and liquid asset positions and resources. It remains premature to predict the full impact the pandemic may have on our future liquidity position and needs. Refer to the “Executive Overview-COVID-19” section for additional information about liquidity and COVID-19. The following is a discussion of our liquidity resources and requirements for our holding company and our insurance subsidiaries.
National Liquidity
The primary sources of cash available to National are:
•
principal and interest receipts on assets held in its investment portfolio, including proceeds from the sale of assets;
•
recoveries associated with insurance loss payments; and
•
installment premiums.
The primary uses of cash by National are:
•
loss payments and LAE on insured transactions;
•
payments of dividends; and
•
payments of operating expenses, taxes and investment portfolio asset purchases.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, National held cash and investments of $2.1 billion and $2.7 billion, respectively, of which $359 million and $442 million, respectively, were cash and cash equivalents or short-term investments comprised of highly rated commercial paper, money market funds and municipal, U.S. agency and corporate bonds.
The insurance policies issued or reinsured by National provide unconditional and irrevocable guarantees of payments of the principal of, and interest or other amounts owing on, insured obligations when due. In the event of a default in payment of principal, interest or other insured amounts by an issuer, National generally promises to make funds available in the insured amount within one to three business days following notification. In some cases, the amount due can be substantial, particularly if the default occurs on a transaction to which National has a large notional exposure or on a transaction structured with large, bullet-type principal maturities. The U.S. public finance insurance segment’s financial guarantee contracts generally cannot be accelerated by a party other than the insurer which helps to mitigate liquidity risk in this segment.
Corporate Liquidity
The primary sources of cash available to MBIA Inc. are:
•
dividends from National;
•
available cash and liquid assets not subject to collateral posting requirements;
•
principal and interest receipts on assets held in its investment portfolio, including proceeds from the sale of assets; and
•
access to capital markets.
The primary uses of cash by MBIA Inc. are:
•
servicing outstanding unsecured corporate debt obligations and MTNs;
•
meeting collateral posting requirements under investment agreements and derivative arrangements;
•
payments related to interest rate swaps;
•
payments of operating expenses; and
•
funding share repurchases and debt buybacks.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
LIQUIDITY (continued)
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the liquidity positions of MBIA Inc. were $294 million and $375 million, respectively, and included cash and cash equivalents and other investments comprised of highly rated commercial paper and U.S. government and asset-backed bonds.
During 2020, MBIA Inc. returned $49 million of tax payments to National as a result of tax losses incurred by National in 2019, of which $9 million was in cash. The return was pursuant to the terms of the tax sharing agreement. Under the CARES Act, National’s 2019 taxable loss became subject to a five-year NOL carry-back, which allowed it to recover taxes paid in years in which the tax rate was 35%. A taxable loss generated in 2020 will also be subject to a five-year NOL carry-back under the CARES Act, after which the two-year NOL carry-back provision will again become effective. In addition to releases or returns following the expiration of National’s two-year NOL carry-back period, from time to time, MBIA Inc. is permitted to withdraw assets from the Tax Escrow Account if the aggregate market value of all assets held in the Tax Escrow Account exceeds the required minimum balance. There can be no assurance that any future payments under the Tax Escrow Account from subsidiaries will be released to MBIA Inc. due to deductible or creditable tax attributes of those subsidiaries and/or the market value performance of the assets supporting the Tax Escrow Account.
Based on our projections of National’s and MBIA Corp.’s future earnings and losses, we expect that for the foreseeable future National will be the primary source of payments to MBIA Inc. During 2020, National declared and paid a dividend of $81 million to its ultimate parent, MBIA Inc. There can be no assurance as to the amount and timing of any such future dividends or payments from the tax escrow account under the tax sharing agreement. Also, absent a special dividend subject to the approval of the NYSDFS, we expect the declared and paid dividend amounts from National to be limited to the prior twelve months of adjusted net investment income as reported in its most recent statutory filings. Refer to the “Capital Resources - Insurance Statutory Capital” section for additional information on payments of dividends. We do not expect MBIA Inc. to receive dividends or utilize the Company’s tax escrow account from MBIA Corp.
Currently, a significant portion of the cash and securities held by MBIA Inc. is pledged against investment agreement liabilities, the Asset Swap (simultaneous repurchase and reverse repurchase agreement) and derivatives, which limits its ability to raise liquidity through asset sales. As the market value or rating eligibility of the assets which are pledged against MBIA Inc.’s obligations declines, we are required to pledge additional eligible assets in order to meet minimum required collateral amounts against these liabilities. To mitigate these risks, we seek to maintain cash and liquidity resources that we believe will be sufficient to make all payments due on our obligations and to meet other financial requirements, such as posting collateral. Contingent liquidity resources include: (1) sales of invested assets exposed to credit spread stress risk, which may occur at losses; (2) termination and settlement of interest rate swap agreements; and (3) accessing the capital markets. These actions, if taken, are expected to result in either additional liquidity or reduced exposure to adverse credit spread movements. There can be no assurance that these actions will be sufficient to fully mitigate this risk.
MBIA Corp. Liquidity
The primary sources of cash available to MBIA Corp. are:
•
recoveries associated with insurance loss payments;
•
installment premiums and fees; and
•
principal and interest receipts on assets held in its investment portfolio, including the proceeds from the sale of assets.
The primary uses of cash by MBIA Corp. are:
•
loss and LAE or commutation payments on insured transactions;
•
repayment of the Refinanced Facility; and
•
payments of operating expenses.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
LIQUIDITY (continued)
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, MBIA Corp. held cash and investments of $243 million and $230 million, respectively, of which $130 million and $124 million, respectively, were cash and cash equivalents or liquid investments comprised of money market funds and municipal, U.S. Treasury and corporate bonds that were immediately available to MBIA Insurance Corporation.
Insured transactions that require payment of scheduled debt service payments insured when due or payment in full of the principal insured at maturity could present liquidity risk for MBIA Corp., as any salvage recoveries from such payments could be recovered over an extended period of time after the payment is made. MBIA Corp. is generally required to satisfy claims within one to three business days, and as a result seeks to identify potential claims in advance through our monitoring process. In order to monitor liquidity risk and maintain appropriate liquidity resources, we use the same methodology as we use to monitor credit quality and losses within our insured portfolio, including stress scenarios. Refer to “Note 6: Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of our loss process.
During 2020, MBIA Corp. requested and was denied permission by the NYSDFS to prepay approximately $26 million of the Refinanced Facility. The NYSDFS has cited MBIA Corp.’s liquidity position as the basis for such non-approval.
Advances Agreement
MBIA Inc., National, MBIA Insurance Corporation and certain other affiliates are party to an intercompany advances agreement (the “MBIA Advances Agreement”). The MBIA Advances Agreement permits National to make advances to MBIA Inc. and other MBIA group companies that are party to the agreement at a rate per annum equal to LIBOR plus 0.25%. The agreement also permits other affiliates to make advances to National or MBIA Insurance Corporation at a rate per annum equal to LIBOR minus 0.10%. Advances by National cannot exceed 3% of its net admitted assets as of the last quarter end. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no amounts drawn under the agreement.
Consolidated Cash Flows
Information about our consolidated cash flows by category is presented on our consolidated statements of cash flows. The following table summarizes our consolidated cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
n/m-Percent change not meaningful.
Operating activities
Net cash used by operating activities increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to decreases in proceeds from insurance recoveries and reinsurance of $71 million and investment income received of $58 million. These decreases were partially offset by a decrease in interest paid of $96 million.
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
LIQUIDITY (continued)
This was primarily due to the refinancing and partial paydowns of the MBIA Corp. Financing Facility in 2019 and an increase in paid-in-kind interest in 2020.
Investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to an increase in net cash provided by VIE activity. During 2020, two VIEs were terminated and deconsolidated which resulted in $890 million of net proceeds from HTM investments compared with the sale of investments at fair value related to the COFINA bonds which resulted in $422 million of net proceeds in 2019.
Financing activities
Net cash used by financing activities increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to increases in principal repayments of VIE notes of $149 million due to the deconsolidation of VIEs and purchases of treasury stock of $94 million. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in principal paydowns of medium-term notes of $57 million.
Investments
The following discussion of investments, including references to consolidated investments, excludes investments reported under “Assets of consolidated variable interest entities” on our consolidated balance sheets. Investments of VIEs support the repayment of VIE obligations and are not available to settle obligations of MBIA. Our AFS investments comprise high-quality fixed-income securities and short-term investments.
Refer to “Note 2: Significant Accounting Policies,” and “Note 8: Investments” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about our accounting policies and investments.
Credit Quality
The credit quality distribution of the Company’s AFS fixed-maturity investment portfolios, excluding short-term investments, are based on ratings from Moody’s and alternate ratings sources, such as S&P or the best estimate of the ratings assigned by the Company, have been used for a small percentage of securities that are not rated by Moody’s. As of December 31, 2020, the weighted average credit quality rating of the Company’s AFS fixed-maturity investment portfolio, excluding short-term investments, was Aa and 96% of the investments were investment grade.
Insured Investments
MBIA’s consolidated investment portfolio includes investments that are insured by various financial guarantee insurers (“Insured Investments”), including investments insured by National and MBIA Corp. (“Company-Insured Investments”). When purchasing Insured Investments, the Company’s third-party portfolio manager independently assesses the underlying credit quality, structure and liquidity of each investment, in addition to the creditworthiness of the insurer. Insured Investments are diverse by sector, issuer and size of holding. The third-party portfolio manager assigns underlying ratings to Insured Investments without giving effect to financial guarantees based on underlying ratings assigned by Moody’s or S&P, when a rating is not published by Moody’s. When a Moody’s or S&P underlying rating is not available, the underlying rating is based on the portfolio manager’s best estimate of the rating of such investment. If the Company determines that declines in the fair values of third-party Insured Investments are related to credit loss, the Company will establish an allowance for credit losses and recognize the credit component through earnings.
As of December 31, 2020, Insured Investments at fair value represented $193 million or 7% of consolidated investments, of which $167 million or 6% of consolidated investments were Company-Insured Investments. As of December 31, 2020, based on the actual or estimated underlying ratings of our consolidated investment portfolio, without giving effect to financial guarantees, the weighted average rating of only the Insured Investments in the
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
LIQUIDITY (continued)
investment portfolio would be in the Baa range. Without giving effect to the National and MBIA Corp. guarantees of the Company-Insured Investments in the consolidated investment portfolio, as of December 31, 2020, based on actual or estimated underlying ratings, the weighted average rating of the consolidated investment portfolio was in the Aa range. The weighted average rating of only the Company-Insured Investments was in the below investment grade range, and investments rated below investment grade in the Company-Insured Investments were 5% of the total consolidated investment portfolio.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes the Company’s future estimated cash payments relating to contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020. Estimating these payments requires management to make estimates and assumptions regarding these obligations. The estimates and assumptions used by management are described below. Since these estimates and assumptions are subjective, actual payments in future periods may vary from those reported in the following table. Refer to “Note 13: Insurance in Force” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information about the Company’s exposure under insurance contracts.
(1)-Amounts on certain policies are presented net of expected recoveries. Excludes intercompany reinsurance agreements.
Gross insurance claim obligations represent the future value of probability-weighted payments MBIA expects to make (before reinsurance and the consolidation of VIEs) under insurance policies for which the Company has recorded loss reserves. Certain policies included in gross insurance claim obligations are presented net of expected recoveries. The discounted value of estimated payments included in the table, along with probability-weighted estimated recoveries and estimated negotiated early settlements, on policies accounted for as financial guarantee insurance contracts is reported as case basis reserves within “Loss and loss adjustment expense reserves” on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. Estimated potential claim payments and principal and interest due on the Refinanced Facility for obligations issued by VIEs consolidated in our international and structured finance insurance segment are included within “Gross insurance claim obligations” and “Refinanced Facility”, respectively, in the preceding table. Obligations of these VIEs, except for the Refinanced Facility, are collateralized by assets held by the VIEs, and investors in such obligations do not have recourse to the general credit of MBIA. As of December 31, 2020, VIE notes issued by issuer-sponsored consolidated VIEs totaled $350 million and are not considered contractual obligations of MBIA beyond MBIA’s insurance claim obligation. The Company’s involvement with VIEs is continually reassessed as required by consolidation guidance, and may result in consolidation or deconsolidation of VIEs in future periods. As the Company consolidates and deconsolidates VIEs, the amount of VIE debt obligations recorded on its balance sheet may change significantly.
Long-term debt, investment agreements, MTNs, surplus notes and the Refinanced Facility include principal and interest and exclude premiums or discounts. Liabilities issued at discounts reflect principal due at maturity. Interest payments on floating rate obligations are estimated using applicable forward rates. Principal and interest
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
LIQUIDITY (continued)
on callable obligations or obligations that allow investors to withdraw funds prior to legal maturity are based on the expected call or withdrawal dates of such obligations. Liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are presented in U.S. dollars using applicable exchange rates as of December 31, 2020.
Included in international and structured finance insurance segment’s surplus notes for 2021 is $985 million of unpaid interest related to the 2013 through 2020 interest payments in which MBIA Insurance Corporation’s requests for approval to pay was not approved by the NYSDFS. This does not include the amount due to MBIA Inc., which is eliminated in our consolidated financial statements. This deferred interest payment will be due on the first business day on or after which MBIA Insurance Corporation obtains approval to make such payment. No interest will accrue on the deferred interest. There can be no assurance that the NYSDFS will approve any subsequent payments, or that it will approve any payment by the scheduled interest payment date. Refer to “Capital Resources - MBIA Insurance Corporation” section for additional information on MBIA Insurance Corporation’s surplus notes and statutory capital. Principal payments under investment agreements are based on expected withdrawal dates. All other principal payments are based on contractual maturity dates.