Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of the Results of Operations
Statements in the following discussion and throughout this report that are not historical in nature are “forward-looking statements.” You can identify forward-looking statements by the use of words such as “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “intend,” “believe,” and similar expressions. Although we believe the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable, such statements are inherently subject to risk and we can give no assurances that our expectations will prove to be correct. Actual results could differ from those described in this report because of numerous factors, many of which are beyond our control. These factors include, without limitation, those described under Item 1A “Risk Factors.” We undertake no obligation to update these forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect actual outcomes. Please see “Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Form 10-K.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes thereto and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements in the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect actual outcomes.
Overview
Mustang Bio, Inc. (“Mustang,” “We,” “Us” or the “Company”) is a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on translating today’s medical breakthroughs in cell and gene therapies into potential cures for hematologic cancers, solid tumors and rare genetic diseases. We aim to acquire rights to these technologies by licensing or otherwise acquiring an ownership interest in the technologies, funding their research and development and eventually either out-licensing or bringing the technologies to market.
Our pipeline is currently focused in three core areas: gene therapy programs for rare genetic disorders, chimeric antigen receptor (“CAR”) engineered T cell (“CAR T”) therapies for hematologic malignancies and CAR T therapies for solid tumors. For each therapy we have partnered with world class research institutions. For our gene therapy program, we have partnered with St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital (“St. Jude”) in the development of a first-in-class ex vivo lentiviral treatment of X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (“XSCID”) and for our CAR T therapies we have partnered with the City of Hope National Medical Center (“COH”), Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center (“Fred Hutch”) and Nationwide Children’s Hospital (“Nationwide”).
Gene Therapy
In partnership with St. Jude and the National Institutes of Health (“NIH”), our gene therapy program is being conducted under an exclusive license to develop a potentially curative treatment for XSCID, a rare genetic immune system condition also known as bubble boy disease in which affected patients do not live beyond infancy without treatment. This first-in-class ex vivo lentiviral gene therapy is currently in two Phase 1/2 clinical trials involving two different autologous cell products: a multicenter trial of the MB-107 product in newly diagnosed infants sponsored by St. Jude and a single-center trial of the MB-207 product in previously transplanted patients sponsored by the NIH.
In May 2020, we submitted an Investigational New Drug (“IND”) application with the FDA to initiate a registrational multicenter Phase 2 clinical trial of MB-107 in newly diagnosed infants with XSCID who are under the age of two. In response, the FDA identified Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Control (“CMC”) hold issues that Mustang satisfactorily addressed in a December 2020 submission to the FDA, and the CMC hold was removed in January 2021. The trial is expected to enroll 10 patients who, together with 15 patients enrolled in the current multicenter trial led by St. Jude, will be compared with 25 matched historical control patients who have undergone hematopoietic stem cell transplant (“HSCT”). The primary efficacy endpoint will be event-free survival and we are targeting topline data from the trial in the second half of 2022.
We further expect to file an IND in the second quarter of 2021 for a registrational multicenter Phase 2 clinical trial of lentiviral gene therapy in previously transplanted XSCID patients (MB-207). We anticipate enrolling 20 patients, and we are targeting topline data for this trial in the first half of 2023.
CAR T Therapies
Our pipeline of CAR T therapies is being developed under exclusive licenses from several world class research institutions. Our strategy is to license these technologies, support preclinical and clinical research activities by our partners and transfer the underlying technology to our cell processing facility located in Worcester, Massachusetts, to conduct our own clinical trials.
We are developing CAR T therapies for hematologic malignancies in partnership with COH targeting CD123 (MB-102) and CS1 (MB-104) and with Fred Hutch targeting CD20 (MB-106). Phase 1 clinical trials sponsored by COH for MB-102 and MB-104 and by Fred Hutch for MB-106 are underway. In the third quarter of 2019 the FDA approved our IND application to initiate a multi-center Phase 1/2 clinical trial of MB-102, and our clinical trial began enrollment in 2020 for the treatment of patients with blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm. We expect to file an IND for MB-106 in the first quarter of 2021 and to initiate our own Phase 1/2 clinical trial shortly thereafter for the treatment of patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. We plan to file an IND for a multicenter Phase 1/2 trial for MB-104 for the treatment of patients with multiple myeloma once COH has established a safe and effective dose.
We are also developing CAR T therapies for solid tumors in partnership with COH targeting IL13Rα2 (MB-101), HER2 (MB-103) and PSCA (MB-105). In addition, we have partnered with Nationwide for the C134 oncolytic virus (MB-108) in order to enhance the activity of MB-101 for the treatment of patients with glioblastoma multiforme (“GBM”). Phase 1 clinical trials sponsored by COH for MB-101, MB-103 and MB-105 are underway. A Phase 1 clinical trial sponsored by the University of Alabama at Birmingham (“UAB”) for MB-108 began during the third quarter of 2019 and, in the fourth quarter of 2021, we plan to file an IND for the combination of MB-101 and MB-108 for the treatment of patients with GBM. We also plan to file INDs and initiate our own clinical trials for MB-103 for the treatment of patients with metastatic breast cancer to brain and for MB-105 for the treatment of patients with prostate and pancreatic cancer.
Recent Events
MB-106 (CD20 CAR T for Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma and Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia)
In February 2020, we announced that the first subject treated with the optimized MB-106 (CD20-targeted, autologous CAR T cell therapy) manufacturing process, developed in collaboration with Fred Hutch, achieved a complete response at the lowest starting dose in an ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trial. The trial is evaluating the safety and efficacy of MB-106 in subjects with relapsed or refractory B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas and chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
In December 2020, at the 62nd American Society of Hematology Annual Meeting, Mustang and Fred Hutch announced interim data in patients with relapsed or refractory B-cell NHL from the ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trial of MB-106 at Fred Hutch. Data presented by Fred Hutch reported on an initial seven patients treated without response and without significant CAR T cell expansion or persistence. Among these 7 patients there was one occurrence of cytokine release syndrome (CRS; grade 3 - unexplained alkaline phosphatase elevation in the setting of fever), and there were no occurrences of immune effector cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome (ICANS). Subsequently the trial was put on hold while Fred Hutch collaborated with Mustang to undertake a major modification in the cell manufacturing process.
Following IND amendment to implement this modified cell processing, 9 patients - 7 with follicular lymphoma and 2 with mantle cell lymphoma - were treated at 4 different dose levels ranging from 1 x 105 CAR T cells/kg to 3.3 x 106 CAR T cells/kg. The overall response rate was 89% (8/9), the complete response rate was 44% (4/9), and there was good expansion and persistence of CAR T cells. All complete responses were ongoing at the time of data disclosure. One patient experienced a grade 1 episode of CRS, and no patients experienced ICANS. Mustang plans to file an IND at the end of the first quarter of 2021 to enable the initiation of a multicenter Phase 1/2 trial of MB-106.
MB-107 and MB-207 (Ex vivo Lentiviral Therapy for X-linked Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (XSCID))
In May 2020, we submitted an IND application with the FDA to initiate a registrational multi-center Phase 2 clinical trial of MB-107 in newly diagnosed infants with XSCID who are under the age of two. In response, the FDA identified CMC hold issues that we satisfactorily addressed in a December 2020 submission to the FDA, and the CMC hold was removed in January 2021. The trial is expected to enroll 10 patients who, together with 15 patients enrolled in the current multicenter trial led by St. Jude, will be compared with 25 matched historical control patients who have undergone hematopoietic stem cell transplant (“HSCT”). The primary efficacy endpoint will be event-free survival and potential topline data from the trial are expected in the fourth quarter of 2022.
In August 2020, we announced that the FDA has granted Rare Pediatric Disease Designation to MB-107 and MB-207. The FDA previously granted Regenerative Medicine Advanced Therapy designation to MB-107 for the treatment of XSCID in newly-diagnosed infants in August 2019. Additionally, the European Medicines Agency granted Advanced Therapy Medicinal Product classification to MB-107 in April 2020.
The FDA grants Rare Pediatric Disease Designation for serious and life-threatening diseases that primarily affect children ages 18 years or younger and affect fewer than 200,000 people in the United States. If Mustang’s BLA is approved, the company may be eligible to receive a priority review voucher, which can be redeemed to obtain priority review for any subsequent marketing application and may be sold or transferred. This program is intended to encourage development of new drugs and biologics for the prevention and treatment of rare pediatric diseases.
In September 2020, we announced that the FDA has granted Orphan Drug Designation to MB-107 and MB-207. The FDA grants Orphan Drug Designation to drugs and biologics that are intended for the safe and effective treatment, diagnosis or prevention of rare diseases or disorders that affect fewer than 200,000 people in the U.S. Orphan Drug Designation provides certain incentives, such as tax credits toward the cost of clinical trials and prescription drug user fee waivers. If a product holding Orphan Drug Designation receives the first FDA approval for the disease in which it has such designation, the product is entitled to seven years of market exclusivity, which is independent from intellectual property protection.
In October 2020, we in-licensed LentiBOOST™ technology from SIRION Biotech GmbH for the development of MB-207.
In November 2020, we signed an agreement with Minaris Regenerative Medicine GmbH to enable technology transfer and GMP clinical manufacturing of the MB-107 lentiviral gene therapy program for the treatment of XSCID in Europe.
Also in November 2020, we announced that the European Commission issued a positive opinion on its application for Orphan Drug Designation for the MB-107 lentiviral gene therapy for the treatment of XSCID.
MB-102 (CD123-targeted CAR T cell therapy)
In October 2020, we announced that the first patient has been dosed in a Mustang-sponsored, open label, multicenter Phase 1/2 clinical trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of MB-102 in patients with relapsed or refractory BPDCN. Study sites include City of Hope, where the CAR T cell therapy was initially developed and where the clinical data were generated to support Mustang’s current multicenter trial, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Duke University and MD Anderson Cancer Center.
The Phase 1 portion of the trial will determine the maximum tolerated dose of MB-102 for the Phase 2 portion of the trial. Safety will be assessed at each dose level before proceeding to the next. Depending on the efficacy and safety profile of MB-102 in the Phase 1 portion of the trial, relapsed or refractory AML and demethylation resistant hrMDS may be added to the later dose escalation cohorts. The Phase 2 portion of the trial may be divided into as many as three arms to evaluate the efficacy of MB-102 in relapsed or refractory BPDCN (Arm 1), relapsed or refractory AML (Arm 2) and demethylation resistant hrMDS (Arm 3). The primary outcome that will be studied is the response rate at day 28 post infusion in all arms. Secondary outcome measures include duration of response, progression-free survival, overall survival and incidence of treatment-emergent adverse events, which will be followed for up to three years.
MB-101 (IL13Rα2-targeted CAR T cell therapy)
In December 2020, we announced that a Phase 1 single-center, two-arm clinical trial was initiated to establish the safety and feasibility of administering MB-101 to patients with leptomeningeal brain tumors (e.g., glioblastoma, ependymoma or medulloblastoma).
MB-105 (PSCA CAR T for Prostate & Pancreatic Cancers)
In October 2020, we announced that one patient’s experience on the Phase 1 trial of MB-105 was presented at the virtual 27th Annual Prostate Cancer Foundation Scientific Retreat. In a 73-year-old male patient with PSCA-positive metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer who was treated with MB-105 and lymphodepletion (a standard CAR T pre-conditioning regimen) after failing eight prior therapies, MB-105 demonstrated on day 28 a 94 percent reduction in prostate-specific antigen (PSA), near complete reduction of measurable soft tissue metastasis by computerized tomography, and improvement in bone metastases by magnetic resonance imaging. The therapy was associated with cytokine release syndrome, which was clinically managed with tocilizumab (anti-IL-6 receptor antibody), and hemorrhagic cystitis requiring transfusion which clinically resolved in 30 days.
SIRION Biotech GmbH - LentiBOOSTTM
On September 30, 2020, Mustang entered into an exclusive, worldwide licensing agreement with SIRION Biotech (“SIRION”) for the rights to SIRION’s LentiBOOSTTM technology for the development of MB-207, Mustang’s lentiviral gene therapy for the treatment of previously transplanted XSCID patients (the “SIRION Technology License”). Pursuant to the SIRION Technology License, the Company paid a one-time upfront fee of €0.1 million ($0.1 million) during the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, five future development milestone payments totaling up to approximately €4.7 million ($5.5 million) in the aggregate are due upon achievement of certain milestones. Additional milestone payments totaling up to €3.5 million ($4.1 million) in the aggregate are due in connection with the achievement of three commercial milestones, and low single digit royalties are due on aggregate cumulative worldwide net sales of licensed products.
Registration Statements
On October 23, 2020, the Company filed a shelf registration statement No. 333-249657 on Form S-3 (the “2020 S-3”), which was declared effective on December 4, 2020. Under the 2020 S-3, the Company may sell up to a total of $100.0 million of its securities. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $85.7 million of the 2020 S-3 remains available for sales of securities.
Term Loan
On March 29, 2019 (the “Closing Date”), the Company entered into a $20.0 million Loan Agreement with Horizon (the “Loan Agreement”), the proceeds of which were used to provide the Company with additional working capital to continue development of its gene and cell therapies. In accordance with the Loan Agreement, $15.0 million of the $20.0 million loan was funded on the Closing Date, with the remaining $5.0 million fundable upon the Company achieving certain predetermined milestones. On September 30, 2020, the Company repaid in full all amounts that were outstanding under the Loan Agreement.
At-the-Market Offering
On July 13, 2018, the Company filed a shelf registration statement No. 333-226175 on Form S-3, as amended on July 20, 2018 (the “2018 S-3”), which was declared effective in August 2018. Under the 2018 S-3, the Company may sell up to a total of $75.0 million of its securities. In connection with the 2018 S-3, the Company entered into an At-the-Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “ATM Agreement”) with B. Riley Securities, Inc. (formerly B. Riley FBR, Inc.), Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., National Securities Corporation, and Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. (each an “Agent” and collectively, the “Agents”), relating to the sale of shares of common stock. Under the ATM Agreement, the Company pays the Agents a commission rate of up to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from the sale of any shares of common stock. On December 31, 2020, the ATM Agreement was amended to add H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC as an Agent.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued approximately 17.6 million shares of common stock at an average price of $3.40 per share for gross proceeds of $59.8 million under the ATM Agreement. In connection with these sales, we paid aggregate fees of approximately $1.1 million for net proceeds of approximately $58.7 million.
Public Offering of Common Stock
On June 11, 2020, we announced the pricing of an underwritten public offering, whereby we sold 10,769,231 shares of common stock, (plus a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 1,615,384 shares of common stock, which was partially exercised) at a price of $3.25 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $37.2 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. In connection with the public offering, the Company paid aggregate fees of approximately $2.4 million for net proceeds of approximately $34.8 million.
Authorized Shares
On November 11, 2020, the Company’s Board adopted resolutions of the Board to ratify, approve and recommend stockholder approval of an amendment to the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, as amended, to revise Article IV, Section A thereof in order to effect an increase in the authorized number of shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.0001, from 85 million to 125 million (the “Amendment”). On November 11, 2020, the Company received approval of the Amendment by written consent in lieu of a meeting from the holders of a majority of issued and outstanding shares of the Company’s common and preferred stock. The increase in authorized shares to 125 million became effective on December 4, 2020.
To date, we have not received approval for the sale of our product candidates in any market and, therefore, have not generated any product sales from our product candidates. In addition, we have incurred substantial operating losses since our inception, and expect to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future and may never become profitable. As of December 31, 2020, we have an accumulated deficit of $185.5 million.
We are a majority-controlled subsidiary of Fortress Biotech, Inc. (“Fortress”). As a “Controlled Company” we rely on the exemption provided by Nasdaq Listing Rule 5615(c)(2), which permits us to maintain less than a majority of independent directors on our board.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
See Note 2 to our Financial Statements.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel, and other related expenses, stock-based compensation, payments made to third parties for license, sponsored research and milestone costs related to in-licensed products and technology, payments made to third party contract research organizations for preclinical and clinical studies, investigative sites for clinical trials, consultants, the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials, costs associated with regulatory filings, laboratory costs and other supplies.
Research and development expense increased by approximately $7.2 million from $30.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $37.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the following:
● $2.9 million for increased research and development employee compensation costs, including stock compensation, as we continue to increase research and development headcount to support development of our clinical programs;
● $2.5 million for increased lentiviral vector manufacturing to support Mustang-sponsored clinical trials;
● $1.6 million for increased costs for sponsored research and clinical trial agreements with our academic partners;
● approximately $1.4 million for increased other costs including consulting, outside services, laboratory supplies and depreciation; and
● offset by approximately $1.2 million for decreased costs for third-party contract research organizations.
Research and development expenses - licenses acquired increased by $3.8 million from $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses - licenses acquired for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the following:
● Approximately $2.7 million for the annual stock dividend to Fortress;
● $1.3 million related to our licenses with COH;
● $0.3 million related to our CD20 license with Fred Hutch;
● $0.1 million related to our LentiBOOSTTM license with SIRION; and
● offset by approximately $0.5 million for decreased costs related to our licenses with Nationwide, UCLA and CSL Behring (Calimmune).
We expect our research and development activities to increase as we develop our existing product candidates and potentially acquire new product candidates, reflecting increasing costs associated with the following:
● employee-related expenses, which include salaries and benefits;
● license fees and milestone payments related to in-licensed products and technology;
● expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, investigative sites and consultants that conduct our clinical trials and our preclinical activities;
● facility expenses, which include rent, utilities and maintenance costs;
● the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials; and
● costs associated with non-clinical activities, and regulatory approvals.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related expenses, including stock-based compensation, for executives and other administrative personnel, recruitment expenses, professional fees and other corporate expenses, including investor relations, legal activities including patent fees, and facilities-related expenses.
General and administrative expense decreased by approximately $0.1 million from $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the following:
● $0.9 million for increased general and administrative employee compensation costs, including stock compensation, due primarily to additional headcount to support the Company’s continued growth;
● offset by approximately $1.0 million for decreased costs primarily for legal and professional fees, consulting fees and state taxes.
We anticipate general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods, reflecting continued and increasing costs associated with:
● support of our expanded research and development activities, including additional product candidates entering the clinic;
● stock compensation granted to key employees and non-employees;
● support of business development activities; and
● increased professional fees and other costs associated with the regulatory requirements and increased compliance associated with being a publicly traded company.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) consists primarily of interest income earned on cash balances and short-term investments and interest expense on the Company’s notes payable. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, total other income (expense) were approximately $3.2 million and $0.5 million of expense, respectively. The $2.7 million increase in other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to $1.6 million of debt discount amortization, debt prepayment penalties of $0.6 million and lower interest income of $0.6 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company has incurred substantial operating losses and expects to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future and may never become profitable. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $185.5 million.
The Company has funded its operations to date primarily through the sale of equity and its venture debt financing agreement (the "Loan Agreement") with Horizon Technology Finance Corporation ("Horizon"), herein referred to as the "Horizon Notes." In September 2020, we repaid the Horizon Notes in full all amounts that were outstanding under the loan agreement, which was comprised of $15.0 million face value of the outstanding notes, $112,500 accrued and unpaid interest, a $750,000 loan termination fee and prepayment penalties of $550,000. The Company expects to continue to use the proceeds from previous financing transactions primarily for general corporate purposes, including financing the Company’s growth, developing new or existing product candidates, and funding capital expenditures, acquisitions and investments. The Company currently anticipates that its cash and cash equivalents balances at December 31, 2020, are sufficient to fund its anticipated operating cash requirements for at least one year from the date of this Form 10-K.
From January 1, 2021 through March 18, 2021, the Company issued approximately 10.6 million shares of common stock at an average price of $4.24 per share for gross proceeds of $44.9 million under the ATM Agreement.
The Company will be required to expend significant funds in order to advance the development of its product candidates. The Company will require additional financings through equity and debt offerings, collaborations and licensing arrangements or other sources to fully develop, prepare regulatory filings, obtain regulatory approvals and commercialize its existing and any new product candidates. If the Company is unable to arrange for such financings, or unable to arrange for them on terms acceptable to the Company, the Company’s current development plans and plans for expansion of its facility and general and administrative infrastructure will be curtailed.
Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $37.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $33.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to approximately $60.0 million in net loss, partially offset by $7.6 million of common shares issuable for Founders shares, $3.1 million change in operating assets and liabilities, $3.0 million of non-cash stock compensation expenses, $2.5 million of research and development-licenses acquired, $2.4 million of equity fee on issuance of common shares to Fortress, $2.3 million of accretion of debt discount and $1.7 million of depreciation expense.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to approximately $46.4 million in net loss, partially offset by $4.9 million of common shares issuable for Founders shares, $2.7 million of non-cash stock compensation expenses, $1.7 million of equity fee on issuance of common shares to Fortress, $1.4 million of research and development-licenses acquired, $1.3 million of depreciation expense and $0.7 million of accretion of debt discount.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing $2.5 million in purchases of research and development licenses and $1.9 million in purchases of fixed assets.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $13.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing our $17.6 million in maturities of certificates of deposits, offset by $1.4 million in purchases of research and development licenses and $2.3 million in purchases of fixed assets.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $78.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, gross proceeds of $59.8 million, net of offering costs of $1.1 million, from the Mustang ATM; gross proceeds of $37.2 million, net of offering costs of $2.4 million, from our June 2020 underwritten public offering and $0.3 million raised from the issuance of the Company’s common shares in connection with the ESPP, partially offset by the prepayment of the Horizon Notes of $15.7 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $65.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, due to net proceeds of $13.6 million from the Horizon Notes; gross proceeds of $22.5 million, net of offering costs of $0.5 million, from the Mustang ATM; and gross proceeds of $31.6 million, net of offering costs of $2.1 million, from our May 2019 underwritten public offering.