Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward Looking Statements
Certain information contained in this MD&A includes “forward-looking statements.” Statements which are not historical reflect our current expectations and projections about our future results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities and are based upon information currently available to us and our management and their interpretation of what is believed to be significant factors affecting our existing and proposed business, including many assumptions regarding future events. Actual results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities could differ materially and perhaps substantially from those expressed in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements as a result of various risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those risks described in detail in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors” as well as elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Forward-looking statements, which involve assumptions and describe our future plans, strategies, and expectations, are generally identifiable by use of the words “may,” “should,” “would,” “will,” “could,” “scheduled,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “intend,” “seek,” or “project” or the negative of these words or other variations on these words or comparable terminology.
In light of these risks and uncertainties, and especially given the nature of our existing and proposed business, there can be no assurance that the forward-looking statements contained in this section and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K will in fact occur. Potential investors should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. Except as expressly required by the federal securities laws, there is no undertaking to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances or any other reason.
Overview
Microbot is a pre-clinical medical device company specializing in the research, design and development of next generation robotic endoluminal surgery devices targeting the minimally invasive surgery space. Microbot is primarily focused on leveraging its micro-robotic technologies with the goal of redefining surgical robotics while improving surgical outcomes for patients.
Microbot’s current technological platforms, ViRobTM, TipCATTM and LIBERTY™ (including certain CardioSert assets), are comprised of proprietary innovative technologies. Using the ViRob platform, Microbot is currently developing the Self Cleaning Shunt for the treatment of hydrocephalus and Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus, or NPH. Utilizing the LIBERTY and CardioSert platforms, Microbot is developing the first ever fully disposable robot for various endovascular interventional procedures. In addition, the Company is focused on the development of a Multi Generation Pipeline Portfolio utilizing all of its proprietary technologies.
Microbot has a patent portfolio of 42 issued/allowed patents and 23 patent applications pending worldwide.
Technological Platforms
ViRob
The ViRob is an autonomous crawling micro-robot which can be controlled remotely or within the body. Its miniature dimensions are expected to allow it to navigate and crawl in different natural spaces within the human body, including blood vessels, the digestive tract and the respiratory system as well as artificial spaces such as shunts, catheters, ports, etc. Its unique structure is expected to give it the ability to move in tight spaces and curved passages as well as the ability to remain within the human body for prolonged time. The SCS product was developed using the ViRob technology.
TipCAT
The TipCAT is a disposable self-propelled locomotive device that is specially designed to advance in tubular anatomies. The TipCAT is a mechanism comprising a series of interconnected balloons at the device’s tip that provides the TipCAT with its forward locomotion capability. The device can self-propel within natural tubular lumens such as the blood vessels, respiratory and the urinary and GI tracts. A single channel of air/fluid supply sequentially inflates and deflates a series of balloons creating an inchworm like forward motion. The TipCAT maintains a standard working channel for treatments. Unlike standard access devices such as guidewires, catheters for vascular access and endoscopes, the TipCAT does not need to be pushed into the patient’s lumen using external pressure; rather, it will gently advance itself through the organ’s anatomy. As a result, the TipCAT is designed to be able to reach every part of the lumen under examination regardless of the topography, be less operator dependent, and greatly reduce the likelihood of damage to lumen structure. The TipCAT thus offers functionality features equivalent to modern tubular access devices, along with advantages associated with its physiologically adapted self-propelling mechanism, flexibility, and design.
CardioSert
On May 25, 2018, Microbot acquired a patent-protected technology from CardioSert Ltd., a privately-held medical device company based in Israel that was part of a technological incubator supported by the Israel Innovation Authorities. The CardioSert technology contemplates a combination of a guidewire and microcatheter, technologies that are broadly used for surgery within a tubular organ or structure such as a blood vessel or duct. The CardioSert technology features a unique guidewire delivery system with steering and stiffness control capabilities which when developed is expected to give the physician the ability to control the tip curvature, to adjust tip load to varying degrees of stiffness in a gradually continuous manner. The CardioSert technology was originally developed to support interventional cardiologists in crossing chronic total occlusions (CTO) during percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) procedures and has the potential to be used in other spaces and applications, such as peripheral intervention, and neurosurgery.
LIBERTY
On January 13, 2020, Microbot unveiled what it believes is the world’s first fully disposable robotic system for use in Endovascular Interventional procedures, such as cardiovascular, peripheral and neurovascular. The LIBERTY robotic system features a unique compact design with the capability to be operated remotely, reduce radiation exposure and physical strain to the physician, as well as the potential to eliminate the use of multiple consumables when used with its “One & Done” capabilities, based in part on the CardioSert platform or possibly other guidewire/microcatheter technologies.
On August 17, 2020, Microbot announced the successful conclusion of its feasibility animal study using the LIBERTY robotic system. The study met all of its end points with no intraoperative adverse events, which supports Microbot’s objectives to allow physicians to conduct a catheter-based procedure from outside the catheterization laboratory (cath-lab), avoiding radiation exposure, physical strain and the risk of cross contamination. The study was performed by two leading physicians in the neuro vascular and peripheral vascular intervention spaces, and the results demonstrated robust navigation capabilities, intuitive usability and accurate deployment of embolic agents, most of which was conducted remotely from the cath-lab’s control room.
We are continuously exploring and evaluating additional innovative guidewire/microcatheter technologies to be integrated and combined with the LIBERTY robotic platform.
Financial Operations Overview
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and related expenses and overhead for Microbot’s research, development and engineering personnel, prototype materials and research studies, obtaining and maintaining Microbot’s patent portfolio. Microbot expenses its research and development costs as incurred.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of the costs associated with management salaries and benefits, professional fees for accounting, auditing, consulting and legal services, and allocated overhead expenses.
Microbot expects that its general and administrative expenses may increase in the future as it expands its operating activities, maintains and expands its patent portfolio and maintains compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements. Microbot expects these potential increases will likely include management costs, legal fees, accounting fees, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance premiums and expenses associated with investor relations.
Income Taxes
Microbot has incurred net losses and has not recorded any income tax benefits for the losses. It is still in its development stage and has not yet generated revenues, therefore, it is more likely than not that sufficient taxable income will not be available for the tax losses to be fully utilized in the future.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of Microbot’s financial condition and results of operations are based on its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires Microbot to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements. Microbot bases its estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While Microbot’s significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to its consolidated financial statements, Microbot believes the following accounting policies are the most critical for fully understanding and evaluating its consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
Contingencies
Management records and discloses legal contingencies in accordance with ASC Topic 450 Contingencies. A provision is recorded when it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. The Company monitors the stage of progress of its litigation matters to determine if any adjustments are required.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company measures the fair value of certain of its financial instruments on a recurring basis.
A fair value hierarchy is used to rank the quality and reliability of the information used to determine fair values. Financial assets and liabilities carried at fair value will be classified and disclosed in one of the following three categories:
Level 1 - Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets and liabilities.
Level 2 - Inputs other than Level 1 that are observable, either directly or indirectly, such as unadjusted quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities, unadjusted quoted prices in the markets that are not active, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to the fair value of the assets or liabilities.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth the key components of Microbot’s results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses. Microbot’s research and development expenses were approximately $3,396,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $3,048,000 for the same period in 2019. The increase in research and development expenses of approximately $348,000 in 2020 was primarily due to increased salaries, professional services and patent expenses compared to the prior year. Microbot expects its research and development expenses to continue to increase over time as Microbot advances its development programs and begins pre-clinical and clinical trials for the SCS, LIBERTY and TipCAT research programs.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses were approximately $5,693,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $4,192,000 for the same period in 2019. The increase in general and administrative expenses of approximately $1,501,000 in 2020 was primarily due to increased salaries, government fees, share based compensation, insurance, and public and investor relations compared to 2019, partially offset by a decrease in 2020 in professional services and travel expenses compared to 2019. Microbot believes its general and administrative expenses may increase over time as it advances its programs, increases its headcount and operating activities and incurs expenses associated with public-company compliance.
Financing Expenses. Financing expenses were approximately $80,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $103,000 for the same period in 2019. The decrease in 2020 was primarily due to financing income from convertible loan offset by exchange rate differences related to lease liability contracts at Microbot Israel.
Capital Gains. Capital gains in 2019 were approximately $96,000, where Microbot incurred capital gains primarily from the sale of certain property and equipment. We did not incur capital gains in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Microbot has incurred losses since inception and negative cash flows from operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. As of December 31, 2020, Microbot had a net working capital of approximately $23,908,000, consisting primarily of cash and cash equivalents. Microbot anticipates that it will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future as it continues research and development efforts of its product candidates, hires additional staff, including clinical, scientific, operational, financial and management personnel, and continues to incur costs associated with being a public company.
Microbot has funded its operations through the issuance of capital stock, grants from the Israeli Innovation Authority, and convertible debt. Since inception (November 2010) through December 31, 2020, Microbot has raised net cash proceeds of approximately $54,770,000, and incurred a total cumulative loss of approximately $44,280,000. Microbot returned $3,375,000 (before interest) of such proceeds as a result of an adverse outcome in a litigation that concluded in the first quarter of 2020, and is now subject to an additional lawsuit seeking the return of an additional $6,750,000 of such proceeds.
Microbot Israel obtained from the Israeli Innovation Authority (“IIA”) grants for participation in research and development for the years 2013 through December 31, 2020 in the total amount of approximately $1,500,000 and, in return, Microbot Israel is obligated to pay royalties amounting to 3%-3.5% of its future sales up to the amount of the grant. The grant is linked to the exchange rate of the dollar to the New Israeli Shekel and bears interest at an annual rate of USD LIBOR. Under the terms of the grant and applicable law, Microbot is restricted from transferring any technologies, know-how, manufacturing or manufacturing rights developed using the grant outside of Israel without the prior approval of the Israel Innovation Authority. Microbot has no obligation to repay the grant, if the SCS project fails, is unsuccessful or aborted before any sales are generated. The financial risk is assumed completely by the IIA.
Microbot believes that its net cash will be sufficient to fund its operations for at least 24 months and fund operations necessary to continue development activities of the SCS, LIBERTY and TipCAT. However, in the event we are unsuccessful in our current litigation with Empery and Hudson Bay, pursuant to which they are seeking the return of $6,750,000 in proceeds we received from them in a 2017 stock offering, we may have funds for less than 24 months.
Microbot plans to continue to fund its research and development and other operating expenses, other development activities relating to additional product candidates, and the associated losses from operations, through its existing cash and possibly additional grants from the Israeli Innovation Authority. Microbot intends to also raise capital through future issuances of debt and/or equity securities, including registered offerings under its existing Registration Statement on Form S-3 for up to $75 million of securities, which it may draw down from time to time. These issuances may be opportunistic and even if the Company has enough funds at such time for operations for more than 12-24 months. The capital raises from issuances of convertible debt and equity securities could result in additional dilution to Microbot’s shareholders. In addition, to the extent Microbot determines to incur additional indebtedness, Microbot’s incurrence of additional debt could result in debt service obligations and operating and financing covenants that would restrict its operations. Microbot can provide no assurance that financing will be available in the amounts it needs or on terms acceptable to it, if at all. If Microbot is not able to secure adequate additional working capital when it becomes needed, it may be required to make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible and/or suspend or curtail planned research programs. Any of these actions could materially harm Microbot’s business.
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of the net cash flow activity for each of the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $7,252,000, compared to $6,451,000 in 2019. The increase was from higher net losses in 2020 partially offset by increased non-cash stock-based compensation.
Net cash flows from investing activities decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily from the net purchase of marketable securities.
Net cash flows from financing activities decreased in 2020 due primarily to issuance of common stock of $36,770,000 during 2019, while in 2020 there was a payback of $3,375,000 to investors due to the outcome of litigation with such investors.