ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements and Notes thereto included in this Form 10-K. The forward-looking statements included in this discussion and elsewhere in this Form 10-K involve risks and uncertainties, including those set forth under “Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results and experience could differ materially from the anticipated results and other expectations expressed in our forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including but not limited to those discussed in this Item and in Item 1A - “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Our Business
We are a clinical stage pharmaceutical company focused on the treatment of highly resistant cancers and viruses. We have three core technologies, based substantially on discoveries made at MD Anderson Cancer Center (MD Anderson or MDA). We have four drug candidates, three of which have now shown human activity in clinical trials.
During 2020, three of those drug candidates accounted for five clinical trials in the US and Europe. Two of those trials are ongoing externally funded studies of WP1066 in brain tumors. Two of our internally funded Phase 1 clinical trials have essentially concluded. The trial for Annamycin in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) successfully met its safety endpoint, and the trial for WP1220 in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) demonstrated an objective response rate of 45% and a clinical benefit rate of 100%. An additional Phase 1/2 clinical trial of Annamycin in AML is also internally funded and is currently ongoing. In 2021, we anticipate the initiation of five new clinical trials in addition to the three trials continuing from 2020.
In late 2020, we received U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) clearance to proceed with an additional Phase 1b/2 clinical trial of Annamycin for the treatment of sarcoma lung metastases and we are preparing to begin this trial in the US. We also plan to seek approval to begin a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of Annamycin in combination with Ara-C for the treatment of AML in Europe. These two new trials will be internally funded. We expect a second Phase 1b/2 clinical trial of Annamycin in sarcoma lung metastases to be primarily investigator-funded in Europe and we plan to seek a collaborative partner to support a Phase 2 clinical study of WP1220 in CTCL. Finally, we are working to initiate a clinical trial of WP1122, in either a Phase 1a/1b clinical trial in COVID-19 or a physician-sponsored clinical trial for a cancer indication, or both. The ultimate course of action depends on the outcome of additional regulatory and preclinical work. These trials may be internally or externally funded, depending on the timing and nature of the studies. In summary, we had five clinical trials underway or concluded in 2020 and we now expect up to eight clinical trials to be underway or approved in 2021, including physician-sponsored trials related to our drug candidates for which we are not actively involved.
By "internally funded” we mean that the primary costs of the preclinical activity and clinical trials are funded by us. “Externally funded” drug candidates include those for which preclinical work is funded and performed by external collaborators and for which clinical trials are physician-sponsored. For externally funded research, any grant funds that support such preclinical work or clinical trials and most of the associated expenses are not reflected in our financial statements. However, the costs of drug product and other minor supporting activities that we provide for externally funded preclinical activities and clinical trials are included in our financial statements.
We recently announced collaborations with third parties to assist us in developing potential treatments for certain viral diseases, including potentially COVID-19. The preclinical work to evaluate molecules within the WP1122 portfolio of antimetabolites (which include molecules capable of inhibiting glycolysis and altering glycosylation) for viral indications is mostly similar to the preclinical work we originally planned as part of developing WP1122 for cancer indications. Accordingly, we believe the preclinical work under way for WP1122 will support an Investigational New Drug (IND) application or its equivalent in other countries for either cancer-related or virus-related clinical trials (or both) in the first half of 2021. Conducting any such clinical trials for viral diseases is subject to the limited access we have to validated in vivo efficacy testing and our ability to obtain approval from a regulatory body to proceed without in vivo efficacy studies. Additionally, we primarily rely on such collaborations for testing other molecules in the WP1122 portfolio against other hard to treat viruses.
Based on the results of our clinical activity thus far, we have further narrowed our internal development focus to our nearest term opportunities, especially where human activity has been shown in clinical trials. This focus is primarily on preclinical and clinical activities with Annamycin, preclinical activities associated with an intravenous version of WP1066 and IND-enabling studies of WP1122. We intend to rely on external funding, to the extent available. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have internally accelerated development of the WP1122 portfolio with a combined effort of internally and externally funded preclinical work to support an IND application with the FDA or an international regulatory body for the treatment of COVID-19 or a cancer indication or both.
Of our three clinical stage drug candidates, Annamycin is currently in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in Poland. We recently received clearance from the FDA to proceed with a Phase 1b/2 clinical trial of Annamycin as a potential treatment for soft tissue sarcomas (STS) metastasized to the lungs. WP1066, an Immune/Transcription Modulator (p-STAT3 inhibitor or, simply, STAT3 inhibitor) is intended to target a wide range of tumors, including brain tumors such as glioblastoma (GBM) and pediatric brain tumors (like diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma, or DIPG, and medulloblastoma), as well as pancreatic cancer. It is currently in two physician-sponsored Phase 1 clinical trials, one for adult GBM and another for pediatric brain tumors (including DIPG and medulloblastoma). We began and completed a "proof-of-concept" Phase 1 clinical trial in 2019 in Poland for a third drug, WP1220 (a molecule in the WP1066 portfolio), for the topical treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). We are actively seeking collaboration with a strategic partner in the near term for external funding for the continued development of WP1220 in a Phase 2 clinical trial as a topical therapy for CTCL. If we are not successful in this outreach, we may choose to use internal funds to generate additional human data to facilitate such outreach efforts. We are also engaged in preclinical development of additional drug candidates, including additional Immune/Transcription Modulators, as well as antimetabolites, targeting glycolysis and glycosylation.
We consider Annamycin to be a "next generation" anthracycline, unlike any currently approved anthracyclines, as it is designed to avoid multidrug resistance mechanisms with little to no cardiotoxicity (the efficacy of all currently approved anthracyclines is limited by both multidrug resistance and cardiotoxicity). We have received an independent expert cardiology assessment confirming the absence of cardiotoxicity in the first 19 patients treated with Annamycin in both our US and European Phase 1 clinical trials. Annamycin is currently in one Phase 1/2 clinical trial in Europe, and the Phase 1 portion of another Phase 1/2 AML trial in the US has been concluded, subject to final database lock and closure. The FDA requested that we demonstrate that Annamycin could be safely administered to patients up to the lifetime maximum allowable level of anthracycline (LTMAD) established by the FDA and the trial met this primary endpoint. The FDA established the LTMAD because of concerns about cardiotoxicity associated with currently approved anthracyclines when administered above the LTMAD. Of the first 19 patients in our trials, 11 have been treated above the LTMAD (one patient received more than double the LTMAD) and none have shown evidence of any cardiotoxicity. As a result of discussions with the FDA, we will focus on establishing a recommended Phase 2 dose (RP2D) in our trial in Europe, and, as requested by the FDA, we will generate additional safety and efficacy data.
The trial in Poland is in its fifth cohort, where patients are being treated at 240 mg/m2. Patient 2 in this cohort experienced a dose limiting toxicity (DLT), related to liver function, secondarily related to concomitant medication not being withheld. Although that DLT resolved, in accordance with the trial protocol, the cohort was expanded and has now enrolled a total of five patients. In March 2021, patient 4 in this cohort experienced a similar DLT and, accordingly, no additional patients will be enrolled at this dose level beyond the five patients enrolled to date. The DLT for Patient 4 is being monitored and, per protocol, other patients in this cohort are permitted to continue to receive the full dose of Annamycin, at the discretion of their physicians and with the patients being notified of the reported DLTs.
We are planning to amend the protocol for this trial to allow exploration of an intermediate dose level between the 210 mg/m2 dose in the fourth cohort and the current 240 mg/m2 dose level, in order to establish the maximum tolerated dosage (MTD) and Recommended Phase 2 dose (RP2D), which may be the same. While this will establish an MTD for Annamycin in AML and inform the starting dose in our planned trials in soft tissue sarcoma (STS) lung metastases, we do not believe it will limit the dose escalation in our STS trials. Because of the different indication and differences in dosing regimen, we expect to determine a separate MTD in the Phase 1 portion of the STS trials. Once the MTD in the single agent AML trial is established, we currently plan to begin the expansion Phase 2 portion of this trial with relapsed patients at the RP2D, in order to determine the potential efficacy of Annamycin as a second line, single agent treatment for relapsed AML. Following on our preclinical research, we also intend to begin the Phase 1 portion of an AML trial using Annamycin in combination with Ara-C, a drug commonly used as a single agent and in combination chemotherapy for AML.
A preliminary review of the data in the completed cohorts in both trials, which is subject to update, indicates that patients received an average of 3+ and a maximum of 9 prior regimens. Thus far in the completed cohorts of our US and European single agent AML trials, there are 13 relapsed patients who were enrolled after one or more relapses from the prior regimens. Of these, 38% had either a CRi, PR or Bridge to Transplant. We view this as encouraging, because recruitment in the expansion Phase 2 will be limited to patients with no more than a single relapse. This is in contrast to the Phase 1 portion of the trial, where, in order to accelerate recruitment, we included a majority of patients who were primarily refractory or who had two or more relapses from alternate therapy. We believe this is significant because patients who are either refractory or have had two or more relapses are considered to be less likely to respond to therapy and especially to a single agent therapy. As a result and considering that all patients in Phase 2 will be treated at the RP2D, we believe the overall response in the expansion Phase 2 may be better than the overall response in the Phase 1 portion of the trial, although we cannot be certain that actual results will reflect this.
Our preclinical work on Annamycin demonstrated activity against certain cancers metastasized to the lungs. In December 2020, we disclosed that the FDA allowed our IND to go into effect to study Annamycin for the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma lung metastases. This allows us to begin a Phase 1b/2 clinical trial in the U.S. for patients with soft tissue sarcoma that has metastasized to the lungs after first-line therapy for their disease. We expect this trial to begin in the first half of 2021. Later in December 2020, we disclosed that the FDA had granted Orphan Drug Designation (ODD) to Annamycin for the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas, in addition to the existing ODD for Annamycin in relapsed or refractory AML. On February 2, 2021, we announced that a preclinical study in animals has confirmed a significant therapeutic benefit of Annamycin against metastatic osteosarcoma. As of day 130 of the study, the survival rate for animals treated with Annamycin was 100%, compared with only 10% for untreated animals. Computerized tomography scans demonstrated that animals treated with Annamycin exhibited suppression of tumor growth and not a single death was observed in the treated animals, whereas observed tumor burden was believed to have contributed to the rapid death of 90% of untreated animals. We believe this data is a promising indication of the possibility of Annamycin’s impact on other cancers metastasized to the lungs. We caution that this is preclinical animal data and we can provide no assurance that we will see similar results in our planned clinical trials.
WP1066 is one of several Immune/Transcription Modulators designed to stimulate the immune response to tumors by inhibiting the errant activity of Regulatory T-Cells (TRegs) while also inhibiting key oncogenic transcription factors, including p-STAT3 (phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 3), c-Myc (a celluar signal transducer named after a homologous avian virus called Myelocytomatosis) and HIF-1α (hypoxia inducible factor 1α). These transcription factors are widely sought targets that are believed to contribute to an increase in cell survival and proliferation, and the angiogenesis (coopting vasculature for blood supply), invasion, metastasis and inflammation associated with tumors. They may also play a role in the inability of immune checkpoint inhibitors to affect more resistant tumors. WP1066 is currently in two US physician-sponsored Phase 1 trials, one at MD Anderson for the treatment of glioblastoma (GBM) in adults and another at Emory University for the treatment of pediatric brain tumors.
The trial at MD Anderson is in the fourth and final cohort in the dose escalation phase. In the first quarter of 2021, we were notified that the physician sponsoring this trial is leaving MDA. We cannot be assured that this trial will continue at MDA after her departure. Several additional institutions have expressed an interest in sponsoring similar research on WP1066 in brain tumors, so to help ensure the potential continuation of this important research, regardless of the sponsoring institution, we have requested the IND for this trial to be transferred into our name with the FDA, although we can provide no assurance as to when, or if, this transfer will be completed. While we are making arrangements to continue this research in additional physician-sponsored trials, we expect that continued research on WP1066 in adult GBM will be temporarily delayed in 2021.
The Emory trial for pediatric brain tumors has now treated three patients in the first cohort. The third and last patient in the second cohort has begun treatment at the dose level of 6mg/kg. In that trial, one of the patients in the first cohort with DIPG showed an apparent response to the treatment with both clinical improvement and radiologic reduction of tumor size. We caution that this is preliminary data, and no conclusions should be drawn from this single event. Another physician-sponsored Phase 1 trial is being considered for the treatment of GBM with WP1066 in combination with radiation, although no assurances can be given that such trial will begin.
We are also developing new compounds designed to exploit the potential uses of inhibitors of glycolysis such as 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG), which we believe may provide an opportunity to cut off the fuel supply of tumors by taking advantage of their high level of dependence on glucose in comparison to healthy cells. A key drawback to 2-DG is its lack of drug-like properties, including a short circulation time and poor tissue/organ distribution characteristics. Our lead Metabolism/Glycosylation Inhibitor, WP1122, is a prodrug of 2-DG that appears to improve the drug-like properties of 2-DG by increasing its circulation time and improving tissue/organ distribution. New research also points to the potential for 2-DG to be capable of enhancing the usefulness of checkpoint inhibitors. Considering that 2-DG lacks sufficient drug-like properties to be practical in a clinical setting, we believe WP1122 has the opportunity to become an important drug to potentiate existing therapies, including checkpoint inhibitors.
As the COVID-19 pandemic unfolded, several independent research teams identified that 2-DG may have the potential to treat COVID-19, as well as other diseases caused by coronaviruses. Similar to the dependence of many tumors on glucose, viruses like SARS-CoV-2 are highly dependent on both glycolysis and glycosylation (and, therefore, glucose) in order to successfully invade host cells and proliferate. It is on this basis that we have established an antiviral drug development program focused on WP1122 and its analogs. We are in the process of identifying the best possible pathway to begin a clinical trial in either COVID-19 or cancer patients or both in the first half of 2021.
The spread of COVID-19 has caused significant volatility in US and international markets, including Poland, where we conduct some of our clinical trials, and Italy, where our drug supply is produced. There has been limited interruption of our drug supply, and most Polish clinics where we are conducting trials are limiting access for monitoring activities, which could delay our ability to collect data and authorize new patient recruitment. Additionally, we believe COVID-19 has materially slowed the ability of approved sites to recruit patients for our trials. This could worsen or be alleviated at any time. Furthermore, there is significant uncertainty around the breadth and duration of business disruptions related to COVID-19, as well as its impact on the US and international economies and, as such, we are unable to determine if it will have a material impact to our operations. Recently, we have experienced a limited increase in activity with regard to recruitment of new patients in Poland. Additionally, we believe that the potential for impact to our supply chain due to COVID-19 will be reduced as vaccine production normalizes throughout the industry. In light of current US trends with respect to COVID-19, we cannot determine whether COVID-19 will materially impact recruitment for current or future US based trials.
We do not have manufacturing facilities and all manufacturing activities are contracted out to third parties. Additionally, we do not have and do not intend to have a sales organization. Our overall strategy is to seek potential outlicensing opportunities with larger pharmaceutical companies who are better suited for the marketing, sales and distribution of our drugs once approved.
Recent Developments
Equity Offerings
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we issued equity and received gross proceeds of $80.9 million. During January 2021 we issued approximately 469,000 shares for gross proceeds of $2.9 million using our At The Market Agreement with Oppenheimer & Co., Inc. Additionally, on February 3, 2021, we announced the pricing of an underwritten public offering of an aggregate of 14,273,684 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $4.75 per share. We granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 2,141,052 shares of common stock offered in the public offering. The offering closed on February 5, 2021 and gross proceeds of the offering were approximately $67.8 million, prior to deducting the underwriting discount and other estimated offering expenses. On February 10, 2021, the underwriters of the public offering exercised in full their option to purchase an additional 2,141,052 shares of common stock at the public offering price of $4.75 per share, bringing total gross proceeds to approximately $78.0 million before underwriting discount.
Engagement of a Clinical Research Organization for the STS Lung Metastasis Clinical Trial
On February 1, 2021, we entered into an agreement with Catalyst Clinical Research (Catalyst), a contract research organization, to manage our US clinical trial to study the ability of Annamycin to treat soft tissue sarcoma (STS) that has metastasized to the lungs.
Moleculin Biotech, Inc.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 as Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table is data derived from the Consolidated Statement of Operations (in thousands) and the discussions that follow are in approximate amounts:
Research and Development Expense
Research and development (R&D) expense was $12.8 million and $11.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in R&D of $1.8 million mainly relates to: increased clinical trial activity (3 drugs in 4 clinical trials in 2019, versus 3 drugs in 5 clinical trials in 2020), increased costs related to sponsored research agreements, costs related to manufacturing of additional drug product and two additional employees in R&D headcount.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative (G&A) expense was $6.8 million and $6.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in G&A of $0.5 million was mainly attributable to increased payroll related costs for an additional finance staff, increased stock-based compensation expense, and increased costs for directors and officer's liability insurance being partially offset by reduced travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gain from Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
We recorded a gain of $2.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a gain of $4.1 million, during the year ended December 31, 2019, for the change in fair value on revaluation of our warrant liability associated with our warrants issued in conjunction with our stock offerings. We are required to revalue certain of the warrants at the time of each warrant exercise and at the end of each reporting period and reflect in the statement of operations a gain or loss from the change in fair value of the warrant in the period in which the change occurred. We calculated the fair value of the warrants outstanding using the Black-Scholes model. Generally, a gain results principally from a decline in our share price during the period and a loss results principally from an increase in our share price.
Net Loss
The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $17.4 million, which included non-cash gains of $2.3 million on warrants in 2020 as compared to $4.1 million in the prior year and approximately $1.7 million of stock-based compensation expense in 2020 as compared to $1.5 million in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $15.2 million and prepaid expenses and other expenses of $2.0 million. We also had $1.1 million of accounts payable and $1.8 million of accrued expenses and other current liabilities. A significant portion of the accounts payable and accrued expenses are due to work performed in relation to our preclinical activities and our clinical trials. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we used approximately $17.8 million and $17.2 million of cash in operating activities, respectively, which represents cash outlays for research and development and general and administrative expenses in such periods. The increase in 2020 reflects the increase in preclinical and clinical activity over 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net proceeds from financing activities were $22.5 million, predominately from the sale of our common stock and warrants. In 2019, approximately $20.9 million was raised predominately through the sale of shares of common stock and the exercise of warrants. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $0.4 million primarily related to mass spectrometer equipment purchased for the lab in 2020. The equipment will be used to analyze uptake, metabolism, and tissue organ distribution of anti-cancer and anti-viral agents, which is critical for determination of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic parameters of the drug.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we issued equity and received gross proceeds of $80.9 million. During January 2021 we issued approximately 469,000 shares for gross proceeds of $2.9 million using our At The Market Agreement with Oppenheimer & Co., Inc., discussed below. Additionally, on February 3, 2021, we announced the pricing of an underwritten public offering of an aggregate of 14,273,684 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $4.75 per share. We granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 2,141,052 shares of common stock offered in the public offering. The offering closed on February 5, 2021 and gross proceeds of the offering were approximately $67.8 million, prior to deducting the underwriting discount and other estimated offering expenses. On February 10, 2021, the underwriters of the public offering exercised in full their option to purchase an additional 2,141,052 shares of common stock at the public offering price of $4.75 per share, bringing total gross proceeds to approximately $78.0 million before underwriting discount.
We believe that our cash resources as of December 31, 2020, along with the additional funding received subsequent to year-end, will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements, which include a potential increase over our current R&D rate of expenditures, through at least the year 2023. Such projections are subject to changes in our internally funded preclinical and clinical activities, including unplanned preclinical and clinical activity. We anticipate incurring operating losses for the next several years as we support the preclinical and clinical activities necessary to prepare our drug candidates for successful out licensing, including our efforts to expand our technologies. These factors raise uncertainties about our ability to fund operations in future years. If we need to raise additional capital in order to continue to execute our business plan, there is no assurance that additional financing will be available when needed or that we will be able to obtain financing on terms acceptable to us. A failure to raise sufficient capital could adversely impact our ability to achieve our intended business objectives and meet our financial obligations as they become due and payable.
February 2020 Stock Offering
In February 2020 we entered into subscription agreements with certain institutional investors for the sale of up to 1,250,000 shares of our common stock (taking into account the one-for-six reverse stock split completed January 29, 2021) and warrants to purchase 937,501 shares of common stock (taking into account the one-for-six reverse stock split completed January 29, 2021) at a combined public offering price of $4.80 per share and related warrant. The warrants were exercisable commencing six months from the date of issuance at a price of $6.30 per share and will expire five years from the date they are first exercisable. The offering closed on February 10, 2020 and gross proceeds of the offering were approximately $6.0 million, prior to deducting the placement agent fees and other estimated offering expenses.
Lincoln Park Equity Line
In November 2020, we entered into a purchase agreement (the 2020 Purchase Agreement) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (Lincoln Park). Pursuant to the terms of the 2020 Purchase Agreement, Lincoln Park agreed to purchase from us up to $22.0 million of the Company’s common stock (subject to certain limitations) from time to time during the term of the 2020 Purchase Agreement. Pursuant to the terms of the 2020 Purchase Agreement, at the time we signed the 2020 Purchase Agreement, we issued 126,699 shares of common stock to Lincoln Park as consideration for its commitment to purchase shares of our common stock under the 2020 Purchase Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, pursuant to the 2020 Purchase Agreement, we sold Lincoln Park 638,203 shares of common stock, and issued a total of 133,017 commitment shares, at an average price of $4.30 per share, resulting in gross proceeds of $2.7 million. We terminated the 2020 Purchase Agreement on February 2, 2021.
ATM Agreements
In July 2020, we entered into a new At Market Issuance Sales Agreement with Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. (the 2020 ATM Agreement). Pursuant to the terms of the 2020 ATM Agreement, the Company was able to sell from time to time through Oppenheimer shares of the Company’s common stock with an aggregate sales price of up to $15.0 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, pursuant to the 2020 ATM Agreement, the Company issued 471,405 shares of common stock at an average price of $6.11 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $2.8 million.
In addition, at December 31, 2020, we had 26,966 shares of our common stock subscribed in ATM transactions under the 2020 ATM Agreement for net proceeds, after deducting commissions and other transaction costs, of approximately $0.1 million at an average selling price of $4.96 per share. Accordingly, we have recorded a subscription receivable of $0.1 million as a reduction of stockholders' equity in our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. We terminated the 2020 ATM Agreement on February 2, 2021.
In July 2019, we entered into an at-the-market equity agreement (the 2019 ATM Agreement) with Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. During the year ended December 31, 2020, pursuant to the 2019 ATM Agreement, we issued 1,412,017 shares of common stock at an average price of $8.68 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $11.9 million. We paid a commission to Oppenheimer equal to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from the sale of our common stock under the 2019 ATM Agreement. In the third quarter of 2020, the 2019 ATM Agreement expired and was terminated.
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for the years indicated (in thousands):
Cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $17.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $17.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in use of cash for operations was mainly due to: 1) payments for developing, manufacturing and testing drug product as we prepared for clinical trials; 2) an increase in R&D employee and contractor headcount and associated payroll costs; 3) an increase in paid sponsored research and related expenses; and 4) an increase in license fees. These are all a reflection of the ongoing clinical and pre-clinical activity and the associated increase in G&A support for our three core drug technologies.
Cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.05 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase relates to mass spectrometer equipment purchased for the lab in 2020. The equipment will be used to analyze uptake, metabolism, and tissue organ distribution of anti-cancer and anti-viral agents, which is critical for determination of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic parameters of the drug.
Cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $22.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior period of $20.9 million. Net cash provided by financing in 2020 consisted primarily of net proceeds from issuance of common stock. The prior period financing activities consisted primarily of $19.3 million net proceeds from issuance of common stock, and $1.6 million net proceeds from the exercise of warrants.
Off-Balance Sheet Transactions
We do not engage in off-balance sheet transactions.
JOBS Act and Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies.
We have implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and may impact our financial statements and we do not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements and related notes have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (US GAAP) for financial information, and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
We believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Research and Development Costs
We record accrued expenses for estimated costs of our research and development activities conducted by third-party service providers, which include the conduct of pre-clinical and clinical studies and preparation for clinical trials and contract manufacturing activities. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced, and we include these costs in accrued liabilities in the balance sheets and within research and development expense in the statement of operations. These costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses. We record accrued expenses for these costs based on the estimated amount of work completed and in accordance with agreements established with these third parties.
We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued estimates. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed may vary from our estimates and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. Our accrued expenses are dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from clinical research organizations and other third-party service providers. To date, there have been no material differences from our accrued expenses to actual expenses.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Management evaluates the recoverability of its property and equipment and amortizable intangible assets for possible impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable or at a minimum annually during the fourth quarter of the year. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of property and equipment and amortizable intangible assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such asset is reduced to fair value.
Acquired in-process research and development (IPR&D) assets are considered indefinite lived until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development efforts. Management evaluates the recoverability of its IPR&D assets for possible impairment annually during the fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of IPR&D assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts its fair value. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of IPR&D assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such asset is reduced to fair value.
Components of our Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Operating expenses
We classify our operating expenses into three categories: research and development, general and administrative and depreciation.
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•
costs incurred to conduct research, such as the discovery and development of our product candidates;
•
costs related to production of clinical supplies, including fees paid to contract manufacturers and drug manufacturing costs;
•
fees paid to clinical consultants, clinical trial sites and vendors, including clinical research organizations, in preparation for clinical trials and our IND and Orphan Drug applications with the FDA; and
•
costs related to compliance with drug development regulatory requirements.
We recognize all research and development costs as they are incurred. Pre-clinical costs, contract manufacturing and other development costs incurred by third parties are expensed as the contracted work is performed.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase in the future as we advance our product candidates into and through clinical trials and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates in the United States and Europe. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. The actual probability of success for our product candidates may be affected by a variety of factors including: the quality of our product candidates, early clinical data, investment in our clinical program, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent, if any, we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense consists of personnel related costs, which include salaries, as well as the costs of professional services, such as accounting and legal, facilities, information technology and other administrative expenses. We expect our general and administrative expense to increase due to the anticipated growth of our business and related infrastructure as well as accounting, insurance, investor relations and other costs associated with becoming a public company.
Depreciation. Depreciation expense consists of depreciation on our property and equipment. We depreciate our assets over their estimated useful life. We estimate leasehold improvements to have a estimated useful life over the term of the lease or the estimated useful life, whichever is shorter; computer equipment to have a 2-year life; software to have a 3-year life, machinery and equipment to have a 2 to 5 year life and furniture and office equipment to have a 2 to 7 year life.
Accounting for warrants
We issued warrants to purchase shares of common stock related to equity transactions in 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020. We account for our warrants issued in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, guidance applicable to derivative instruments, which requires every derivative instrument within its scope to be recorded on the balance sheet as either an asset or liability measured at its fair value, with changes in fair value recognized in earnings for liability classified warrants. Based on this guidance, we determined that certain of our warrants to purchase shares of common stock related to equity transactions in 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020 meet the criteria for classification as a liability. Accordingly, the warrants were classified as a warrant liability and are subject to fair value remeasurement at each transaction and balance sheet date. The fair value was estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, based on the market value of the underlying common stock at the measurement date, the contractual term of the warrant, risk-free interest rates, expected dividends and expected volatility of the price of the underlying common stock.
Our financial instruments consist primarily of non-trade receivables, account payables, accrued expenses, and a warrant liability. The carrying amount of non-trade receivables, accounts payables, and accrued expenses approximates their fair value because of the short-term maturity of such.
We have categorized our assets and liabilities that are valued at fair value on a recurring basis into three-level fair value hierarchy in accordance with GAAP. Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. The fair value hierarchy gives the highest priority to quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities (Level 1) and lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3).
Assets and liabilities recorded in the balance sheets at fair value are categorized based on a hierarchy of inputs as follows:
Level 1 - Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets of identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets or inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly through market corroboration, for substantially the full term of the financial instrument.
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability.
Our financial assets and liabilities recorded at fair value on a recurring basis include the fair value of our warrant liability discussed below. The fair value of this warrant liability associated with the February 2017, February 2018, June 2018, March 2019, April 2019, and February 2020 Offerings (Offerings) are included in long-term liabilities on the accompanying financial statements as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively.
We estimated the fair value of the warrant liability issued in our Offerings under ASC 820 as of their issuance date for financial reporting purposes. We used the Black-Scholes option pricing model (BSM) to determine the fair value of the warrants. The BSM model is acceptable in accordance with GAAP. The BSM requires the use of a number of assumptions including volatility of the stock price, the weighted average risk-free interest rate, and the weighted average term of the Warrant.
The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates on zero coupon US Treasury bonds whose maturity period is appropriate for the term of the warrants and is calculated by using the average daily historical stock prices through the day preceding the grant date.
Estimated volatility is a measure of the amount by which our stock price is expected to fluctuate each year during the expected life of the warrants. Where appropriate, we used the historical volatility of peer entities combined with our own due to the lack of sufficient historical data of our stock price during 2017-2019. In 2019 we began utilizing some our stock's own volatility in the estimated volatility in the BSM. Beginning in 2020, only the volatility of our stock was used in the BSM as we now have sufficient historic data in our stock price.
Changes in the fair value during the accounting period are shown as other income or expense.
Stock-based compensation
Stock based compensation transactions are recognized as compensation expense in the statement of operations based on their fair values on the date of the grant, with the compensation expense recognized over the period in which a grantee is required to provide service in exchange for the award. We estimate the fair value of options granted using the Black-Scholes option valuation model, and the fair value of restricted stock units using the closing price of our common stock as reported on the date of grant. The Black-Scholes estimate uses assumptions regarding a number of inputs that require us to make significant estimates and judgments. In 2019 we began utilizing some our stock's own volatility in the estimated volatility in the BSM. Beginning in 2020, only the volatility of our stock was used in the BSM as we now have sufficient historic data in our stock price.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes using ASC 740 Income Taxes. ASC 740 Income Taxes is an asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. In estimating future tax consequences, ASC 740 generally considers all expected future events other than enactments of and changes in the tax law or rates. The measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by the amount of any tax benefits that, based on available evidence, are not expected to be realized. Valuation allowances are provided if, considering available evidence, it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized. ASC 740 clarifies the criteria that must be met prior to recognition of the financial statement benefit of a position taken in a tax return. ASC 740 provides a benefit recognition model with a two-step approach consisting of “more-likely-than-not” recognition criteria, and a measurement attribute that measures a given tax position as the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. ASC 740 also requires the recognition of liabilities created by differences between tax positions taken in a tax return and amounts recognized in the financial statements.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See Note 2 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in "Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" in this Annual Report for discussion regarding recent accounting pronouncements.