Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Actual results and the timing of events may differ significantly from those expressed or implied in such forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those set forth in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Executive Overview
Moelis & Company is a leading global independent investment bank that provides innovative strategic advice and solutions to a diverse client base, including corporations, governments and financial sponsors. We assist our clients in achieving their strategic goals by offering comprehensive integrated financial advisory services across all major industry sectors. With 22 geographical locations in the Americas, Europe, the Middle East, Asia and Australia, we advise clients around the world on their most critical decisions, including mergers and acquisitions, recapitalizations and restructurings, capital markets and other corporate finance matters. Our ability to provide confidential, independent advisory services to our clients across sectors and regions and through all phases of the business cycle has led to long-term client relationships and a diversified revenue base.
As of December 31, 2020, we served our clients globally with 627 advisory bankers. We generate revenues primarily from providing advisory services on transactions that are subject to individually negotiated engagement letters which set forth our fees. We generally generate fees at key transaction milestones, such as closing, the timing of which is outside of our control. As a result, revenues and net income in any period may not be indicative of full year results or the results of any other period and may vary significantly from year to year and quarter to quarter. The performance of our business depends on the ability of our professionals to build relationships with clients over many years by providing trusted advice and exceptional transaction execution.
Business Environment and Outlook
Economic and global financial conditions can materially affect our operational and financial performance. See “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this Form 10-K for a discussion of some of the factors that can affect our performance. The M&A market data for announced and completed transactions in 2020 and 2019 referenced throughout this Form 10-K was obtained from Thomson Financial as of January 5, 2021 and January 3, 2020, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we earned revenues of $943.3 million, an increase of 26% from the $746.5 million earned during the same period in 2019. This compares favorably with a 13% decrease in the number of global completed M&A transactions greater than $100 million in the same period.
Our team of investment banking professionals continues to be very active, providing high quality advice to a growing number of clients around the globe. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the global M&A market experienced the strongest quarter of announced transactions in history. This strong activity continued into calendar year 2021, which should allow for a positive M&A environment in the near to intermediate term. As a result, our M&A activity for both financial sponsors and strategics remains elevated versus the prior year. In addition, our restructuring activity continues to be strong as companies in certain parts of the economy are continuing to experience ongoing financial issues as a result of the business disruption caused by COVID-19. The record level of corporate debt issued in 2020 should also provide a steady level of restructuring activity. Combined with our growing capital markets business, including our SPAC franchise, we believe we are well positioned to provide advice to companies across all sectors on their capital and liquidity needs.
Our talented employees have adapted to the work from home environment caused by COVID-19. We believe that while COVID-19 may continue to add uncertainty to the business environment, our Firm remains well positioned due to our thorough business continuity planning, experienced management team, and focused client coverage.
Results of Operations
The following is a discussion of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. For a discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenues
We operate in a highly competitive environment. Each revenue-generating engagement is separately solicited, awarded and negotiated, and there are usually no long-term contracted sources of revenue. As a consequence, our fee-paying client engagements are not predictable, and high levels of revenues in one period are not necessarily predictive of continued high levels of revenues in future periods. To develop new business, our professionals maintain an active dialogue with a large number of existing and potential clients. We add new clients each year as our bankers continue to expand their relationships, as we hire senior bankers who bring their client relationships and as we receive introductions from our relationship network of senior executives, board members, attorneys and other third parties. We also lose clients each year as a result of the sale or merger of clients, changes in clients’ senior management, competition from other financial services firms and other causes.
We earn substantially all of our revenues from advisory engagements, and, in many cases, we are not paid until the completion of an underlying transaction. The vast majority of our advisory revenues are recognized over time, although the recognition of our transaction fees are constrained until the engagement is substantially complete.
Complications that may terminate or delay a transaction include failure to agree upon final terms with the counterparty, failure to obtain required regulatory consents, failure to obtain board or stockholder approvals, failure to secure financing, adverse market conditions or unexpected operating or financial problems related to either party to the transaction. In these circumstances, we often do not receive advisory fees that would have been received if the transaction had been completed, despite the fact that we may have devoted considerable time and resources to the transaction. Barriers to the completion of a restructuring transaction may include a lack of anticipated bidders for the assets of our client or the inability of our client to restructure its operations or indebtedness due to a failure to reach agreement with its creditors. In these circumstances, our fees are generally limited to monthly retainer fees and reimbursement of certain out-of-pocket expenses.
We do not allocate our revenue by the type of advice we provide because of the complexity of the transactions on which we may earn revenue and our holistic approach to client service. For example, a restructuring engagement may evolve to require a sale of all or a portion of the client, M&A assignments can develop from relationships established on prior restructuring engagements, and capital markets expertise can be instrumental on both M&A and restructuring assignments.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus 2019
Revenues were $943.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $746.5 million for the same period in 2019, representing an increase of 26%. The increase in revenues was primarily driven by greater transaction completions and greater average fees per transaction as compared to the prior year period.
The number of fee-paying clients increased year-over-year from 265 clients in 2019 to 316 clients in 2020, and the number of clients who paid fees equal to or greater than $1 million increased from 150 clients in 2019 to 205 clients in 2020.
Operating Expenses
The following table sets forth information relating to our operating expenses:
Our operating expenses are classified as compensation and benefits expenses and non-compensation expenses, and headcount is the primary driver of the level of our expenses. Compensation and benefits expenses account for the majority of our operating expenses. Non-compensation expenses, which include the costs of professional fees, travel and related expenses, communication, technology and information services, occupancy, depreciation and other expenses, generally have been less significant in comparison with compensation and benefits expenses.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus 2019
Operating expenses were $677.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and represented 72% of revenues, compared with $632.0 million for the same period in 2019 which represented 85% of revenues. The increase in operating expenses was primarily driven by higher compensation and benefits expenses associated with greater revenues, partially offset by lower non-compensation expense primarily driven by less travel and related expenses.
Compensation and Benefits Expenses
Our compensation and benefits expenses are determined by management based on revenues earned, the competitiveness of the prevailing labor market and anticipated compensation requirements for our employees, the level of recruitment of new Managing Directors, the amount of compensation expenses amortized for equity awards and other relevant factors. As a result, our compensation expenses may fluctuate materially in any particular period. Accordingly, the amount of compensation expenses recognized in any particular period may not be consistent with prior periods or indicative of future periods.
Our compensation expenses consist of base salary and benefits, annual incentive compensation payable as cash bonus awards, including certain amounts subject to clawback and contingent upon a required period of service (“contingent cash awards”) and amortization of equity-based compensation awards. Base salary and benefits are paid ratably throughout the year. Equity awards are amortized into compensation expenses on a graded basis (based upon the fair value of the award at the time of grant) during the service period over which the award vests, which is typically four or five years. The awards are recorded within equity as they are expensed. Contingent cash awards are amortized into compensation expenses over the required service period. Cash bonuses, which are accrued throughout the year, are discretionary and dependent upon a number of factors including the performance of the Company and are generally paid during the first two months of the year with respect to prior year performance. The equity component of the annual incentive award is determined with reference to the Company’s estimate of grant date fair value, which in turn determines the number of equity awards granted subject to a vesting schedule.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, compensation-related expenses of $560.8 million represented 59% of revenues, compared with $488.4 million which represented 65% of revenues in the prior year. The increase in compensation expenses was primarily related to higher discretionary bonus expense associated with greater revenues and increased headcount as compared with the prior year period.
Non-Compensation Expenses
Our non-compensation expenses include the costs of occupancy, professional fees, communication, technology and information services, travel and related expenses, depreciation and other expenses.
Historically (prior to COVID-19), our non-compensation expenses associated with business development have increased as we have increased headcount and the related non-compensation support costs which results from growing our business. This trend may continue as we expand into new sectors, geographies and products to serve our clients’ growing needs.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus 2019
Non-compensation expenses were $116.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, representing 12% of revenues, compared with $143.6 million, or 19% in the prior year. The decrease in non-compensation expenses was primarily related to decreased travel and other business development expenses related to COVID-19 social distancing restrictions, in addition to our continued and focused expense discipline.
Other Income and Expenses
Other income and expenses consists of earnings from equity method investments, gains and losses on investments, interest income and expense, and other infrequent gains or losses.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus 2019
Other income and expenses were income of $4.4 million and income of $33.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The income of $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily related to the enforcement of noncompete provisions, adjustments to the amounts due pursuant to the Company's Tax Receivable Agreement, and income from the Company’s joint venture in Moelis Australia. The prior year period includes gains of $12.6 and $8.1 million related to the sale of 12.5 million and 8.0 million shares of Moelis Australia common stock, respectively, as well as income from the Company’s joint venture in Moelis Australia.
Provision for Income Taxes
The Company’s operations are comprised of entities that are organized as limited liability companies and limited partnerships. For U.S. federal income tax purposes, taxes related to income earned by these entities represent obligations of their interest holders, except for certain foreign, state and local income taxes. The Company is subject to U.S. corporate, federal, state, and local income tax on its allocable share of results of operations from Group LP.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 versus 2019
The Company’s provision for income taxes and effective tax rates were $51.7 million and 19% and $11.8 million and 8% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The income tax provision for the aforementioned periods primarily reflect the Company’s allocable share of earnings from Group LP at the prevailing U.S. federal, state, and local corporate income tax rate, and the impact of the excess tax benefit recognized in connection with equity-based compensation delivered at a price above the grant date price.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our current assets have historically been comprised of cash, short term liquid investments and receivables related to fees earned from providing advisory services. Our current liabilities are primarily comprised of accrued expenses, including accrued employee compensation. We pay a significant portion of incentive compensation during the first two months of each calendar year with respect to the prior year’s results. We also distribute estimated partner tax payments primarily in the first quarter of each year with respect to the prior year’s operating results. Therefore, levels of cash generally decline during the first quarter of each year after incentive compensation has been paid to our employees and estimated tax payments have been distributed to partners. Cash before dividends and share buybacks then typically builds over the remainder of the year.
We evaluate our cash needs on a regular basis in light of current market conditions. Cash and cash equivalents include all short-term highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and have original maturities of three months or less from the date of purchase. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company had cash equivalents of $119.0 million and $96.0 million, respectively, invested in U.S. Treasury instruments and money market securities. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company had cash of $83.5 million and $71.8 million, respectively, maintained in U.S. and non-U.S. bank accounts, of which most bank account balances exceeded the U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) and U.K. Financial Services Compensation Scheme (“FSCS”) coverage limits.
In addition to cash and cash equivalents, we hold various types of government debt securities that are classified as investments on our consolidated statements of financial condition as they have original maturities of three months or more from the date of purchase. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company held $172.7 million and $174.0 million of U.S. treasury instruments classified as investments, respectively.
Our liquidity is highly dependent upon cash receipts from clients which generally requires the successful completion of transactions. The timing of receivable collections typically occurs within 60 days of billing. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019 accounts receivable were $89.3 million and $45.1 million, respectively, net of allowances of $3.8 million and $4.1 million, respectively.
To provide for additional working capital and other general corporate purposes, we maintain a $65.0 million revolving credit facility. In April 2020, the Company renewed its $65.0 million revolving credit facility which extended the maturity date to June 30, 2021. Unless the lender issues a notice of termination at least 60 days prior to such maturity date, this facility will automatically extend to June 30, 2022. Advances on the facility bear interest at the greater of a fixed rate of 3.50% per annum or at the Company’s option of (i) LIBOR plus 1% or (ii) Prime minus 1.50%. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no borrowings under the credit facility.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s available credit under this facility was $60.5 million as a result of the issuance of an aggregate amount of $4.5 million of various standby letters of credit, which were required in connection with certain office leases and other agreements. The Company incurs a 1% per annum fee on the outstanding balances of issued letters of credit.
During February, 2021, the Board of Directors of Moelis & Company declared a dividend of $0.55 per share to be paid on March 26, 2021 to Class A common stockholders of record on February 22, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company paid aggregate dividends of $4.1525 per share which included special dividends of $2.75 per share and regular quarterly dividends of $1.4025 per share.
In February 2019, the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $100 million of shares of Class A common stock and/or Class A partnership units of Group LP with no expiration date. This new authorization replaced the former repurchase program and the remaining authorization under the program was eliminated. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company repurchased 1,201,525 and 1,331,443 shares, respectively, pursuant to the Company’s share repurchase program and shares repurchased from its employees for the purpose of settling tax liabilities incurred upon delivery of equity-based compensation awards. The remaining balance of shares authorized for repurchase under the program was $75.2 million as of December 31, 2020.
Regulatory Capital
We actively monitor our regulatory capital base. Our principal subsidiaries are subject to regulatory requirements in their respective jurisdictions to ensure general financial soundness and liquidity. This requires, among other things, that we comply with certain minimum capital requirements, record-keeping, reporting procedures, experience and training requirements for employees and certain other requirements and procedures. These regulatory requirements may restrict the flow of funds to and from affiliates. See Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020 for further information. These regulations differ in the United States, United Kingdom, Hong Kong and other countries in which we operate a registered broker-dealer. The license under which we operate in each such country is meant to be appropriate to conduct an advisory business. We believe that we provide each of our subsidiaries with sufficient capital and liquidity, consistent with their business and regulatory requirements.
Tax Receivable Agreement
In connection with the IPO in April 2014, we entered into a tax receivable agreement with our eligible Managing Directors that provides for the payment to eligible Managing Directors of 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that we realize as a result of (a) the increases in tax basis attributable to exchanges by our eligible Managing Directors and (b) tax benefits related to imputed interest deemed to be paid by us as a result of this tax receivable agreement. The Company expects to benefit from the remaining 15% of income tax cash savings, if any, that we realize.
For purposes of the tax receivable agreement, income tax cash savings will be computed by comparing our actual income tax liability to the amount of such taxes that we would have been required to pay had there been no increase to the tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of Group LP as a result of the exchanges and had we not entered into the tax receivable agreement. The term of the tax receivable agreement commenced upon consummation of the IPO and will continue until all such tax benefits have been utilized or expired, unless we exercise our right to terminate the tax receivable agreement for an amount based on an agreed value of payments remaining to be made under the agreement.
Payments made under the tax receivable agreement are required to be made within 225 days of the filing of our tax returns. Because we generally expect to receive the tax savings prior to making the cash payments to the eligible selling holders of Group LP partnership units, we do not expect the cash payments to have a material impact on our liquidity.
In addition, the tax receivable agreement provides that, upon a merger, asset sale, or other form of business combination or certain other changes of control or if, at any time, we elect an early termination of the tax receivable agreement, our (or our successor’s) obligations with respect to exchanged or acquired units (whether exchanged or acquired before or after such change of control or early termination) will be based on certain assumptions, including that we would have sufficient taxable income to fully utilize the deductions arising from the increased tax deductions and tax basis and other benefits related to entering into the tax receivable agreement, and, in the case of an early termination election, that any units that have not been exchanged are deemed exchanged for the market value of the Class A common stock at the time of termination. Consequently, it is possible, in these circumstances, that the actual cash tax savings realized by us may be significantly less than the corresponding tax receivable agreement payments.
Cash Flows
Our operating cash flows are primarily influenced by the amount and timing of receipt of advisory fees, which are generally collected within 60 days of billing, and the payment of operating expenses, including payments of incentive compensation to our employees. We pay a significant portion of incentive compensation during the first two months of each calendar year with respect to the prior year’s results. Our investing and financing cash flows are primarily influenced by activities to fund investments and payments of dividends and estimated partner taxes. A summary of our operating, investing and financing cash flows is as follows:
Year Ended December 31, 2020
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash were $203.3 million at December 31, 2020, an increase of $34.7 million from $168.6 million at December 31, 2019. Operating activities resulted in a net inflow of $429.2 million primarily attributable to cash collected from clients, net of cash operating expense outflows, including discretionary bonuses paid during the period. Investing activities resulted in a net outflow of $40.0 million primarily attributable to cash outflows for construction in progress. Financing activities resulted in a net outflow of $351.8 million primarily related to the payment of dividends and tax distributions and treasury stock purchases.
Year Ended December 31, 2019
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash were $168.6 million at December 31, 2019, a decrease of $93.2 million from $261.8 million at December 31, 2018. Operating activities resulted in a net inflow of $209.3 million primarily attributable to cash collected from clients, net of cash operating expense outflows, including discretionary bonuses paid during the period. Investing activities resulted in a net outflow of $51.9 million primarily attributable to net purchases of investments with a partially offsetting inflow related to Moelis Australia share sales. Financing activities resulted in a net outflow of $252.7 million primarily related to the payment of dividends and tax distributions, and treasury stock purchases.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has a total payable of $307.6 million due pursuant to the tax receivable agreement in the consolidated financial statements and of this amount an estimated $2.8 million will be due in less than one year. These amounts represent management’s best estimate of the amounts currently expected to be owed under the tax receivable agreement. Payments made under the tax receivable agreement are required to be made within 225 days of the filing of our tax returns. We generally expect to receive the tax savings prior to making the cash payments to the eligible selling holders of Group LP partnership units, we do not expect the cash payments to have a material impact on our liquidity. During 2020, we made payments of $36.5 million pursuant to the tax receivable agreement.
Additionally, the Company has contractual obligations related to its leases for corporate office space and an aircraft. Please see Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for details regarding when these obligations are due.
Market Risk and Credit Risk
Our business is not capital-intensive and we do not invest in derivative instruments or, generally, borrow through issuing debt. As a result, we are not subject to significant market risk (including interest rate risk, foreign currency exchange rate risk and commodity price risk) or credit risk.
Risks Related to Cash and Short-Term Investments
Our cash and cash equivalents include all short-term highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and have original maturities of three months or less from the date of purchase. We invest most of our cash in highly-rated municipal bonds, U.S. government agency debt securities and U.S. treasury instruments. Cash is maintained in U.S. and non-U.S. bank accounts. Most U.S. and U.K. account balances exceed the FDIC and FSCS coverage limits. In addition to cash and cash equivalents, we hold various types of U.S. treasury instruments that are classified as investments on our consolidated statement of financial condition as they have original maturities of three months or more (but less than twelve months) from the date of purchase. We believe our cash and short-term investments are not subject to any material interest rate risk, equity price risk, credit risk or other market risk.
Credit Risk
We regularly review our accounts receivable and allowance for credit losses by considering factors such as historical experience, credit quality, age of the accounts receivable, and the current economic conditions that may affect a customer’s ability to pay such amounts owed to the Company. We maintain an allowance for credit losses that, in our opinion, provides for an adequate reserve to cover losses that may be incurred. See “-Critical Accounting Policies-Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Credit Losses.”
Exchange Rate Risk
The Company is exposed to the risk that the exchange rate of the U.S. dollar relative to other currencies may have an adverse effect on the reported value of the Company’s non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and liabilities. Non-functional currency-related transaction gains and losses are recorded in the consolidated statements of operations. In addition, the reported amounts of our revenues may be affected by movements in the rate of exchange between the pound sterling, euro, Brazilian real, Hong Kong dollar, rupee and the U.S. dollar, in which our financial statements are denominated. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the net impact of the fluctuation of foreign currencies in other comprehensive income (loss) in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income was a loss of $2.0 million, and a gain of $1.5 million, respectively. We have not entered into any transactions to hedge our exposure to these foreign currency fluctuations through the use of derivative instruments or other methods.
Critical Accounting Policies
We believe that the critical accounting policies included below represent those that are most important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgment.
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Estimates and assumptions are reviewed periodically, and the effects of revisions are reflected in the period for which they are determined to be necessary.
All intercompany balances and transactions within the Company have been eliminated.
Revenue and Expense Recognition
We earn substantially all of our revenues from advisory engagements, and, in many cases, we are not paid until the completion of an underlying transaction. The Company recognizes revenues from providing advisory services when or as our obligations are fulfilled and collection is reasonably assured. The vast majority of our advisory revenues, which include reimbursements for certain out-of-pocket expenses, are recognized over time; however, a small number of transactions may be recognized at a point in time. We provide our advisory service on an ongoing basis which, for example, may include evaluating and selecting one of multiple strategies. During such engagements, our clients are continuously benefitting from our counsel and the over time recognition matches the transfer of such benefits. However, the recognition of transaction fees is constrained until substantially all services have been provided, specified conditions have been met and it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will not occur in a future period. Upfront fees and retainers specified in our engagement letters that meet the over time criteria will be recognized on a systematic basis over the estimated period where the related services are performed. Revenues may be recognized at a point in time if the engagement represents a singular objective that does not transfer any notable value until formally completed, such as when issuing a fairness opinion. In these instances, the point in time recognition appropriately matches the transfer and consumption of our services.
Incremental costs of obtaining a contract are expensed as incurred since such costs are generally not recoverable and the typical duration of our advisory contracts is less than one year. Costs to fulfill contracts consist of out-of-pocket expenses that are part of performing our advisory services and are typically expensed as incurred, except where the transfer and consumption of our services occurs at a point in time. For engagements recognized at a point in time, out-of-pocket expenses are capitalized and subsequently expensed in the consolidated statement of operations upon completion of the engagement. The Company records deferred revenues when it receives fees from clients that have not yet been earned (e.g. an upfront fee) or when the Company has an unconditional right to consideration before all performance obligations are complete (e.g. upon satisfying conditions to earn an announcement fee, but before the transaction is consummated).
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Credit Losses
The accompanying consolidated statements of financial condition present accounts receivable balances net of allowance for credit losses based on the Company’s assessment of the collectability of customer accounts.
The Company maintains an allowance for credit losses that, in management’s opinion, provides for an adequate reserve to cover losses that may be incurred. For purposes of determining appropriate allowances, the Company stratifies its population of accounts receivable into two categories, one for short-term receivables and a second for private funds advisory receivables. Each population is separately evaluated using an aging method that results in a percentage reserve based on the age of the receivable, in addition to considerations of historical charge-offs and current economic conditions.
After concluding that a reserved accounts receivable is no longer collectible, the Company will charge-off the receivable. This has the effect of reducing both the gross receivable and the allowance for credit losses. If a reserved accounts receivable is subsequently collected, such recoveries reduce the gross receivable and the allowance for credit losses and is a reduction of bad debt expense, which is recorded within other expenses on the consolidated statement of operations. The combination of recoveries and the provision for credit losses of a reported period comprise the Company’s bad debt expense.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, “Accounting for Income Taxes” (“ASC 740”), which requires the recognition of tax benefits or expenses on temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of its assets and liabilities by applying the enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Such net tax effects on temporary differences are reflected on the Company’s consolidated statements of financial condition as deferred tax assets. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when the Company believes that it is more-likely-than-not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
ASC 740 prescribes a two-step approach for the recognition and measurement of tax benefits associated with the positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return that affect amounts reported in the financial statements. The Company has reviewed and will continue to review the conclusions reached regarding uncertain tax positions, which may be subject to review and adjustment at a later date based on ongoing analyses of tax laws, regulations and interpretations thereof. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, no unrecognized tax benefit was recorded. To the extent that the Company’s assessment of the conclusions reached regarding uncertain tax positions changes as a result of the evaluation of new information, such change in estimate will be recorded in the period in which such determination is made. The Company reports income tax-related interest and penalties relating to uncertain tax positions, if applicable, as a component of income tax expense. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, no such amounts were recorded.
Leases
The Company maintains operating leases for corporate offices and an aircraft. The Company determines if a contract contains a lease at inception. Operating leases are recorded as right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities on the consolidated statements of financial condition. ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date and are measured at the present value of anticipated lease payments over the lease term. The operating lease ROU assets are equal to the lease liabilities, adjusted for certain lease incentives, accrued rents, and prepaid rents. Typically, our borrowing rate is used to determine the present value of lease payments because the implicit rate is not readily determinable. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease. These options are factored into our present value calculations when it is reasonably certain that such options will be exercised. Operating lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Recent Accounting Developments
For a discussion of recently issued accounting developments and their impact or potential impact on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 3-Recent Accounting Pronouncements, of the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.