ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION.
Cautionary Statement
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis includes a number of forward-looking statements that reflect our current views with respect to future events and financial performance. Forward-looking statements are often identified by words like: “believe,” “expect,” “plan”, “estimate,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “project,” “will,” “predicts,” “seeks,” “may,” “would,” “could,” “potential,” “continue,” “ongoing,” “should” and similar expressions, or words which, by their nature, refer to future events. You should not place undue certainty on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this Form 10-K. These forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from historical results or from our predictions. We undertake no obligation to update or revise publicly any forward-looking statements, whether because of new information, future events, or otherwise.
Overview
We are currently focused on delivering digital transformation solutions to customer-centric organizations through integrated marketing, data science, analytics, commerce, and machine learning. In addition, we are seeking to invest in cyber-currency and decentralized finance technologies to support the “Always-On Economy”. We were previously engaged in the more narrowly focused business of solely delivering consulting and professional services that were designed to help corporations improve their customer listening and customer management capabilities, referred to as customer experience (“CX”) management solutions.
The Company formed a wholly owned subsidiary, McorpCX, LLC (“McorpCX LLC”) as a limited liability company in the state of Delaware on December 14, 2017. On August 16, 2018, the Company entered into a contribution agreement with its wholly owned subsidiary McorpCX LLC, pursuant to which the Company transferred to McorpCX LLC all the Company’s assets and liabilities related to the Company’s customer experience consulting business, excluding the underlying technology and databases related thereto which remained with the Company.
Effective August 3, 2020, the Company sold all of its membership interests in McorpCX, LLC to mfifty, LLC, a California limited liability company controlled by Michael Hinshaw, the current President of McorpCX LLC (the “Purchaser”). Since the Company’s professional and related consulting services business, which constituted substantially all of the Company’s operations at the time of the sale of McorpCX LLC, was conducted through McorpCX LLC, the sale of McorpCX LLC represented a strategic shift that we believe will have a major effect on the Company’s operations and financial results.
As consideration for the sale of McorpCX LLC, the Company received a total of $352,000 in cash consisting of $100,000 received upon the signing of the purchase agreement and $252,000 received at the closing of the transaction along with a $756,000 promissory note. The promissory note has an initial annual interest rate of 0.99% (to be recalculated at the end of each twelve-month period subsequent to the date of the note based on the annual Applicable Federal Rate for mid-term loans on the first business day following each such twelve-month period) accruing daily on the outstanding balance of the note, and monthly principal payments are payable to the Company over a term of four or more years. Monthly principal payments to the Company are initially $7,292 per month for the first twelve months following the date of the note, and then during each subsequent twelve-month period are based on the annual revenues of McorpCX, LLC. The note is secured by the Purchaser's ownership interest in McorpCX LLC.
The Company’s management is now in the process of recreating the Company to enable it to focus on providing technology solutions for the “Always-On Economy”. MCX is exploring investment opportunities into three areas: digital transformation, cryptocurrency, decentralized finance (“DeFi”). In developing our portfolio offering, we are in the process of exploring various strategic alternatives, such as proprietary software or technology development, pursuit of mergers/acquisitions or joint venture opportunities, “white-labeling” arrangements, software licensing arrangements, and investment in additional infrastructure for our Company. Each of these possible strategies will be thoroughly vetted by our board of directors to assess the expected level of enterprise value creation for each strategy compared to the various risks associated with each possible scenario. In addition, we may require financing to pursue these strategies that are beyond our current financial resources. Accordingly, there is no assurance that we will be able to pursue any strategy identified by our board of directors.
On November 12, 2020, the Company formed The Collective Experience, LLC in Delaware (the “Collective Experience”). The Company is currently providing all of its customer relations management consulting services, which is the Company’s sole revenue generating operations, through the Collective Experience.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) was reported in Wuhan, China and has since extensively impacted the global health and economic environment. In March 2020, the World Health Organization characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic and the government responses to the outbreak presents uncertainty and risk with respect to the Company and its performance and financial results.
The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company's business is highly uncertain and difficult to predict, as the response to the pandemic is continually evolving. The severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company's business will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the duration and severity of the pandemic and the extent and severity of the impact on the Company's customers, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
We cannot assure you that we will be able to compete successfully against current or potential competitors, or that competition will not have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and operations.
Sources of Revenue
Prior to the sale of McorpCX, LLC in August 2020, our revenue consisted primarily of fees from professional and consulting services and other revenue primarily related to the reimbursement of expenses mostly through the operations of McopCX LLC. Product revenue was from productized and software-enabled service sales not elsewhere classified.
As of December 31, 2020, our only source of revenue is derived from providing digital transformation services through the Collective Experience that include brand strategy, data science, pricing science, customer experience management consulting and implementation in support of these strategies.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold consist primarily of expenses directly related to providing professional and consulting services. Those expenses include contract labor, third-party services, and materials and travel expenses related to providing professional services to our clients.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salary and related expenses for management, client delivery, finance and accounting, and sales and marketing. These expenses also include contract services, as well as marketing and promotion costs, professional fees, software license fee expenses, administrative costs, insurance, rent and a portion of travel expenses and other overhead, which are categorized as “other general and administrative expenses” in our consolidated financial statements. In addition, the other general and administrative expenses include the professional fees, filing, and registration costs necessary to meet the requirements associated with having to file reports with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission under the Exchange Act as well as having our stock listed on the TSX Venture Exchange in Canada and quoted on the OTC Pink Sheets in the United States.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis.
Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates. We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with revenue recognition, income taxes, stock-based compensation, research and development costs and impairment of long-lived assets have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
The Company’s revenue consists primarily of professional and consulting services, as well as reimbursable expenses billed to clients, software-enabled product sales and other revenues. Other revenue includes reimbursement of related travel costs and out-of-pocket expenses.
The Company’s consulting services are contracted under master terms and conditions with statements of work (“SOW”) defined for each project. A typical consulting SOW will span a period of 60-180 days and will usually be billed to the client based on certain milestones being achieved throughout the SOW. The Company recognizes revenue based upon a percentage of completion of each SOW during each project. In addition, we typically incur travel and other miscellaneous expenses during work on each SOW which we bill to our clients for reimbursement. The travel and miscellaneous expenses are recognized in revenue on a percentage of work complete basis. In addition, some clients will enter into annual or longer-term contracts that will have a monthly retainer for general consulting and project services. The revenue for these engagements is recognized on straight-line basis monthly during the term of the contract.
Contract costs, such as commissions, are typically incurred contemporaneously with the pattern of revenue recognition and, as such, are expensed as incurred. See Note 4 Revenue Recognition for further information.
Income Taxes
No provision for income taxes at this time is being made due to the offset of cumulative net operating losses. A full valuation allowance has been established for deferred tax assets based on a “more likely than not” threshold. The ability to realize deferred tax assets depends on our ability to generate sufficient taxable income within the carry forward periods provided under the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended and the rules promulgated thereunder. While the Company’s statutory tax rate can vary depending on taxable income level, the effective tax rate is currently 0% mostly because of the valuation allowance described above. The Company does not have any material uncertainties with respect to its provisions for income taxes.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date using a Black-Scholes valuation model and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period. Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires judgment and assumptions, including expected volatility. In addition, judgment is also required in estimating the amount of stock-based awards that are expected to be forfeited. If actual results differ significantly from these estimates, stock-based compensation expense and our results of operations could be impacted.
Results of Continuing Operations
Management determined that the completion of the sale of McorpCX LLC meets the criteria for the presentation of the operations of McorpCX LLC as discontinued operations as of August 3, 2020 and accordingly, the results of the McorpCX, LLC are presented as discontinued operations in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations beginning in the third quarter of 2020, and thus excluded from continuing operations for all periods presented. In addition, the related assets and liabilities of McorpCX, LLC are classified as discontinued operations on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets for all periods presented prior to the disposal.
Revenues & Cost of Goods Sold
During the year ending December 31, 2020, we had $47,933 in revenue recognized as well as the related cost of goods sold of $45,425 generated through continuing operations from two customer contracts entered into in the last quarter of 2020. There was no revenue or cost of goods sold generated through continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 we had net operating loss of $427,498 compared to a net operating loss of $586,986 in 2019. The decrease in net operating loss in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily a result of revenue generated in the fourth quarter of 2020 from new operations combined with fewer salaried employees, less professional fees and no consulting services or travel expenses in 2020.
Net loss decreased to $44,502 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from a net loss of $760,955 in 2019, mostly as a result of $181,634 in income from discontinue operation of McorpCX, LLC in the current period compared with the loss of $178,879 from such discontinued operations in the same period last year combined with the $202,376 gain on disposal of McorpCX, LLC in 2020.
Expenses attributable to salaries and wages decreased by $48,779 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a decrease in the compensation of our executive officers in 2020 compared to 2019 and a reduction in staff salaries due to the outsourcing of our bookkeeping function.
Contract services expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to finance and administration services provided by contractors in 2019, which were not required in 2020.
Other general and administrative costs decreased by $70,501 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to decreases in travel expenses combined with a reduction professional fees in 2020 compared to 2019.
We recognized $1,014 in other expense in 2020 compared to $4,910 in other income in 2019 primarily due to increases in state use tax expenses being more than offset by interest on related party notes receivable.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We measure our liquidity in a variety of ways, including the following:
Anticipated Uses of Cash
As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents and working capital had decreased to $297,965 and $114,499, respectively, from $379,180 and $779,762 as of December 31, 2019. Cash and cash equivalents for discontinued operations were $209,669 as of December 31, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we were able to finance our operations with cash generated through cash on hand as well as proceeds of the sale of McorpCX, LLC. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP applicable to a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our primary uses of cash included cash paid to professional staff to support our consulting services, general and administrative support and new business development activities as well as direct selling costs related to the sale of LLC.
We currently plan to fund our expenditures with cash on hand as well as cash flows generated from new revenue sources as a digital transformation company. If needed, the possibility may exist to raise additional capital through debt financing and common stock sales. We do not intend to pay dividends in the foreseeable future. In addition to the working capital position of the Company, we are seeking new sources of revenue to fund our capital requirements for our business during the next 12 months
We received total consideration of $1,108,000 consisting of $352,000 in cash and a $756,000 promissory note for the sale of McorpCX, LLC, which was completed on August 3, 2020, which applied to transaction costs as well as investment toward becoming a technology solutions business. These measures combined with our positive working capital position are expected to enable us to meet our liquidity needs over the next 12 months. Notwithstanding the foregoing, our ability to continue as a going concern is entirely dependent upon our ability to achieve a level of profitability, and/or to raise additional capital through debt financing and/or through sales of common stock. We cannot provide any assurance that profits from operations, if any, will generate sufficient cash flow to meet our working capital needs and service our existing obligations, nor that sufficient capital can be raised through debt or equity financing.
We intend to continue to seek ways to expand upon our business and as such, in the future we may make acquisitions of businesses or assets or commitments to additional capital projects. To achieve the long-term goals of expanding our assets and earnings, including through acquisitions, capital resources may be required. Depending on the size of a transaction, the capital resources that may be required can be substantial. The necessary resources may be generated from cash flow from operations, cash on hand, the proceeds of the sale of McorpCX, LLC, borrowing against our assets or the issuance of securities, and there is no assurance these capital resources will be available to us when required.
Cash Flow for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The cash flows related to discontinued operations have not been segregated and are included in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. There were no significant capital expenditures and operating noncash items for any periods presented.
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities decreased to $425,384 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net cash used in operating activities of $761,166 in 2019. This decrease in cash used in operating activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to the $716,453 decrease in net loss from 2019 to 2020 as well as a $202,376 gain on disposal of McorpCX, LLC in 2020. Cash provided from greater increases in accounts payable and deferred revenue in 2020 compared to 2019 was more than offset by cash used in connection with greater decreases in accounts receivable and depreciation in 2020 compared to 2019.
Investing Activities. There was cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the net change in cash from the sale of McorpCX, LLC of $305,736 partially offset by cash received from related party notes receivable of $29,168. There was no cash provided by, or used in, investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Financing Activities. The Company had cash used in financing activities due to $411,069 cash proceeds received from the PPP Note and EIDL Note (each defined below) and $100,000 cash proceeds from a related party note during the year ended December 31, 2020.
In March 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act was passed in the United States, which included amongst other programs, loans to businesses under a Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) and Economic Injury Disaster Loan (“EIDL”). On May 12, 2020, McorpCX LLC received an unsecured non-recourse promissory note in the amount of $161,069 under the PPP (the “PPP Note”). The PPP Note incurs interest at a fixed rate of 1.00% and is scheduled to mature on May 3, 2022. McorpCX, LLC is required to make monthly payments on the PPP Note of $6,785 commencing on November 1, 2020.
On June 11, 2020, McorpCX LLC received a secured non-recourse promissory note in the amount of $150,000 under the EIDL program (the “EIDL Loan”). The EIDL Loan incurs interest at a fixed rate of 3.75% and is scheduled to mature on 30 years from June 10, 2050. McorpCX, LLC is required to make monthly payments on the EIDL Loan of $731 which includes principal and interest beginning twelve months from the date of the EIDL Loan beginning June 11, 2021. Collateral for the loan includes all tangible and intangible personal property. As a result of the sale of McorpCX LLC, each of the PPP Note and the EIDL Loan are no longer liabilities of the Company.
The Company also had cash provided by financing activities of $100,000 due to cash proceeds from a related party note during the year ended December 31, 2020. The note is not explicit in its terms of payment, interest, or maturity. As a result of the sale of McorpCX LLC, this note is no longer a liability of the Company.
There was no cash provided by, or used in, financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Results of Discontinued Operations
During the year ended December 31, 2020, total income from discontinued operations increased by $562,889 to $384,010 from a loss of $178,879 in 2019, mostly as a result of $181,634 in income from the discontinued operations of McorpCX, LLC in 2020 compared with a loss of $178,879 from such discontinued operations in 2019 mostly as a result of a decrease in expenses more than offsetting a decrease in gross profit and an increase in other expenses in 2020 compared to 2019, combined with $202,376 in net proceeds from the sale of McorpCX, LLC being recognized as a gain on disposal of McorpCX, LLC in 2020.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We lease one facility in Ohio on a month-to-month basis. We do not have any debt capital lease obligations.
The operating lease obligations presented reflect future minimum lease payments due under the non-cancelable portions of our operating lease.