ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion is intended to assist in the understanding of our results of operations and our present financial condition. The consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes contain additional detailed information that should be referred to when reviewing this material.
Cautionary Note on Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, (the “Exchange Act”) regarding our expectations and beliefs concerning the timing for completion, cost, financing and impact of our Monarch Black Hawk Expansion; additional revenue opportunities as a result of project and budget modifications for our Monarch Black Hawk Expansion; additional capital projects; future expansion and acquisition opportunities; positioning of our properties to benefit from future macro and local economic growth; business prospects; business strategies and outlook; competitive advantages and sources of competition; marketing strategy; approvals and licensing requirements; employee relations; capital requirements; anticipated source of funds and adequacy of such funds to meet our debt obligations and capital requirements; financial condition, legal matters and other matters. The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 provides a safe harbor for forward-looking statements. We note that many factors could cause our actual results and experience to change significantly from the anticipated results or expectations expressed in our forward-looking statements. When words and expressions such as “believes,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “estimates,” “plans,” “intends,” “objectives,” “goals,” “aims,” “projects,” “forecasts,” “possible,” “seeks,” “may,” “could,” “should,” “might,” “likely,” “enable,” or similar words or expressions are used in this Form 10-K, as well as statements containing phrases such as “in our view,” “we cannot assure you,” “although no assurance can be given,” or “there is no way to anticipate with certainty,” forward-looking statements are being made. Example of forward-looking statements include, among others, statements we make regarding: (i) our belief that we have sufficient liquidity to fund all remaining construction and litigation costs and ongoing capital expenditures; (ii) our belief that our business is well-positioned to benefit from any post-pandemic recovery; (iii) our expectation regarding the availability of future acquisition opportunities; (iv) our beliefs regarding the quality of our products and guest services in Reno and Black Hawk; (v) our current plans to redesign part of the legacy building at Monarch Black Hawk to add a specialty restaurant, poker room and a sports lounge, and the expected completion of such construction; (vi) our expectations regarding our guests' acceptance of the expanded casino, new hotel and enhanced amenities at Monarch Casino Resort Spa Black Hawk; (vii) our expectations regarding our future position in, and share of, the high-end segment of the market and the quality of service we provide to our guests; (viii) our expectations regarding the impact of the passage of Amendment 77 to the Colorado Constitution and the actions of the Black Hawk City Council in respect thereof on gaming revenue at Monarch Black Hawk; and (ix) our expectations regarding the litigation relating to the construction of the Monarch Black Hawk expansion and related liens recorded by the general contractor and certain subcontractors against the Monarch Black Hawk. Actual results and future events and conditions may differ materially from those described in any forward-looking statements. Therefore, you should not rely on any of these forward-looking statements.
Various risks and uncertainties may affect the operation, performance, development and results of our business and could cause future outcomes to change significantly from those set forth in our forward-looking statements, including the following factors:
● our ability to successfully implement our business and growth strategies;
● our ability to successfully defend against and remove the liens recorded against the Monarch Black Hawk by the general contractor and certain subcontractors with respect to the expansion and renovation of the property;
● continuing adverse impacts of the COVID-19 outbreak on our business, construction projects, financial condition and operating results;
● continuing actions by government officials at the federal, state and/or local level with respect to steps to be taken, including, without limitation, temporary or extended shutdowns, travel restrictions, social distancing and shelter-in-place orders, in connection with the COVID-19 outbreak;
● our ability to manage guest safety concerns caused by COVID-19;
● our ability to effectively manage and control expenses during temporary or extended shutdown periods;
● impact of temporary or extended shutdowns on our ability to maintain compliance with the terms and conditions of our credit facilities and other material contracts;
● our ability to negotiate relief options and necessary amendments to our Amended Credit Facility;
● access to available and reasonable financing on a timely basis
● our ability to maintain strong working relationships with our regulators, employees, lenders, suppliers, insurance carriers, customers, and other stakeholders;
● impact of any uninsured losses;
● changes in guest visitation or spending patterns due to health or other concerns;
● construction factors, including delays, disruptions, availability of labor and materials, increased costs of labor and materials, contractor disagreements, zoning issues, environmental restrictions, soil and water conditions, weather and other hazards, site access matters, building permit issues and other regulatory approvals or issues;
● ongoing disagreements over costs of and responsibility for delays and other construction related matters with our Monarch Black Hawk general contractor, PCL Construction Services, Inc., including, as previously reported, the litigation against us by such contractor;
● claims for construction defects, breach of contract, breach of warranty, fraud, fraudulent inducement, negligence or other construction related claims that we may have against our contractors in connection with construction and completion of Monarch Black Hawk and any adverse impacts on operations required to correct the same;
● our filing of affirmative defenses and extensive counterclaims against the Monarch Black Hawk contractor, PCL Construction Services, Inc., in the above-mentioned litigation in which litigation the parties are currently conducting discovery, and investigation of the claims by and against us is therefore ongoing;
● our potential need to post bonds or other forms of surety to support our legal remedies;
● risks related to development and construction activities (including disputes with and defaults by contractors and subcontractors; construction, equipment or staffing problems and delays; shortages of materials or skilled labor; environmental, health and safety issues; weather and other hazards, site access matters, and unanticipated cost increases);
● our ability to generate sufficient operating cash flow to help finance our expansion plans and subsequent debt reduction;
● changes in laws mandating increases in minimum wages and employee benefits;
● changes in laws and regulations permitting expanded and other forms of gaming in our key markets;
● the effects of local and national economic, credit and capital market conditions on the economy in general and on the gaming industry and our business in particular;
● the effects of labor shortages on our market position, growth and financial results;
● the potential of increases in state and federal taxation to address budgetary and other impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic;
● the potential of increased regulatory and other burdens to address the direct and indirect impacts of COVID-19 pandemic;
● guest acceptance of our expanded facilities once completed and the resulting impact on our market position, growth and financial results;
● competition in our target market areas;
● our dependence on two resorts;
● our ability to realize the anticipated benefits of our expansion and renovation projects, including the Monarch Black Hawk Expansion;
● ongoing disagreements over costs of and responsibility for delays and other construction related
● we have not entered into a GMP Amendment as contemplated in the contract with our Monarch Black Hawk general contractor. We have numerous disagreements with our Monarch Black Hawk general contractor, including disagreements over costs, schedule delays, and other construction related matters;
● components of our Monarch Black Hawk construction project will be outside the scope of the construction contract;
● risks of construction defects, unacceptable construction quality and failure of the general contractor to deliver Monarch Black Hawk Expansion in a state equal to industry standards;
● our ability to effectively manage expenses to optimize our margins and operating results;
● risks related to our present indebtedness and future borrowings;
● adverse trends in the gaming industries;
● changes in patron demographics;
● general market and economic conditions, including but not limited to, the effects of local and national economic, housing and energy conditions on the economy in general and on the gaming and lodging industries in particular;
● access to capital and credit, including our ability to finance future business requirements;
● our ability to meet our debt obligations;
● our ability to generate sufficient operating cash flow to finance our expansion plans and fund working capital;
● the impact of rising interest rates and our ability to refinance debt as it matures at commercially reasonable rates or at all;
● the impact that any discontinuance, modification or other reform of LIBOR, or the establishment of alternative reference rates, may have on our LIBOR-based debt instruments such as our Fourth Amended Credit Facility;
● our ability to continue to comply with the covenants and terms of our credit instruments;
● ability of large stockholders to influence our affairs;
● our dependence on key personnel;
● the availability of adequate levels of insurance;
● changes in federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including environmental and gaming licenses or legislation and regulations;
● our ability to comply with existing laws and regulations to which we are subject;
● our ability to obtain and maintain gaming and other governmental licenses and regulatory approvals;
● any violations by us of the anti-money laundering laws;
● cybersecurity risks, including misappropriation of customer information or other breaches of information security;
● impact of natural disasters, severe weather, terrorist activity and similar events;
● competitive environment, including increased competition in our target market areas;
● increases in the effective rate of taxation at any of our properties or at the corporate level;
● our ability to successfully estimate the impact of accounting, tax and legal matters;
● risks, uncertainties and other factors described from time to time in this and our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC” or “Commission”) filings and reports;
● the effects of macro and micro economic conditions on employment growth in the economy in general;
● the effects of labor shortages on our ability to grow our business and to expand our market share in each of our key markets;
● our ability to generate sufficient cash flow and manage our expenses to deleverage the Company; and
● guest acceptance of our expanded facilities at Monarch Black Hawk once completed and the resulting impact on our market position, growth and future financial results.
For a more detailed description of certain Risk Factors affecting our business, see Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements as a result of future developments, events or conditions, except as required by law. New risks emerge from time to time and it is not possible for us to predict all such risk factors, nor can we assess the impact of all such risk factors on our business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ significantly from those forecast in any forward-looking statements.
OVERVIEW
Monarch owns and operates the Atlantis Casino Resort Spa, a hotel and casino in Reno, Nevada (the “Atlantis”) and Monarch Casino Resort Spa Black Hawk, a hotel and casino in Black Hawk, Colorado (the “Monarch Black Hawk”). In addition, we own separate parcels of land located next to the Atlantis and a parcel of land with an industrial warehouse located between Denver, Colorado and Monarch Casino Resort Spa Black Hawk. We also own Chicago Dogs Eatery, Inc. and Monarch Promotional Association, both of which were formed in relation to licensure requirements for extended hours of liquor operation in Black Hawk, Colorado.
Our business strategy is to maximize revenues, operating income and cash flow primarily through our casino, food and beverage, and hotel operations at the Atlantis and Monarch Black Hawk. We focus on delivering exceptional service and value to our guests. Our hands-on management style focuses on customer service and cost efficiencies.
FACTORS IMPACTING OUR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our operating results may be affected by, among other things, competitive factors, gaming tax increases, mandated minimum wages, the commencement of new gaming operations, construction at our facilities, general public sentiment regarding travel, overall economic conditions and governmental policies affecting the disposable income of our patrons, widespread public health emergencies including pandemics such as the global coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, terrorism and weather conditions affecting our properties, as well as those matters discussed in Item 1A. “RISK FACTORS” above.
The following significant factors and trends should be considered in analyzing our operating performance:
Atlantis: Our business strategy is to maximize revenues, operating income and cash flow primarily through our casino, food and beverage operations and hotel operations. We focus on delivering exceptional service and value to our guests. Our hands-on management style focuses on customer service and cost efficiencies We continuously upgrade our property. With quality gaming, hotel and dining products, we believe the Atlantis is well positioned to benefit from future macro and local economic growth. Reno remains a very healthy local-oriented market. The market’s employment growth is broad based and we expect this positive indicator will support the continued strength of our business at Atlantis. At the same time, the tight employment environment, with the local unemployment rate below the national average, has created labor challenges, including wage inflation, which we continue to actively manage. We expect this to be a recurring trend for the market and Atlantis in the years ahead but we remain confident that our operating strategies will allow Atlantis to grow revenue as our market share continues to expand. The increase in the labor costs, combined with continued aggressive marketing programs by our competitors, has applied upward pressure on Atlantis operating costs and reduction in profit margins.
Monarch Casino Resort Spa Black Hawk: Since the acquisition of the Monarch Black Hawk property in April 2012, our focus has been to maximize casino and food and beverage revenues while upgrading the existing facility and working on the major expansion. In August 2015, we completed the redesign and upgrade of the existing Monarch Black Hawk property. In November 2016, we opened for guest use a new nine-story parking structure with approximately 1,350 spaces (which is now directly connected to our new hotel and expanded casino), and additional valet parking, with total property capacity of approximately 1,500 spaces. In the fourth quarter of 2020 we opened to the public our hotel tower and expanded casino floor. Construction at the property is currently underway to redesign and upgrade part of the original building, which will complete the transformation of the property into a full-scale casino resort. This last stage of the project, which includes converting the existing buffet to a specialty restaurant and adding a poker room, a sports lounge, a keno counter and additional slot machines, is expected to open in 2021. Upon completion of the remaining portion of the project, the property will feature approximately 60,000 square feet of casino space, approximately 1,200 slot machines, approximately 40 table games, a sports lounge and poker room, 10 bars and lounges, and four new dining options, including a twenty-four-hour full-service restaurant, 250-seat buffet-style restaurant, the Monarch Chophouse (a fine-dining steakhouse), and a specialty restaurant. The resort offers 516 guest rooms and suites, banquet and meeting room space, a retail store, a concierge lounge and an upscale spa and pool facility located on the top floor of the tower. We believe that the quality of our expanded product and exceptional guest service will meet the demand of the high-end segment of the market and will accelerate market share and grow revenue.
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
We use certain Key Performance Indicators (“KPI”) to manage our operation and measure our performance.
Gaming revenue KPI: Our management reviews on a consistent basis the volume metrics and hold percentage metrics for each gaming area. The main volume measurements are slot coin-in, table games drop, sportsbook write and keno write. Slot coin-in represents the dollar amount wagered in slot machines, including free promotional wagers. Table games drop represents the total amount of cash and net markers deposited in the table drop box. Keno write and sportsbook write represents the dollar amount wagered at our counters, along with sportsbook write made through our mobile wagering system. Volume metrics are important in managing the business, as our gaming win is affected by actual hold percentage, which in general varies from the expected hold percentage and historical hold percentage. Gaming win represents the amount of wagers retained by us. Hold percentage represents win as a percentage of slot coin-in, table game drop, sportsbook write, or keno write. Our win and hold percentages are calculated before discounts, commissions, deferring revenue associated with our loyalty programs and allocating casino revenues related to goods and services provided to patrons on a complimentary basis.
Food and Beverage revenue KPI: The main KPIs in managing our food and beverage operations are covers and average revenue per cover. A cover represents the number of guests served and is an indicator of volume. Average revenue per cover represents the average amount spent per food and beverage outlets’ served guests. Changes in the average revenue per cover might be an indicator for changes in menu offerings, changes in menu prices or may indicate changes in our guests’ preferences and purchasing habits.
Hotel revenue KPI: The main KPIs used in managing our hotel operation are the occupancy rate (a volume indicator), which is the average percentage of available hotel rooms occupied during a period, and the average daily rate (“ADR”, a price indicator), which is the average price per sold room. Available rooms exclude those rooms unavailable for occupancy during the period due to renovation, development, or other requirements. Sold rooms include rooms where the guests do not show up for their stay and lose their deposit. The calculations of the occupancy rate and ADR include the impact of rooms provided on a complimentary basis. Revenue per available room ("RevPAR") represents total hotel revenue per available room and is a representation of the occupancy rate, ADR and miscellaneous hotel sales.
Operating margins: Our management is consistently focused on controlling expenses and finding cost savings, without affecting the quality of the product we offer and our guests’ services and experience. We measure our performance using expense margin, which is a percentage of direct expenses, including labor cost of product and any other operating expenses related to the gaming, food and beverage, or hotel operation to the net gaming, food and beverage, or hotel revenues. Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) margin represents SG&A expenses for a period as a percentage of total net revenue for a period. In managing the food and beverage operation we use Cost Of Goods Sold (“COGS”) percentage, which represents a percentage of product cost to the food and beverage revenue and is a measurement of commodity prices and menu sales prices.
Our management evaluates the KPIs as compared to prior periods, the peer group, or market, as well as for any trends.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The operating results for 2020 reflect the government-mandated closures of our operations for approximately three months, as well as the effect of continuing regulatory limitations relating to the ongoing pandemic, which remained in force after the partial reopening of our properties.
In addition, the operating results for 2020 were impacted by the addition of hotel operations and an expanded casino floor at our Black Hawk property, which opened to the public in November 2020 as part of the phased opening of our expanded Monarch Casino Resort Spa Black Hawk.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net income totaled $23.7 million, or $1.25 per diluted share, compared to net income of $31.8 million, or $1.70 per diluted share for the same period of 2019, reflecting a 25.6% decrease in net income and 26.5% in diluted earnings per share. Net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $184.4 million and $249.2 million, respectively, reflecting a decrease of $64.8 million, or 26.0%. Income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $15.3 million compared to $39.6 million for the same period in 2019, representing a decrease of $24.3 million, or 61.4%.
Casino revenue decreased 12.9% in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period of 2019 and was driven by the COVID-19 outbreak, which culminated in a suspension of our operations in mid-March 2020 through beginning/mid-June 2020. In addition, table games re-opened at our Black Hawk property on September 11, 2020 and were subsequently closed again on November 13, 2020 through the end of the year. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in gaming volume, as a result of guest’ spend per visit, during the periods the properties were open and gaming operations were active. Casino operating expense as a percentage of casino revenue decreased to 30.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 35.4% in 2019 primarily as a result of targeted cost cutting measures combined with the increased spend per visit.
Food and beverage revenue decreased 40.5% in the year ended December 31, 2020 over the same period in 2019, due to a 51.2% decrease in covers, partially offset by a 21.9% increase in average revenue per cover. In addition to the COVID-19 pandemic and the shutdown of our properties for approximately three months, 2020 food and beverage covers were also impacted by the closure for remodeling of one of our restaurants and one of our bars at Atlantis for approximately six months. Food and beverage operating expense as a percentage of food and beverage revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020 was 83.7% compared to 79.0% over the same period in 2019. Food and beverage operating expense as a percentage of food and beverage revenue increased as a result of additional labor cost to comply with COVID-19 protocols, partially offset by a decrease in cost of goods sold.
Hotel revenue decreased 42.8% due to lower hotel occupancy of 69.8% for the period hotel was open in 2020 compared to 88.4% in 2019 and a lower ADR of $109.46 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $124.94 for the year ended December 31, 2019 and REVPAR was $82.06 for the period hotel was open in 2020 and $117.77 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Hotel operating expense as a percent of the hotel revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 50.2% compared to 37.3% for the same period in 2019. The increase in the hotel expense margin was primarily due to the increase in labor and operating supplies expenses to comply with the COVID protocol, as well as lower ADR.
Other revenue decreased 28.4% in 2020 compared to 2019 driven by decrease in Atlantis’ spa and salon revenue, arcade revenue and retail revenue, as the properties were closed for approximately three months and under limited operations due to COVID-19 related state restrictions after opening.
SG&A Expense decreased to $60.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $69.3 million in the same period of 2019 due to: i) a $5.4 million decrease in sales and marketing expenses; ii) a $2.2 million decrease in salaries, wages and related employee benefits expense, as top management took pay reduction during the properties’ COVID-19 closure; iii) a $0.6 million decrease in travel expense; and iv) a $0.4 million decrease in utility expense and v) a $0.3 million decrease in repair and maintenance expense. As a percentage of net revenue, SG&A expense increased to 32.7% in 2020 from 27.8% in 2019.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased to $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $14.9 million for the same period in 2019 primarily due to the addition of the hotel building and furniture, fixtures and equipment assets with the completion of the expansion project in Monarch Black Hawk.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $2.8 million in pre-opening expense related to the opening of the new hotel and expanded casino in Black Hawk, $1.6 million in construction litigation expense related to the lawsuit filed by the Monarch Black Hawk Expansion construction project general contractor against the Company and our countersuit against the general contractor, $1.4 million in Colorado legislation lobbing expenses, $0.7 million in equipment, supplies and employee testing expenses directly attributable to the pandemic for reopening of the properties and incremental to normal operations and $0.2 million in unamortized debt issuance cost write off and loss on disposition of assets. During the year ended December 31,2019, we recognized $2.5 million in pre-opening expense related to the upcoming opening of the new hotel and expanded casino in Black Hawk, $0.3 million in construction litigation expense related to the lawsuit filed by the Monarch Black Hawk Expansion construction project general contractor against the Company and our countersuit against the general contractor, and $0.3 million in acquisition opportunity expense. These expenses are included in Other operating items, net in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we decreased the outstanding balance under our credit facility by $11.3 million to $182.5 million as of December 31, 2020. During 2020, we capitalized a majority of the interest paid and accrued, as most of the draws were used to finance the Monarch Black Hawk expansion plan. Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized, was $0.3 million. During 2019, we capitalized all interest paid and accrued, as the draws were strictly used to finance the Monarch Black Hawk expansion plan. See further discussion of our Fourth Amended Credit Facility in the LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES section below.
Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For the year ended December 31, 2019, our net income totaled $31.8 million, or $1.70 per diluted share, compared to net income of $34.1 million, or $1.83 per diluted share for the same period of 2018, reflecting a 6.7% decrease in net income and 7.1% in diluted earnings per share. Net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were $249.2 million and $240.3 million, respectively, reflecting an increase of $8.9 million, or 3.7%. Income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $39.6 million compared to $42.8 million for the same period in 2018, representing a decrease of $3.3 million, or 7.6%.
Casino revenue increased 1.7% in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period of 2018 due to an increase in gaming volume, as a result of an increase in guests spend per visit and partially offset by an increase in promotional allowances (primarily hotel), recognized at the stand-alone selling price and recorded as casino contra revenue. Casino operating expense as a percentage of casino revenue increased to 35.4% for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to 34.8% in 2018 due to an increase in labor expense and promotional expense.
Food and beverage revenue increased 1.9% in the year ended December 31, 2019 over the same period in 2018, due to a 3.5% increase in average revenue per cover partially offset by a 1.5% decrease in covers served. Food and beverage operating expense as a percentage of food and beverage revenue in the year ended December 31, 2019 was 79.0% compared to 75.8% over the same period in 2018. Food and beverage operating expense as a percentage of food and beverage revenue increased as a result of labor cost increase partially offset by a decrease in cost of goods sold.
Hotel revenue increased 15.5% due to a higher ADR of $124.17 for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $104.61 for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in ADR is primarily due to an increase in the complimentary ADR, recognized at the stand-alone dynamic selling price. Hotel occupancy of 88.4% in 2019 was slightly lower compared to 89.3% in 2018. REVPAR was $117.77 and $101.40 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Hotel operating expense as a percent of hotel revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 37.3% compared to 42.8% for the same period in 2018. The decrease in the hotel expense margin was primarily due to the increase in the complimentary ADR.
Other revenue increased 4.7% in 2019 compared to 2018 driven primarily by increased Atlantis’ spa and salon revenues and recoveries of bad debt.
SG&A Expense increased to $69.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 from $65.8 million in the same period of 2018 due to: i) a $2.8 million increase in salaries, wages and related employee benefits expense; ii) a $0.3 million increase in employee acquisition and retention expense; iii) a $0.2 million increase in information systems maintenance expense; and iv) a $0.2 million increase in travel expense. As a percentage of net revenue, SG&A expense increased to 27.8% in 2019 from 27.4% in 2018.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased to $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $14.6 million for the same period in 2018 primarily due to the increase in property and equipment, as we continually strive to add to and upgrade our property and equipment assets.
During 2019, we recognized $2.5 million in pre-opening expense related to the upcoming opening of the new hotel and expanded casino in Black Hawk, $0.3 million in construction litigation expense related to the lawsuit filed by the Monarch Black Hawk Expansion construction project general contractor against the Company and our countersuit against the general contractor and $0.3 million acquisition opportunity related professional service fees. We had no such expenses in 2018.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we drew $105.5 million from the Amended Credit Facility and paid $3.8 million of mandatory principal payment, which resulted in an increase in our outstanding balance thereunder to $196.3 million as of December 31, 2019. During 2019, we capitalized all interest paid and accrued, as the draws were strictly used to finance the Monarch Black Hawk Expansion Plan. During 2018, we capitalized a majority of the interest paid and accrued, as most of the draws were used to finance the Monarch Black Hawk Expansion Plan, which resulted in interest expense, net of amounts capitalized, of $0.2 million. See further discussion of our Amended Credit Facility in the LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES section below.
CAPITAL SPENDING AND DEVELOPMENT
We seek to continuously upgrade and maintain our facilities in order to present a fresh, high quality product to our guests. In addition, we have invested, and continue to invest, in our Monarch Black Hawk Expansion Plan. Capital expenditures during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows (in thousands):
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, capital expenditures related primarily to the work on the Monarch Black Hawk Expansion Plan, the introduction of Red Bloom Asian Kitchen restaurant and Atrium bar and lounge at Atlantis, as well as the acquisition of gaming equipment to upgrade and replace existing equipment at both properties.
Monarch Black Hawk Expansion Plan
In 2013, we began work to convert the Monarch Black Hawk into a full-scale casino resort. The multi-phased expansion of the Monarch Casino Resort Spa Black Hawk involves construction of a new parking structure, demolition of the existing parking structure and construction of a new hotel tower and casino expansion.
In November 2016, the new nine-story parking structure, offering approximately 1,350 parking spaces, was completed and became available for use by Monarch Black Hawk guests. The demolition and removal of the old parking structure, which included a controlled implosion of the old garage, was completed in the first quarter of 2017.
On February 8, 2017, we broke ground on the hotel tower and casino expansion.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we began the phased opening of our new hotel tower and casino expansion, which increased the casino space and added a 23-story hotel tower with 516 guest rooms and suites, banquet and meeting room space, a retail store, a concierge lounge, an upscale spa and pool facility located on the top floor of the tower, three new restaurants, and additional bars and lounges. We are currently working on converting the existing buffet to a specialty restaurant, and adding a poker room, a keno counter, a sports lounge, as well as additional slot machines, in the existing facility. We expect this work to be completed later in 2021.
We are confident that the quality of our expanded product and exceptional guest service will meet the demand of the high-end segment of the market and will derive accelerated market share and revenue growth.
We expect to continue to finance the cost through a combination of operating cash flow and funds from our money market account. We can provide no assurance that any project will be completed on schedule, if at all, or within established budgets, or that any project will result in increased earnings.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash provided by operations and, for capital expansion projects, borrowings available under our Fourth Amended Credit Facility.
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities totaled $31.4 million, a decrease of $31.8 million, or 50.3%, compared to the same period of the prior year. This decrease was primarily due to: i) a $24.8 million increase in income tax receivable, offset by a $14.4 million increase in deferred tax, both as a result of an accelerated depreciation for tax purposes on the assets put in service in 2020 with the opening of a hotel tower and expanded casino in Monarch Black Hawk; ii) a $8.1 million decrease in net income; iii) a $4.3 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense, including the excess tax benefit; iv) a $11.7 million change in working capital, all offset by a $2.7 million increase in depreciation and amortization.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $46.4 million and $134.9 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 consisted primarily of cash used for the new hotel tower and casino expansion at Monarch Casino Resort Spa Black Hawk, for renovation projects at Atlantis, and for the acquisition of gaming and other equipment at both properties.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities of $17.3 in 2020 represented $13.7 million principal payments, net of the borrowings under the credit facility, $2.9 million long-term debt refinancing cost and $0.7 million of proceeds from stock options exercise. Net cash provided by financial activities in 2019 was $101.8 million and represented borrowing under our Fourth Amended Credit Facility, net of the mandatory principal payments.
We expect that the Company’s cash position in the next several quarters will be negatively impacted by the outstanding construction retention and other payments related to the Monarch Black Hawk Expansion project of $49.8 million, which are reflected in “Construction Accounts Payable” on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
We expect that the Company’s cash position in the next few quarters will be positively impacted by the expected tax refund for 2020 fiscal year of $24.9 million, which is reflected in “Income taxes receivable” on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
Purchase obligations of materials and supplies used in the normal operation of our business represent approximately $10.3 million at December 31, 2020 and all are cancelable by us upon providing a 30-day notice.
Fourth Amended Credit Facility
On September 3, 2020, the Company entered into the Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement with Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as administrative agent and certain banks (the “Fourth Amended Credit Facility”). The Fourth Amended Credit Facility amends and restates our $250.0 million credit facility, dated as of July 20, 2016 (the “Prior Credit Facility”). On September 29, 2020, the Company and its lender executed an Amendment to the Fourth Amended Credit Facility, which amends the definition of “Financial Covenant Start Date”.
The Fourth Amended Credit Facility extends the maturity date of the Prior Credit Facility from July 20, 2021 to September 3, 2023. In addition, the Fourth Amended Credit Facility increases the aggregate principal amount of the credit facilities to $270.0 million, which consist of $200.0 million term loan (“Term Loan Facility”) and $70.0 million revolving credit facility (“Revolving Credit Facility”).
We are required to make quarterly principal payments under the Term Loan Facility on each Term Loan Installment Date, commencing on December 31, 2020, in an amount equal to (x) the percentage set forth opposite the applicable period during which such Term Loan Installment Date occurs (i.e., 1.25% for the period from December 31, 2020 to September 30, 2021, and 2.50% for the period from December 31, 2021 and thereafter) multiplied by (y) $200.0 million. The estimated amount of the mandatory principal payments due in the next twelve months is $12.5 million.
Commencing with the delivery of the compliance certificate for fiscal year 2021, we may be required to prepay borrowings under the Fourth Amended Credit Facility using excess cash flows for each fiscal year, depending on the Company’s leverage ratio.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an outstanding principal balance of $182.5 million under the Term Loan Facility, a $0.6 million letter of credit and no borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility; all $70.0 million remained available for borrowing.
Borrowings are secured by liens on substantially all of the Company’s real and personal property.
In addition to other customary covenants for a facility of this nature, as of September 30, 2020, we are required to maintain a Total Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Fourth Amended Credit Facility) of no more than 4.75:1 and Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Fourth Amended Credit Facility) of at least 1.15:1. As of December 31, 2020, our Total Leverage Ratio and Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio were 2.6:1 and 5.6:1.
The interest rate under the Amended Credit Facility is LIBOR plus a margin ranging from 1.75% to 3.25%, or a base rate (as defined in the Fourth Amended Credit Facility) plus a margin ranging from 0.75% to 2.25%, or the Prime Rate. The applicable margins vary depending on Company’s leverage ratio. There is a LIBOR floor of 0.50%. Commitment fees are equal to the daily average unused revolving commitment multiplied by the commitment fee percentage, ranging from 0.35% to 0.575%, based on our leverage ratio.
At December 31, 2020, our interest rate was based on LIBOR and our leverage ratio was such that pricing for borrowings under the Amended Credit Facility was LIBOR plus 2.25%. At December 31, 2020, the Term loan interest rate was 2.75%, computed as LIBOR floor of 0.50% plus interest margin of 2.25%. The carrying value of the debt outstanding under the Amended Credit Facility approximates fair value because the interest fluctuates with the lender’s prime rate or other market rates of interest.
On the terms and subject to some conditions, the Company may, at any time before the Maturity Date, request an increase of Revolving Credit Facility, provided that each such increase is equal to $15.0 million or an integral multiple of $1.0 million in excess and, after giving effect to the requested increase, the aggregate amount of the increases in the total revolving loan commitment shall not exceed $75.0 million.
We may prepay borrowings under the Fourth Amended Credit Facility revolving loan without penalty (subject to certain conditions and certain charges applicable to the prepayment of LIBOR borrowings prior to the end of the applicable interest period). Once reduced or cancelled, the Revolving Credit Facility may not be increased or reinstated without the prior written consent of all lenders.
As of December 31, 2020, $167.2 million “Long-term debt, net” in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets represents the $182.5 million outstanding loan amount under the Amended Credit facility, net of $2.8 million unamortized debt issuance costs and $12.5 million mandatory principal payment that are due in next twelve months and are presented as “Current portion of long-term debt” in the Current liabilities section of the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
The Company believes that the $2.0 million cash in its interest-bearing money market fund, the $70.0 million available under its Fourth Amended Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020 and the expected cash flows from operating activities will be sufficient to support its current operations, meet its debt obligations and fulfill its capital expenditure plans for the twelve months from filing of Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020; however, the Company is surrounded by uncertainty about COVID-19 and the restricted reopening of its operations, as well as financial, economic, competitive, regulatory, and other factors, many of which are beyond its control. If the Company is unable to generate sufficient cash flow in the upcoming months or if its cash needs exceed the Company’s borrowing capacity under the Fourth Amended Credit Facility, it could be required to adopt one or more alternatives, such as reducing, delaying or eliminating planned capital expenditures, selling assets, restructuring debt or issuing additional equity capital.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). Certain of our policies, including the estimated useful lives assigned to our assets and the calculation of the capitalized interest, the determination of the allowance for doubtful accounts and allowance for unredeemed gift certificates, self-insurance reserves, deferred revenue, the calculation of income tax liabilities and the calculation of stock-based compensation, require that we apply significant judgment in defining the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Our judgments are based on historical experience, terms of existing contracts, observation of trends in the industry, information provided by customers and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. There can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from our estimates. To provide an understanding of the methodologies applied, our significant accounting policies are discussed where appropriate in this discussion and analysis and in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Monarch and its subsidiaries. Intercompany balances and transactions are eliminated.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We extend short-term credit to our gaming customers. Such credit is non-interest bearing and is due on demand. In addition, we also have receivables due from hotel guests and convention groups and events, which are primarily secured with a credit card at the time a customer makes reservation or checks in. An allowance for doubtful accounts is established for all of our receivables based upon our historical collection and write-off experience, and taking in consideration the current economic conditions and management’s expectations of future economic conditions. The allowance is applied even when the risk of credit loss is remote. When a situation warrants, the Company may create a specific identification reserve for a high collection risk receivable. We write off our uncollectible receivables once all efforts have been made to collect such receivables. The book value of receivables approximates fair value due to the short-term nature of the receivables.
Goodwill and Long-lived assets:
The Company accounts for goodwill in accordance with ASC Topic 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (“ASC Topic 350”). ASC Topic 350 gives companies the option to perform a qualitative assessment that may allow them to skip the quantitative test as appropriate. The Company tests its goodwill for impairment annually during the fourth quarter of each year, or whenever events or circumstances make it more likely than not that impairment may have occurred. Impairment testing for goodwill is performed at the reporting unit level, and each of the Company’s casino properties is considered to be a reporting unit.
Goodwill consists of the excess of the acquisition cost over the fair value of the net assets acquired in business combinations in April 2012. As of December 31, 2020, we had goodwill totaling $25.1 million related to the purchase of Monarch Casino Resort Spa Black Hawk, Inc.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic related government orders to suspend operations at our properties and the continued adverse effect of the pandemic on our business, after reopening of our properties, we performed a qualitative assessment for each quarter in 2020 to determine if the Company’s goodwill was impaired. The impairment assessment, resulted in the recognition of no impairment loss. Based upon the financial performance of the Company during the year and taking in consideration the growth opportunity at Monarch Black Hawk after opening the new hotel and expanded casino at the end of 2020, management determined that there was no indicator of impairment. The evaluations used to assess the Company’s goodwill for impairment incorporate inherent uncertainties that are difficult to predict in the current economic environment. When evaluating for impairment, we make numerous highly subjective and judgmental estimates and assumptions, all of which are subject to a variety of risks and uncertainties, and many of which are based on significant unobservable inputs. The most significant assumptions and inputs used in evaluating for impairment are projected short-term and long-term operating results and cash flows, projected capital expenditures, estimated long-term growth rates and the weighted-average cost of capital of market participants, adjusted for the risk profile of the assets being evaluated. The timing and trajectory of the expected post-pandemic economic recovery is unknown, and accordingly, estimates and assumptions are likely to change as more information becomes available.
The Company believes that it has made reasonable estimates and judgments in performing its analysis in light of the risks and uncertainties surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. However, if the excess of fair value over the carrying amount declines by a significant amount in the future as a result of changes in actual and projected operating results or other internal or external economic factors, the Company could be required to recognize goodwill impairment charges in future periods.
Self-insurance Reserves
We are currently self-insured up to certain stop loss amounts for Atlantis workers’ compensation and for certain medical benefit costs provided to our Monarch Black Hawk employees. We are also self-insured for certain medical benefit costs provided to our Atlantis employees. As required by the state of Colorado, we are fully insured for Monarch Black Hawk workers’ compensation costs. We review self-insurance reserves at least quarterly. The reserve is determined by reviewing the actual expenditures for the previous twelve-month period and reports prepared by the third party plan administrator for any significant unpaid claims. We engage third party actuaries at least once per year for a more precise reserves review and calculation. The reserve is an amount estimated to pay both reported and unreported claims as of the balance sheet date. We believe changes in medical costs, trends in claims of our employee base, accident frequency and severity and other factors could materially affect the estimate for this reserve. Unforeseen developments in existing claims, or the possibility that our estimate of unreported claims differs materially from the actual amount of unreported claims, could result in the over or under estimation of our self-insurance reserve.
Capitalized Interest
We capitalize interest costs associated with debt incurred in connection with major construction projects. When no debt is specifically identified as being incurred in connection with a construction project, we capitalize interest on amounts expended on the project at our average borrowing cost. Interest capitalization is ceased when the project is substantially complete. We capitalized $6.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, $5.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 and $2.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2018 in interest. Capitalized interest of $16.5 million, related to the Monarch Black Hawk expansion project, was allocated to the fixed assets placed in service at the project completion date in the fourth quarter of 2020 and is amortized over the respective assets’ recovery period.
Casino Revenues
Casino revenues represent the net win from gaming activity, which is the difference between the amounts won and lost, which represents the transaction price. Jackpots, other than the incremental amount of progressive jackpots, are recognized at the time they are won by customers. Funds deposited by customers in advance and outstanding chips and slot tickets in the customers’ possession are recognized as a liability until such amounts are redeemed or used in gaming play by the customer. Additionally, net win is reduced by the performance obligations for the players’ club program, progressive jackpots and any pre-arranged marker discounts. The players club performance obligations result in recognition of deferred revenue at the standalone selling prices (“SSP”) of the goods and services that the points are expected to be redeemed for. Progressive jackpot provisions are recognized in two components: 1) as wagers are made for the share of players’ wagers that are contributed to the progressive jackpot award, and 2) as jackpots are won for the portion of the progressive jackpot award contributed by us. Cash discounts and other cash incentives to guests related to gaming play are recorded as a reduction to gaming revenue.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded in accordance with the liability method pursuant to authoritative guidance. Under the asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting for income taxes, the following basic principles are applied in accounting for income taxes at the date of the financial statements: (a) a current liability or asset is recognized for the estimated taxes payable or refundable on taxes for the current year; (b) a deferred income tax liability or asset is recognized for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards; (c) the measurement of current and deferred tax liabilities and assets is based on the provisions of the enacted tax law; the effects of future changes in tax laws or rates are not anticipated; and (d) the measurement of deferred income taxes is reduced, if necessary, by the amount of any tax benefits that, based upon available evidence, are not expected to be realized.
Our income tax returns are subject to examination by tax authorities. We assess potentially unfavorable outcomes of such examinations based on accounting standards for uncertain income taxes. Under the accounting guidance, we may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50.0% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. It also provides guidance on derecognition, measurement, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods and disclosure.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with authoritative guidance which establishes standards for the accounting for transactions in which an entity exchanges its equity instruments for goods and services or incurs a liability in exchange for goods and services that are based on the fair value of the entity’s equity instruments or that may be settled by the issuance of those equity instruments. It requires an entity to measure the costs of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award and recognize that cost over the service period. We calculate the grant-date fair value using the Black-Scholes valuation model.
The Black-Scholes valuation model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions which include the expected term of options granted, risk-free interest rates, expected volatility, and expected rates of dividends. We estimate an expected term for each stock option grant based on the weighted-average time between grant date and exercise date and the risk-free interest rate assumption was based on U.S. Treasury rates appropriate for the expected term. We use historical data and projections to estimate expected volatility and expected employee behaviors related to option exercises and forfeitures.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
A variety of proposed or otherwise potential accounting standards are currently under review and study by standard-setting organizations and certain regulatory agencies. Because of the tentative and preliminary nature of such proposed standards, we have not yet determined the effect, if any, the implementation of any such proposed or revised standards would have on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
Financial Instruments - Credit Losses: In June 2016, the FASB issued amended accounting guidance for the measurement of credit losses on financial instruments. The Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-13 significantly changes the way entities account for credit losses for most financial assets and certain other instruments that are not measured at fair value through net income. The amended accounting guidance replaces the incurred loss impairment model with a forward-looking expected loss model, and is applicable to most financial assets, including trade receivables other than those arising from operating leases. In the first quarter of 2020, we adopted ASU 2016-13. The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
We extend short-term credit to its gaming customers. Such credit is non-interest bearing and is due on demand. In addition, the Company also has receivables due from hotel guests and convention groups and events, which are primarily secured with a credit card. An allowance for doubtful accounts is set up for all Company receivables based upon the Company’s historical collection and write-off experience and taking in consideration the current economic conditions and management’s expectations of future economic conditions. The allowance is applied even when the risk of credit loss is remote. When a situation warrants, we may create a specific identification reserve for a high collection risk receivables. We write off uncollectible receivables once all efforts have been made to collect such receivables. The book value of receivables approximates fair value due to the short-term nature of the receivables.
Cloud Computing Arrangement (“CCA”) Implementation Costs: In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15 to align the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred in a hosting arrangement with the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred to develop or obtain internal-use software. The implementation costs incurred for setup fees in a hosting arrangement that is a service contract should be presented as a prepaid asset in the balance sheet and expensed over the term of the hosting arrangement to the same line item in the statement of income as the costs related to the hosting fees, with costs incurred for integration with on premise software being capitalized as intangible assets and being amortized over the term of the arrangement. The Company adopted the guidance effective January 1, 2020. In 2020 we capitalized $622 thousand CCA implementation costs. The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill Impairment: In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-04 that simplifies the accounting for goodwill impairment for all entities by eliminating the requirement to calculate the implied fair value of goodwill (i.e., Step 2 of today’s goodwill impairment test) to measure a goodwill impairment charge. Instead, entities will record an impairment charge based on the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying amount over its fair value (i.e., measure the charge based on today’s Step 1). The standard does not change the guidance on completing Step 1 of the goodwill impairment test. An entity will still be able to perform today’s optional qualitative goodwill impairment assessment before determining whether to proceed to Step 1. The standard will be applied prospectively and is effective for annual and interim impairment tests performed in periods beginning after December 15, 2019. The adoption did not have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
Reference Rate Reform: In March 2020, the FASB issued temporary accounting guidance to ease the accounting effects of reform to the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) and other reference rates. The guidance contains optional expedients and exceptions that apply to accounting for contract modifications, hedging relationships, and other transactions affected by reference rate reform. The guidance is effective for all entities as of March 12, 2020 through December 31, 2022 and may be applied from the beginning of an interim period or prospectively from a date within an interim period that includes or is subsequent to March 12, 2020. The Company does not expect the adoption to have a material impact on its Consolidated Financial Statements.
Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes: In December 2019, the FASB issued amended accounting guidance to simplify the accounting for income taxes. The amendment eliminates certain exceptions related to the approach for intra-period tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. The amendment also simplifies other aspects of the accounting for income taxes. The amended guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020 and interim periods within those years, and early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact this guidance will have on its financial position and results of operations.
A variety of proposed or otherwise potential accounting standards are currently under review and study by standard-setting organizations and certain regulatory agencies. Because of the tentative and preliminary nature of such proposed standards, we have not yet determined the effect, if any, the implementation of any such proposed or revised standards would have on our Consolidated Financial Statements.