Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Results of Operations
General
We report our consolidated and individual segment results of operations on a 52- or 53-week fiscal year ending on the last Thursday in December. We divide our fiscal year into three 13-week quarters and a final quarter consisting of 13 or 14 weeks. Our primary operations are reported in two business segments: theatres, and hotels and resorts.
Fiscal 2018 was a 52-week year, beginning on December 29, 2017 and ending on December 27, 2018. Fiscal 2019 was a 52-week year, beginning on December 28, 2018 and ending on December 26, 2019. Fiscal 2020 was a 53-week year, beginning on December 27, 2019 and ending on December 31, 2020.
Fiscal 2020 results by quarter were significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which began late in our first fiscal quarter and impacted our results for the remainder of fiscal 2020. Under normal conditions, our first fiscal quarter typically produces the weakest operating results in our hotels and resorts division due primarily to the effects of reduced travel during the winter months. The quality of film product in any given quarter typically impacts the operating results in our theatre division. Our second and third fiscal quarters generally produce our strongest operating results because these periods coincide with the typical summer seasonality of the movie theatre industry and the summer strength of the lodging business. Due to the fact that the week between Christmas and New Year’s Eve is historically one of the strongest weeks of the year for our theatre division, the specific timing of the last Thursday in December impacts the results of our fiscal first and fourth quarters in that division, particularly when we have a 53-week year.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) generally discusses fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019. Discussions of fiscal 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018 that are not included in this MD&A can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2019.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has had an unprecedented impact on the world and both of our business segments. The situation continues to be volatile and the social and economic effects are widespread. As an operator of movie theatres, hotels and resorts, restaurants and bars, each of which consists of spaces where customers and guests gather in close proximity, our businesses are significantly impacted by protective actions that federal, state and local governments have taken to control the spread of the pandemic, and our customers’ reactions or responses to such actions. These actions have included, among other things, declaring national and state emergencies, encouraging social distancing, restricting freedom of movement and congregation, mandating non-essential business closures, issuing curfews, limiting business capacity, mandating mask-wearing and issuing shelter-in-place, quarantine and stay-at-home orders.
As a result of these measures, we temporarily closed all of our theatres on March 17, 2020, and did not generate any significant revenues from our theatre operations during our fiscal 2020 second quarter and the first two months of our fiscal 2020 third quarter (other than revenues from six theatres opened on a very limited basis in June 2020 primarily to test new operating protocols, five parking lot cinemas, and some limited online and curbside sales of popcorn, pizza and other assorted food and beverage items). As of August 28, 2020, we had reopened approximately 80% of our theatres, although seating capacity at our reopened theatres has been temporarily reduced in response to COVID-19 as a way to ensure proper social distancing. In October 2020, we temporarily closed several theatres due to changes in the release schedule for new films, reducing our percentage of theatres open to approximately 66%. In November 2020, new state and local restrictions in several of our markets required us to temporarily reclose several theatres, and as a result, approximately 52% of our theatres were open as of December 31, 2020. Subsequent to year-end, several of these new restrictions were lifted and as of the date of this report, approximately 69% of our theatres are currently open with temporarily reduced seating capacity in response to COVID-19. Temporarily closed theatres are ready to quickly reopen as restrictions are lifted, new films are released and demand returns.
We also temporarily closed all of our hotel division restaurants and bars at approximately the same time as our theatres and closed five of our eight company-owned hotels and resorts on March 24, 2020 due to a significant reduction in occupancy at those hotels. We closed our remaining three company-owned hotels in early April 2020. We re-opened four of our company-owned hotels and several of our restaurants and bars during June 2020. We reopened three additional company-owned hotels during our fiscal 2020 third quarter and we reopened our remaining company-owned hotel in November 2020. As such, as of December 31, 2020, all eight of our company-owned hotels and all but one of our managed hotels are open. The majority of our restaurants and bars in our hotels and resorts are also now open, operating under applicable state and local restrictions and guidelines. The majority of our hotels and restaurants are generating significantly reduced revenues as compared to prior years.
Maintaining and protecting a strong balance sheet has always been a core philosophy of The Marcus Corporation during our 85-year history. As a result, we believe we entered the global COVID-19 crisis with a strong financial position. At the end of fiscal 2019, our debt-to-capitalization ratio was 0.26. Despite the majority of our theatres being closed during most of the second and third quarters of fiscal 2020, our hotels being closed during most of the second quarter and portions of the third quarter of fiscal 2020, and both of our businesses operating at significantly reduced attendance and occupancy levels during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, our financial position remains strong. As of December 31, 2020, our debt-to-capitalization ratio was 0.37, which is equal to or lower than the same ratio we had at seven of our last 10 fiscal year-ends.
Despite our strong financial position, the COVID-19 pandemic has had and is expected to continue to have adverse effects on our business, results of operations, cash flows, financial condition, access to credit markets and ability to service our existing and future indebtedness. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic and in keeping with our core philosophies, we have been working to preserve cash and ensure sufficient liquidity to endure the impacts of the global pandemic, even if prolonged. On April 29, 2020, we entered into the First Amendment to Credit Agreement (the “First Amendment”) which amended our existing credit agreement dated January 9, 2020 (the Credit Agreement, as amended by the First Amendment and the Second Amendment, as defined below, the “Credit Agreement”). The First Amendment provided a new $90.8 million 364-day Senior Term Loan A (the “Term Loan A”) to further support our balance sheet. We used the proceeds from the Term Loan A to repay borrowings under the Credit Agreement, to pay costs and expenses related to the First Amendment, and for general corporate purposes. On July 22, 2020, we repaid $55 million of borrowings under our revolving credit facility. On September 15, 2020, we entered into the Second Amendment to Credit Agreement (the “Second Amendment”) which amended the Credit Agreement and, among other things, extended the maturity date of the Term Loan A to September 22, 2021.
In addition, on September 22, 2020, we received $100.05 million of gross proceeds from the issuance of Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 (the “Convertible Notes”). We used a portion of the proceeds from the Convertible Notes to enter into privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain financial institutions in order to reduce the potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of the Convertible Notes. We used the remaining proceeds from the Convertible Notes to repay borrowings under the Credit Agreement, to pay costs and expenses related to the Convertible Notes, and for general corporate purposes. Our net proceeds from this offering were approximately $78.6 million (after deducting estimated fees and expenses related to the offering and the cost of the capped call transactions). This additional financing further enhanced our liquidity, and combined with the expected receipt of income tax refunds, state grants and proceeds from the sale of surplus real estate (discussed below), we believe we are positioned to repay the Term Loan A in September 2021 and continue to sustain our operations throughout fiscal 2021 and into fiscal 2022, even if our properties continue to generate significantly reduced revenues throughout fiscal 2021. As of December 31, 2020, we had a cash balance of approximately $7 million and $220 million of availability under our $225 million revolving credit facility.
Since the COVID-19 pandemic began, we have been working proactively to preserve cash. In addition to temporarily suspending our quarterly dividend payments as required by the Credit Agreement, additional measures we took during all or portions of fiscal 2020 to enhance our liquidity included:
● Discontinuing all non-essential operating and capital expenditures;
● Temporarily laying off the majority of our hourly theatre and hotel associates, in addition to temporarily reducing property management and corporate office staff levels;
● Temporarily reducing the salary of our chairman and our president and chief executive officer by 50%, as well as temporarily reducing the salary of all other executives and remaining divisional/corporate staff;
● Temporarily eliminating all board of directors cash compensation;
● Actively working with landlords and major suppliers to modify the timing and terms of certain contractual payments;
● Evaluating the provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act of 2020 (the “CARES Act”) and utilizing the benefits, relief and resources under those provisions as appropriate; and
● Evaluating the provisions of a COVID Relief Bill signed by the President on December 27, 2020 and any subsequent federal or state legislation enacted as a response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
After reviewing certain provisions of the CARES Act, we filed income tax refund claims of $37.4 million in the third quarter of fiscal 2020, with the primary benefit derived from several accounting method changes and new rules for qualified improvement property and net operating loss carrybacks. Early in our fiscal 2020 fourth quarter, we received $31.5 million of the requested tax refunds. We expect to receive the remaining $5.9 million of tax refunds during the first quarter of fiscal 2021. We also expect to apply a significant portion of our tax loss incurred in fiscal 2020 to prior year income, resulting in an anticipated tax refund of approximately $21.0 million in fiscal 2021 when our fiscal 2020 tax return is filed (with additional tax loss carryforwards that may be used in future years).
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, a number of states elected to provide grants to certain businesses most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, utilizing funds received by the applicable state under provisions of the CARES Act. As a result, grants from seven states totaling $5.8 million were awarded to a significant number of our theatres and grants from two states totaling $1.2 million were awarded to several of our hotels. The $7.0 million of total grants are reported as an offset to “other operating expenses” on our earnings (loss) statement. As of December 31, 2020, we had received approximately $2.1 million of these grants, and the remaining $4.9 million was received in January 2021. Early in fiscal 2021, we were awarded an additional $1.3 million in theatre grants from another state.
In addition, 11 of our subsidiaries successfully applied for and received a cumulative total of approximately $13.5 million in funds under the CARES Act Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) that allowed our subsidiaries to rehire many of our hotel associates for eight weeks during the second quarter of fiscal 2020, as well as fund certain other qualifying expenses (described in detail in the Hotels and Resorts section of this MD&A). Approximately $10.1 million of these funds were used by our subsidiaries to fund qualifying expenses, the majority of which we would not have incurred otherwise (i.e., the rehiring of laid off hotel associates despite the underlying hotels being temporarily closed). Cumulatively, approximately $9.1 million, or 90% of the qualifying expenses paid with these PPP loan proceeds benefitted associates and did not impact the operating loss of the hotels and resorts division. The remaining approximately $1.0 million of qualified expenses paid were used by our subsidiaries to offset rent expense, utility costs and mortgage interest expense. Approximately $3.4 million of the cumulative PPP loan proceeds were not used on qualifying expenses as of December 31, 2020 and contributed to the increase in net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2020 compared to the prior year. We believe the portion of the PPP loan proceeds used by our subsidiaries for qualifying expenses will be forgiven under the current terms of the CARES Act. The receipt of these funds, and the forgiveness of the loans accompanying these funds, is dependent on us having initially qualified for the PPP loan proceeds and qualifying for the forgiveness of the PPP loan proceeds based on our future adherence to the forgiveness criteria established by the Small Business Administration. We believe we met the initial qualification for the loans and we believe we will continue to meet the requirements for forgiveness of qualified expenses.
The Credit Agreement also allows us to consider additional borrowings from governmental authorities under provisions of the CARES Act or any other subsequent governmental actions that we could avail ourselves of if we deemed it necessary and appropriate. Although we have sought and obtained, and intend to continue to seek, any available potential benefits under the CARES Act, including those described above, we cannot predict the manner in which such benefits will be allocated or administered, and we cannot assure that we will be able to access such benefits in a timely manner or at all. We also cannot assure that potential benefits under the CARES Act will not be amended or eliminated under any subsequent governmental actions.
It is also important to note our significant real estate ownership. In addition to our owned hotels, unlike most of our peers, we own the underlying real estate for the majority of our theatres (representing over 60% of our screens), thereby reducing our monthly fixed lease payments. We believe this real estate ownership is a significant advantage for us relative to our peers, as it enables us to quickly react to changing theatre trends without requiring landlord approval for necessary changes, keeps our monthly fixed lease payments low and provides significant underlying credit support for our balance sheet. We also own surplus real estate and other non-core real estate that may be monetized in future periods if opportunities arise. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we sold two land parcels and a former budget theatre, generating total proceeds of approximately $3.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had letters of intent or contracts to sell several pieces of real estate with a carrying value of $4.1 million and we believe we may receive total sales proceeds from real estate sales during the next 12-18 months totaling approximately $10-$40 million, depending upon demand for the real estate in question.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the fact that all of our theatres and the majority of our hotels were closed as of the end of our fiscal 2020 first quarter, required us to review many of the assets on our balance sheet as of March 26, 2020. As a result, we increased our allowances for bad debts and wrote off a portion of our food inventories in both our theatre and hotels and resorts divisions. We reviewed our indefinite life trade name intangible asset and determined that, as a result of a change in circumstances, the carrying value exceeded fair value, and we reported a pre-tax impairment charge of $2.2 million during the first quarter of fiscal 2020. We reviewed our long-lived assets, including property and equipment and operating lease right-of-use assets, for impairment due to the change in circumstances and determined that an additional pre-tax impairment charge of $6.5 million was required during the first quarter of fiscal 2020 for several theatre properties. We reviewed goodwill at the theatre reporting unit level and determined that the fair value of our theatre reporting unit exceeded our carrying value as of March 26, 2020 and thus was not impaired as of that date. Additionally, we reviewed each of these asset types described above as of September 24, 2020, the end of our third quarter of fiscal 2020, and concluded that no additional impairment charges were required at that time for goodwill and our indefinite life trade name intangible asset. We did, however, conclude that an additional pre-tax impairment charge of $765,000 was required during the third quarter of fiscal 2020 for several theatre properties. During the third quarter of fiscal 2020, we determined that the fair value of our equity method investment in a hotel joint venture was less than its carrying value and recorded an other-than-temporary impairment loss of approximately $811,000. Lastly, we once again reviewed each of these asset types described above as of December 31, 2020, the end of our fiscal 2020, and concluded that an additional impairment charge of $400,000 was required for our indefinite life trade name intangible asset. We also concluded that an additional pre-tax impairment charge of $14.8 million was required during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 for several theatre properties, due in part to the fact that several leased theatres have not reopened yet and a planned new theatre project was abandoned. No impairment charges were required at the end of fiscal 2020 for goodwill.
As a result of temporarily closing the majority of our properties, we also incurred approximately $5.5 million of nonrecurring expenses during the first quarter of fiscal 2020 related primarily to salary continuation payments to employees temporarily laid off. We incurred an additional $3.0 million of nonrecurring expenses during the second quarter of fiscal 2020, including additional payments to and on behalf of laid off employees and additional allowances for bad debts (including the write-off of deferred expenses for a hotel tenant who vacated space because of the COVID-19 pandemic). Nonrecurring expenses during the fiscal 2020 second quarter also included extensive cleaning costs, operating supplies and employee training, among other items, related to the reopening of selected theatre and hotel properties and implementing new operating protocols (described in greater detail below). We incurred an additional $1.6 million and $1.4 million of nonrecurring expenses during the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2020, respectively, primarily related to additional reopening costs of selected theatre and hotel properties, as well as additional payments to and on behalf of laid off employees. In total, we estimate we incurred approximately $11.5 million in nonrecurring expenses related to the above-described items during fiscal 2020.
As part of our reopening experience in our theatres, we have introduced our “Movie STAR” approach, which incorporates new health and safety measures and is in alignment with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) guidelines. Everyone can be a Movie STAR and play a role in creating a safe environment with social distancing (S); thorough cleaning (T); app and website ordering of tickets, food and concessions for no-to-low contact interactions (A); and respecting each other by following these new protocols (R). Specific measures we have implemented in conjunction with the reopening of theatres include, but are not limited to:
● Initially reducing each theatre auditorium’s capacity by 50% (or lower depending upon specific local or state restrictions) and implementing a checkerboard seating pattern that will allow guests to reserve seats together with two empty seats between groups to allow for proper social distancing in accordance with CDC guidelines;
● Staggering showtimes to limit the number of people in common areas of the theatre and allowing extra time between shows for thorough cleanings;
● Requiring masks to be worn by guests except for when they are eating or drinking in the auditoriums;
● Conducting associate wellness checks and requiring the use of face masks, as well as gloves as appropriate, during the associate’s shift;
● Increasing frequency of cleaning (especially high-touch surfaces), providing hand sanitizer throughout the theatre and introducing signage to encourage proper social distancing;
● Encouraging guests to purchase their tickets online or via the Marcus Theatres app;
● Encouraging low-contact food ordering through the Marcus Theatres app and website, with food orders picked up at a designated area within the theatre; and
● Introducing Marcus Private Cinema, allowing a guest to purchase an entire auditorium for up to 20 of their friends and family for a fixed charge.
We expect policies and guidelines will continue to evolve with time and will be assessed and updated on an ongoing basis. We opened our initial six theatres with reduced operating days (Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays and Tuesdays) and reduced operating hours. In late August, when we initially reopened the majority of our theatres, we returned to more standard operating hours and days. As the quantity of new film releases subsided in September 2020, we began reducing our operating hours and days and currently have returned to being open only on weekends and Tuesdays (with expanded hours/days during selected holiday time periods). While we were showing and continue to show older “library” film product, admission to those movies is only $5, with no upcharges. As new movies are released, we have returned to standard pricing for those movies. As more new movies are released, we currently expect to return to standard operating days, hours and pricing, although likely with reduced seating capacity initially.
A reduction in capacity does not necessarily translate to an equal reduction in potential revenues. Reduced capacity may potentially impact attendance on $5 Tuesdays and on opening weekends of major new film releases, but other showings may be relatively unaffected given normal attendance counts. Based upon our past experience, we believe that customers impacted on those $5 Tuesdays and opening weekends may adapt to reduced seat availability by shifting their attendance to different days and times of day. In addition, as new films are first released, we anticipate dedicating a larger number of auditoriums to the blockbuster films to increase seating capacity for those movies.
We believe that the exhibition industry has historically fared well during recessions, and we remain optimistic that the industry will rebound and benefit from pent-up social demand as a large percentage of the population is vaccinated, home sheltering subsides and people seek togetherness with a return to normalcy. A return to “normalcy” may span multiple months driven by staggered theatre openings due to government limits, reduced operating hours, lingering social distancing requirements, the timing of the vaccination rollout in each state and a gradual ramp-up of consumer comfort with public gatherings. We are very encouraged by the recent performance of theatres in markets such as China and Japan, where the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has lessened. As described further below in the Theatres section of this MD&A, a significant number of films originally scheduled to be released through March 2021 have been delayed until later in fiscal 2021 or fiscal 2022, further increasing the quality and quantity of films expected to be available during those future time periods.
There has been some speculation that the COVID-19 pandemic may result in a change in how film studios distribute their product in the future, including accelerating the release of films on alternate distribution channels such as premium video-on-demand (“PVOD”) and streaming services. In several cases, films that were scheduled to be released to theatres have instead been released directly to these alternate channels. In the case of one studio, an agreement was reached with several large exhibitors, including ourselves, that includes a 17-day PVOD window for certain films and a 31-day window for certain more successful films. The agreement with this studio did not change the window for release for “free” viewing on streaming services. In addition, recently one studio announced that it intended to release all of its 2021 films theatrically and on its proprietary streaming service on the same day and date. This studio indicated that its actions were primarily a response to the immediate circumstances of movie theatres being closed or negatively impacted by governmental restrictions worldwide (including important markets such as New York and Los Angeles) and does not necessarily reflect a change in permanent distribution plans. This same studio has subsequently announced plans to distribute several films in 2022 and 2023 exclusively in theatres. The vast majority of films with greater expected box office potential from the remaining studios have been delayed rather than released early and comments from the film community in general have been very supportive of the importance of the theatrical experience. Specific release models are negotiated with distributors and exhibitors individually and we believe any changes to the existing financial model between exhibitors and film studios would likely only become a workable industry-wide model with the support of many exhibitors and distributors after each group evaluates the potential risks and benefits appropriately. The exhibition industry is an $11-$12 billion industry in the U.S. and approximately $40 billion worldwide, and the film studios derive a significant portion of their return on investment in film content from theatrical distribution. We believe distributing films in a movie theatre will continue to be an important component of their business model.
When we closed our hotels, it was not because of any governmental requirements to close. Our restaurants and bars within our hotels were required to close, but the hotels themselves were considered “essential businesses” under most definitions. We closed our hotels due to a significant drop in demand that made it financially prudent for us to close rather than stay open. As a result, the timing of reopening our hotels and resorts was driven by demand, as individual and business travelers began to travel more freely once again. The future economic environment will have a significant impact on the pace of our return to “normal” hotel operations. After past events such as the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001 and the 2008 financial crisis, hotel demand softened for a period of time, particularly among business transient and group business travelers as travel budgets tightened in uncertain economic times. Whether the return to more normal demand is relatively rapid, as it was after September 11, 2001, or occurs over the course of one or more years, as it was after the 2008 financial crisis, is unknown at this time.
Late in our fiscal 2020 second quarter, we reopened several of our hotels (including several of our restaurants and bars), beginning with The Pfister® Hotel on June 8, followed by the Grand Geneva® Resort & Spa, the Hilton Madison Monona Terrace and The Skirvin Hilton hotel in subsequent weeks in June. We reopened the Hilton Milwaukee City Center hotel, the AC Hotel Chicago Downtown and The Lincoln Marriott Cornhusker Hotel during our fiscal 2020 third quarter and we reopened Saint Kate® - The Arts Hotel (the “Saint Kate”) during our fiscal 2020 fourth quarter. As expected, the primary initial customer for hotels has come from the “drive-to leisure” market, as air travel remains significantly reduced and the number of transient and group business customers will likely remain limited in the near term. We will continue to monitor market demand and adjust our operating plans as appropriate.
Overall hotel occupancy in the U.S. has slowly increased since the initial onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020. Most current demand continues to come from the drive-to leisure segment. Most organizations implemented travel bans at the onset of the pandemic and are currently only allowing essential travel, which will likely limit business travel in the near term. Our company-owned hotels experienced a significant decrease in group bookings for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. As of the date of this report, our group room revenue bookings for fiscal 2021 - commonly referred to in the hotels and resorts industry as “group pace” - is running significantly behind where we were last year at this time for fiscal 2020, with the largest portion of that decline in Milwaukee because last year’s group bookings included bookings in anticipation of Milwaukee hosting the Democratic National Convention (“DNC”) in July 2020. Banquet and catering revenue pace for fiscal 2021 is also running behind where we were last year at this same time for fiscal 2020, but not as much as group room revenues, due in part to increases in wedding bookings. Many of our cancelled group bookings due to COVID-19 are re-booking for future dates, excluding one-time events that could not rebook for future dates such as those connected to the DNC. However, some group bookings for the first half of fiscal 2021 have subsequently canceled or postponed their event, and we cannot predict to what extent any of our hotel bookings will be canceled or rescheduled due to COVID-19 or otherwise.
Like our theatres, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we reopened our hotels with new operating protocols. This includes the introduction of our CleanCare Pledge that incorporates the best industry practices and protocols for operating our hotels, resorts, spas, golf courses and restaurants with an enhanced focus on cleanliness, sanitization and safety. Key elements and examples of the CleanCare Pledge include:
● Introducing new processes and easy-to-use technology to create a low-to-no contact experience;
● Incorporating social distancing into processes and various spaces;
● Outfitting associates with masks and gloves, and making masks available for guests; and
● Enhanced cleaning and sanitization protocols that go beyond leading hospitality industry standards and CDC guidelines.
We cannot assure that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will not continue to have a material adverse effect on both our theatre and hotels and resorts businesses, results of operations, cash flows, financial condition, access to credit markets and ability to service our existing and future indebtedness.
Implementation of New Accounting Standards
During fiscal 2019, we adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), intended to improve financial reporting related to leasing transactions. ASU No. 2016-02 requires a lessee to recognize a right-of-use (“ROU”) asset and a lease liability for most leases. The new guidance requires disclosures to help investors and other financial statement users better understand the amount, timing and uncertainty of cash flows arising from the leases. Leases are now classified as finance or operating, with classification affecting the pattern and classification of expense recognition in the consolidated statements of net earnings (loss). ASU No. 2018-11, Leases (Topic 842): Targeted Improvements, amended ASU No. 2016-02 and allows entities the option to initially apply Topic 842 at the adoption date and recognize a cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings in the period of adoption. We adopted the new accounting standard as of the first day of fiscal 2019 using the modified retrospective approach, which resulted in the cumulative effect of adoption recognized at the date of application, rather than as of the earliest period presented. As a result, no adjustment was made to prior period financial information and disclosures.
In conjunction with the adoption of the new standard, companies were able to elect several practical expedients to aid in the transition to Topic 842. We elected the package of practical expedients which permits us to forego reassessment of our prior conclusions related to lease identification, lease classification and initial direct costs. Topic 842 also provides practical expedients for an entity’s ongoing accounting. We elected the practical expedient to not separate lease and non-lease components for all of our leases. We also made a policy election not to apply the lease recognition requirements for short-term leases. As a result, we do not recognize ROU assets or lease liabilities for short-term leases that qualify for the policy election (those with an initial term of 12 months or less which do not include a purchase or renewal option which is reasonably certain to be exercised), but instead recognize these lease payments as lease costs on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Adoption of this new standard resulted in a material impact related to the recognition of ROU assets and lease liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet for assets currently subject to operating leases. We recognized lease liabilities representing the present value of the remaining future minimum lease payments for all of our operating leases as of December 28, 2018 of $81.5 million. We recognized ROU assets for all assets subject to operating leases in an amount equal to the operating lease liabilities, adjusted for the balances of long-term prepaid rent, favorable lease intangible assets, deferred lease expense, unfavorable lease liabilities and deferred lease incentive liabilities as of December 28, 2018.
The adoption of the new standard did not have a material effect on our consolidated statements of net earnings (loss).
Consolidated Financial Comparisons
The following table sets forth revenues, operating income (loss), other income (expense), net earnings (loss) and net earnings (loss) per common share for the past three fiscal years (in millions, except for per share and percentage change data) :
Fiscal 2020 versus Fiscal 2019
Revenues, operating income (loss), net earnings (loss) attributable to The Marcus Corporation and net earnings (loss) per common share all decreased during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 due to the temporary closing of all of our theatres and hotels and subsequent significant reduction of revenues upon reopening a majority of our theatres and hotels as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic as described above. Both of our operating divisions were negatively impacted by nonrecurring expenses during fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019. Net earnings (loss) attributable to The Marcus Corporation during fiscal 2020 was negatively impacted by increased interest expense compared to fiscal 2019 and benefited from a substantial tax benefit provided for by the CARES Act.
Our operating performance during fiscal 2020 was negatively impacted by nonrecurring expenses totaling approximately $11.5 million, or approximately $0.27 per diluted common share, including payments to and on behalf of laid off employees. Nonrecurring expenses during fiscal 2020 also included extensive cleaning costs, supply purchases and employee training, among other items, related to the reopening of selected theatre and hotel properties and implementing new operating protocols (described in greater detail above). In addition, impairment charges related to intangible assets and several theatre locations negatively impacted our fiscal 2020 operating loss by approximately $24.7 million, or approximately $0.59 per diluted common share. Conversely, our operating performance during fiscal 2020 was favorably impacted by nonrecurring state governmental grants totaling approximately $7.0 million, or approximately $0.17 per diluted common share, and net insurance proceeds of approximately $1.8 million, or approximately $0.04 per diluted common share, related to COVID-19 pandemic related insurance claims. Our additional 53rd week of operations contributed approximately $5.1 million in revenues and did not have a material impact on our operating loss or net loss during fiscal 2020.
On February 1, 2019, we acquired the assets of Movie Tavern®, a New Orleans-based industry leading circuit known for its in-theatre dining concept (the “Movie Tavern Acquisition”). Now branded Movie Tavern by Marcus, the acquired circuit consisted of 208 screens at 22 locations in nine states - Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, New York, Pennsylvania, Texas and Virginia. The purchase price consisted of $30 million in cash, subject to certain adjustments, and 2,450,000 shares of our common stock for a total purchase price of approximately $139 million, based upon our closing share price on January 31, 2019. Excluding acquisition and preopening expenses, the acquisition did not have a material impact on operating income during fiscal 2019. Acquisition and preopening expenses related to the Movie Tavern Acquisition and the opening of a newly built Movie Tavern theatre in Brookfield, Wisconsin negatively impacted our operating income during fiscal 2019 by approximately $2.5 million, or $0.06 per diluted common share. An impairment charge related to a specific theatre location negatively impacted our fiscal 2019 operating income by approximately $1.9 million, or $0.04 per diluted common share.
We closed the InterContinental Milwaukee hotel in early January 2019 and began a substantial renovation project that converted this hotel into an experiential arts hotel named Saint Kate - The Arts Hotel. The newly renovated hotel reopened during the first week of June 2019 (although a portion of the rooms and food and beverage outlets didn’t fully open until later in the month). Revenues from our hotels and resorts division during fiscal 2019 were unfavorably impacted by the closing of the hotel for nearly six months for renovation and the negative impact of comparing a newly-opened independent hotel (i.e., the Saint Kate) to a stabilized branded hotel (i.e., the InterContinental Milwaukee) in the prior year. Division revenues during fiscal 2019 were also negatively impacted by a major renovation that occurred at our Hilton Madison hotel during the first half of fiscal 2019. Our operating income from our hotels and resorts division during fiscal 2019 was negatively impacted by preopening expenses and initial start-up losses related to the Saint Kate hotel closure and conversion. These costs totaled approximately $6.8 million, or $0.16 per diluted common share, during fiscal 2019.
Operating losses from our corporate items, which include amounts not allocable to the business segments, decreased during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 due in part to reduced bonus and donation expenses as a result of operating losses during fiscal 2020. Operating losses from corporate items also decreased during fiscal 2020 due to measures taken to increase liquidity, including reductions in corporate staff, reductions in the salaries of executives and corporate staff and the suspension of board cash compensation. Operating losses from our corporate items were also favorably impacted during fiscal 2020 by the net insurance proceeds of $1.8 million described above.
We recognized investment income of $564,000 during fiscal 2020 compared to investment income of $1.4 million during fiscal 2019. Investment income includes interest earned on cash and cash equivalents, as well as increases/decreases in the value of marketable securities and increases in the cash surrender value of a life insurance policy. A significant market decline arising from the COVID-19 pandemic during the first quarter of fiscal 2020 was offset by a market recovery later in fiscal 2020, but investment income was larger during fiscal 2019 due to more significant increases in the value of marketable securities and due to the fact that we had more marketable securities in fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2020. Investment income during fiscal 2021 may vary compared to fiscal 2020, primarily dependent upon changes in the value of marketable securities.
Interest expense totaled $16.3 million during fiscal 2020, an increase of $4.5 million, or 38.0%, compared to interest expense of $11.8 million during fiscal 2019. The increase in interest expense during fiscal 2020 was due in part to increased borrowings and an increase in our average interest rate, as discussed in the Liquidity section of this MD&A below. In addition, interest expense increased during fiscal 2020 due to the fact that we incurred approximately $2.2 million in noncash amortization of debt issuance costs and discount on convertible notes, compared to approximately $300,000 of such costs during fiscal 2019. During fiscal 2021, we estimate that noncash amortization of debt issuance costs will be approximately $2.0 million, excluding the impact of any new debt issuance costs. On January 1, 2021, we elected to early adopt ASU No. 2020-06 (described in the “Accounting Changes” section below), which will result in the elimination of noncash discount on convertible notes during fiscal 2021. We expect our interest expense to increase during fiscal 2021, however, due to increased borrowings and an increase in our average interest rate. Changes in our borrowing levels due to variations in our operating results, capital expenditures, acquisition opportunities (or the lack thereof) and asset sale proceeds, among other items, may impact, either favorably or unfavorably, our actual reported interest expense in future periods, as may changes in short-term interest rates.
We incurred other expense of $1.0 million during fiscal 2020, a decrease of approximately $900,000, or 48.7%, compared to other expense of $1.9 million during fiscal 2019. Other expense consists primarily of the non-service cost components of our periodic pension costs. During fiscal 2020, other expense was partially offset by other income of approximately $1.4 million related to the receipt of Movie Tavern Acquisition escrow funds returned to us in conjunction with a negotiated early release of remaining escrow funds to the seller. Based upon information from an actuarial report for our pension plans, we expect other expense to be approximately $2.5 million during fiscal 2021.
We reported net gains on disposition of property, equipment and other assets of approximately $900,000 during fiscal 2020, compared to net losses on disposition of property, equipment and other assets of $1.1 million during fiscal 2019. The net gains on disposition of property, equipment and other assets during fiscal 2020 were due primarily to the sale of two surplus land parcels and one theatre, partially offset by losses on items disposed of during the year by both divisions. The net losses during fiscal 2019 were due primarily to losses related to old theatre seats and other items disposed of in conjunction with theatre renovations. The timing of our periodic sales and disposals of property, equipment and other assets results in variations each year in the gains or losses that we report on dispositions of property, equipment and other assets. We anticipate the potential for additional disposition gains or losses from periodic sales of property, equipment and other assets, during fiscal 2021 and beyond, as discussed in more detail in the “Current Plans” section of this MD&A.
We reported equity losses from an unconsolidated joint venture of approximately $1.5 million and $274,000, respectively, during fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019. The equity losses during both fiscal years consisted of our pro-rata share of losses from the Omaha Marriott Downtown at The Capitol District hotel in Omaha, Nebraska (the “Omaha Marriott”) - a hotel we manage and in which we had a 10% minority ownership interest. The loss increased during fiscal 2020 due to increased losses from the hotel and an other-than-temporary impairment loss of approximately $811,000 in which we determined that the fair value of our equity method investment in the hotel joint venture was less than its carrying value. The Omaha Marriott has actually performed well historically from an operational perspective, but has experienced overall losses due to depreciation and interest expense, further exasperated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Early in fiscal 2021, pursuant to a recapitalization of the hotel, we surrendered our ownership interest in this property. We will continue to manage the hotel. We currently do not expect any equity earnings or losses from unconsolidated joint ventures during fiscal 2021, unless we increase the number of joint ventures in which we participate during fiscal 2021.
The operating results of one majority-owned hotel, The Skirvin Hilton, are included in the hotels and resorts division revenue and operating income (loss) during fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, and the after-tax net earnings or loss attributable to noncontrolling interests is deducted from or added to net earnings (loss) on the consolidated statements of earnings (loss). As a result of the noncontrolling interest balance reaching zero during the second quarter of fiscal 2020, we do not expect to report additional net losses attributable to noncontrolling interests in future periods until the hotel returns to profitability.
We reported an income tax benefit during fiscal 2020 of $70.9 million, compared to income tax expense of $12.3 million during fiscal 2019. The large income tax benefit during fiscal 2020 was primarily the result of the significant losses before income taxes incurred as a result of the closing of the majority of our properties in March 2020 and the subsequent reduction in our operating performance due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our fiscal 2020 income tax benefit was also favorably impacted by an adjustment of approximately $20.1 million, or approximately $0.65 per share, resulting from several accounting method changes, the March 27, 2020 signing of the CARES Act and a provision of a COVID Relief stimulus bill passed in December 2020 that allows us to deduct the $10.1 million of qualified expenses paid for by PPP loans discussed above. One of the provisions of the CARES Act allows our 2019 and 2020 taxable losses to be carried back to prior fiscal years during which the federal income tax rate was 35% compared to the current statutory federal income tax rate of 21%. Our fiscal 2020 effective income tax rate, after adjusting for earnings (losses) from noncontrolling interests that are not tax-effected because the entity involved is a tax pass-through entity, was 36.2% and benefitted from the adjustments described above. Excluding these favorable adjustments to income tax benefit, our effective income tax rate during fiscal 2020 was 26.0%. Our fiscal 2019 effective income tax rate was 22.7%. We currently anticipate that our fiscal 2021 effective income tax rate may be in the 24-26% range, excluding any potential further changes in federal or state income tax rates or other one-time tax benefits.
Weighted-average shares outstanding were 31.0 million during fiscal 2020 and 31.2 million during fiscal 2019. All per share data in this MD&A is presented on a fully diluted basis, however for periods when we report a net loss, common stock equivalents are excluded from the computation of diluted loss per share as their inclusion would have an anti-dilutive effect.
Current Plans
Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, our aggregate cash capital expenditures, acquisitions and purchases of interests in, and contributions to, joint ventures were only approximately $21 million during fiscal 2020, compared to $94 million during fiscal 2019 (including approximately $30 million in cash consideration paid in conjunction with the Movie Tavern acquisition described below) and $59 million during fiscal 2018. We anticipate that we will continue to limit our capital expenditures during fiscal 2021, and as a result, we currently estimate that our fiscal 2021 cash capital expenditures will be in the $15-$25 million range. We will, however, continue to monitor our operating results and economic and industry conditions so that we may adjust our plans accordingly.
Our current strategic plans include the following goals and strategies:
Theatres
● Our long-term plans for growth in our theatre division may include evaluating opportunities for new theatres and screens. In October 2019, we opened our new eight-screen Movie Tavern® by Marcus theatre in Brookfield, Wisconsin. This new theatre became the first Movie Tavern by Marcus in Wisconsin. It includes eight auditoriums, each with laser projection and comfortable DreamLoungerSM recliner seating, a full-service bar and food and drink center, and a new delivery-to-seat service model that also allows guests to order food and beverage via our mobile phone application or in-theatre kiosk. We will consider additional sites for potential new theatre locations in both new and existing markets in the future. Plans discussed previously for a new theatre in Tacoma, Washington have been abandoned.
● In addition to building new theatres, acquisitions of existing theatres or theatre circuits has also been a viable growth strategy for us. On February 1, 2019, we acquired the assets of Movie Tavern, a New Orleans-based industry leading circuit known for its in-theatre dining concept featuring chef-driven menus, premium quality food and drink and luxury seating. The acquired circuit consisted of 208 screens at 22 locations in nine states - Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, New York, Pennsylvania, Texas and Virginia. The purchase price consisted of $30 million in cash, subject to certain adjustments, and 2,450,000 shares of our common stock, for a total purchase price of approximately $139.3 million, based upon our closing share price on January 31, 2019. The acquisition of the Movie Tavern circuit increased our total number of screens by an additional 23%.
Now branded Movie Tavern by Marcus, we have subsequently introduced new amenities to select Movie Tavern theatres, including our proprietary premium large format (PLF) screens and DreamLounger recliner seating, signature programming, such as $5 movies on Tuesdays with a free complimentary-size popcorn for loyalty members, and proven marketing, loyalty and pricing programs that will continue to benefit Movie Tavern guests in the future.
The COVID-19 pandemic has been challenging for all theatre operators. A number of theatre operators have filed for bankruptcy relief and many others are facing difficult financial circumstances. Although we will prioritize our own finances, we will continue to consider potential acquisitions as well as consider management agreements which may possibly lead to opportunities to own. The movie theatre industry is very fragmented, with approximately 50% of United States screens owned by the three largest theatre circuits and the other 50% owned by an estimated 800 smaller operators, making it very difficult to predict when acquisition opportunities may arise. We do not believe that we are geographically constrained, and we believe that we may be able to add value to certain theatres through our various proprietary amenities and operating expertise.
● We have invested approximately $370 million to further enhance the movie-going experience and amenities in new and existing theatres over the last seven and one-half calendar years, with more investments planned for fiscal 2021 and beyond. These investments include:
DreamLounger recliner additions. These luxurious, state-of-the-art recliners allow guests to go from upright to a full-recline position in seconds. These seat changes require full auditorium remodels to accommodate the necessary 84 inches of legroom, resulting in the loss of approximately 50% of the existing traditional seats in an average auditorium. To date, the addition of DreamLoungers has increased attendance at each of our applicable theatres, outperforming nearby competitive theatres and growing the overall market attendance in most cases. Initially, 12 of the 22 acquired Movie Tavern theatres had recliner seating. We added DreamLounger recliner seats to four additional existing Movie Tavern theatres during fiscal 2019, as well as one Marcus Wehrenberg® theatre and one newly built Movie Tavern theatre. We completed the addition of DreamLounger recliner seats at two additional Movie Tavern locations during fiscal 2020 and expect to add DreamLounger recliner seats to one Marcus Wehrenberg theatre during the second quarter of fiscal 2021. As of December 31, 2020, we offered all DreamLounger recliner seating in 65 theatres, representing approximately 76% of our company-owned, first-run theatres. Including our premium, large format (PLF) auditoriums with recliner seating, as of December 31, 2020, we offered our DreamLounger recliner seating in approximately 79% of our company-owned, first-run screens, a percentage we believe to be the highest among the largest theatre chains in the nation.
UltraScreen DLX® and SuperScreen DLX® (DreamLounger eXperience) conversions. We introduced one of the first PLF presentations to the industry when we rolled out our proprietary UltraScreen® concept over 20 years ago. We later introduced our UltraScreen DLX concept by combining our premium, large-format presentation with DreamLounger recliner seating and Dolby® Atmos™ immersive sound to elevate the movie-going experience for our guests. During fiscal 2019, we opened one new UltraScreen DLX at an existing Marcus Wehrenberg theatre and converted one existing screen into an UltraScreen DLX auditorium at a Movie Tavern by Marcus theatre. During fiscal 2020, we converted three existing screens at three Movie Tavern by Marcus theatres and one existing screen at one Marcus Wehrenberg theatre to SuperScreen DLX auditoriums. During fiscal 2019, we converted 26 existing screens at 13 Movie Tavern by Marcus theatres and two existing screens at one Marcus Wehrenberg theatre to SuperScreen DLX and opened one new SuperScreen DLX auditorium at a newly built Movie Tavern by Marcus theatre. Most of our PLF screens now include the added feature of heated DreamLounger recliner seats. As of December 31, 2020, we had 31 UltraScreen DLX auditoriums, one traditional UltraScreen auditorium, 85 SuperScreen DLX auditoriums (a slightly smaller screen than an UltraScreen but with the same DreamLounger seating and Dolby Atmos sound) and three IMAX® PLF screens at 66 of our theatre locations. As of December 31, 2020, we offered at least one PLF screen in approximately 77% of our first-run, company-owned theatres - once again a percentage we believe to be the highest percentage among the largest theatre chains in the nation.
Our PLF screens generally have higher per-screen revenues and draw customers from a larger geographic region compared to our standard screens, and we charge a premium price to our guests for this experience. We continue to evaluate opportunities to convert additional existing screens to SuperScreen DLX auditoriums.
Signature cocktail and dining concepts. We have continued to further enhance our food and beverage offerings within our existing theatres. We believe our 50-plus years of food and beverage experience in the hotel and restaurant businesses provides us with a unique advantage and expertise that we can leverage to further grow revenues in our theatres. The concepts we are expanding include:
● Take FiveSM Lounge, Take Five Express and The Tavern - These full-service bars offer an inviting atmosphere and a chef-inspired dining menu, along with a complete selection of cocktails, locally-brewed beers and wines. We also offer full liquor service through the concession stand at two theatres. We acquired 22 new bars, known as The Tavern, in conjunction with our Movie Tavern acquisition and opened a new Tavern at our new Brookfield, Wisconsin Movie Tavern by Marcus theatre in fiscal 2019. We closed one Movie Tavern by Marcus theatre in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we offered bars/full liquor service at 50 theatres, representing approximately 58% of our company-owned, first-run theatres. We are currently evaluating opportunities to add bar service to additional locations and expect to add one Take Five Lounge outlet to a Marcus Wehrenberg theatre currently under renovation in fiscal 2021.
● Zaffiro’s® Express - These outlets offer lobby dining that includes appetizers, sandwiches, salads, desserts and our signature Zaffiro’s THINCREDIBLE® handmade thin-crust pizza. In select locations without a Take Five Lounge outlet, we offer beer and wine at the Zaffiro’s Express outlet. We opened one new Zaffiro’s Express outlet during fiscal 2019 at our new Movie Tavern by Marcus location in Brookfield, Wisconsin, and our number of theatres with this concept totaled 29 as of December 31, 2020, representing approximately 45% of our company-owned, first-run theatres (excluding our in-theatre dining Movie Tavern theatres). We also operate three Zaffiro’s® Pizzeria and Bar full-service restaurants.
● Reel Sizzle® - This signature dining concept serves menu items inspired by classic Hollywood and the iconic diners of the 1950s. We offer Americana fare like burgers and chicken sandwiches prepared on a griddle behind the counter, along with chicken tenders, crinkle-cut fries, ice cream and signature shakes. Our new Movie Tavern by Marcus in Brookfield, Wisconsin includes a Real Sizzle. As of December 31, 2020, we operated eight Reel Sizzle outlets, and we expect to add one Reel Sizzle outlet in fiscal 2021 to a Marcus Wehrenberg theatre currently under renovation.
● Other in-lobby dining - We also operate one Hollywood Café at an existing theatre, and four of the Marcus Wehrenberg theatres offer in-lobby dining concepts sold through the concession stand. In addition, we are currently testing a Mexican food concept at one theatre, and we are considering expanding this new concept in the future. Including these additional concepts, as of December 31, 2020, we offered one or more in-lobby dining concepts in 40 theatres, representing approximately 62% of our company-owned, first-run theatres (excluding our in-theatre dining Movie Tavern theatres).
● In-theatre dining - As of December 31, 2020, we offered full-service, in-theatre dining with a complete menu of drinks and chef-prepared salads, sandwiches, entrées and desserts at 31 theatres and a total of 246 auditoriums, operating under the names Big Screen BistroSM, Big Screen Bistro ExpressSM, BistroPlexSM and Movie Tavern by Marcus, representing approximately 36% of our company-owned, first-run theatres.
● With each of these strategies, our goal continues to be to introduce and create entertainment destinations that further define and enhance the customer value proposition for movie-going. We also expect to continue to maintain and enhance the value of our existing theatre assets by regularly upgrading and remodeling our theatres to keep them fresh. To accomplish the strategies noted above, we currently anticipate that our fiscal 2021 capital expenditures in this division will total approximately $10-$15 million.
● In addition to the growth strategies described above, our theatre division continues to focus on multiple strategies designed to further increase revenues and improve the profitability of our existing theatres. These strategies include various cost control efforts, as well as plans to expand ancillary theatre revenues, such as pre-show advertising, lobby advertising, additional corporate and group sales, sponsorships, special film series and alternate auditorium uses. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we introduced Marcus Private Cinema in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020. Under this program, a guest can reserve an entire auditorium for up to 20 people for a fixed charge, offering them a safe, fun and stress-free social gathering opportunity.
● We also have several customer-focused strategies designed to elevate our consumer knowledge, expectation and connection, and provide us with a competitive advantage and the ability to deliver improved financial performance. These strategies include the following:
Marketing initiatives. We offer a “$5 Tuesday” promotion at every theatre in our circuit that includes a free complimentary-size popcorn to our loyalty program members. We have seen our Tuesday attendance increase dramatically since the introduction of the $5 Tuesday promotion. We believe this promotion has increased movie going frequency and reached a customer who may have stopped going to the movies because of price, creating another “weekend” day for us without adversely impacting the movie-going habits of our regular weekend customers. We introduced our $5 Tuesday promotion with the free popcorn for loyalty members at our Marcus Wehrenberg theatres immediately upon acquisition in December 2016 and did the same thing in February 2019 with our newly acquired Movie Tavern theatres. We experienced an increase in Tuesday performance at the Marcus Wehrenberg theatres and have seen a similar response from customers at our Movie Tavern theatres. When not operating with limited days of operation, we also offer a “$6 Student Thursday” promotion at all of our locations that has been well received by that particular customer segment. In addition, we offer a $6 “Young-at-Heart” program for seniors on Friday afternoons that was also introduced to our Movie Tavern locations during our fiscal 2019 first quarter.
Loyalty program. We offer what we believe to be a best-in-class customer loyalty program called Magical Movie RewardsSM. We currently have approximately 4.0 million members enrolled in the program. Approximately 47% of all box office transactions and 43% of total transactions in our theatres during fiscal 2020 were completed by registered members of the loyalty program. The program allows members to earn points for each dollar spent and access special offers available only to members. The rewards are redeemable at the box office, concession stand or at the many Marcus Theatres® food and beverage venues. In addition, we have partnered with Movio, a global leader in data analysis for the cinema industry, to allow more targeted communication with our loyalty members. The software provides us with insight into customer preferences, attendance habits and general demographics, which we believe will help us deliver customized communication to our members. In turn, members of this program can enjoy and plan for a more personalized movie-going experience. The program also gives us the ability to cost effectively promote non-traditional programming and special events, particularly during non-peak time periods. We believe that this will result in increased movie-going frequency, more frequent visits to the concession stand, increased loyalty to Marcus Theatres and ultimately, improved operating results. The acquired Wehrenberg theatres offered a loyalty program to their customers that had approximately 200,000 members. We converted these members to our Magical Movie Rewards program during fiscal 2017. The acquired Movie Tavern theatres did not offer a loyalty program to their customers. We introduced our Magical Movie Rewards program to these theatres during the second quarter of fiscal 2019 after all necessary technology requirements were completed.
Technology enhancements. We have recently enhanced our mobile ticketing capabilities, our downloadable Marcus Theatres mobile application, and our marcustheatres.com website. We added food and beverage ordering capabilities to our mobile application at select theatres, including our recently opened Movie Tavern location in Brookfield, Wisconsin, in fiscal 2019 and expanded this feature to all of our theatres in fiscal 2020. We have continued to install additional theatre-level technology, such as new ticketing kiosks, digital menu boards and concession advertising monitors. Each of these enhancements is designed to improve customer interactions, both at the theatre and through mobile platforms and other electronic devices.
● The addition of digital technology throughout our circuit (we offer digital cinema projection on 100% of our first-run screens) has provided us with additional opportunities to obtain non-motion picture programming from other new and existing content providers, including live and pre-recorded performances of the Metropolitan Opera, as well as sports, music and other events, at many of our locations. We offer weekday and weekend alternate programming at many of our theatres across our circuit. The special programming includes classic movies, live performances, comedy shows and children’s performances. We believe this type of programming is more impactful when presented on the big screen and provides an opportunity to continue to expand our audience base beyond traditional moviegoers.
● In addition, digital 3D presentation of films has continued to positively contribute to our box office receipts during the periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As of December 31, 2020, we had the ability to offer digital 3D presentations in 382, or approximately 36%, of our first-run screens, including the vast majority of our UltraScreens. We have the ability to increase the number of digital 3D capable screens we offer to our guests in the future and will do so based on the number of digital 3D films released during future periods and our customers’ response to these 3D releases.
Hotels and Resorts
● The COVID-19 pandemic has been challenging for most hotel operators and many are facing difficult financial circumstances. As a result, most transactional activity in the hotel industry has temporarily stopped. Although we will prioritize our own finances, our hotels and resorts division expects to continue to seek opportunities to invest in new hotels and increase the number of rooms under management in the future. The goal of our hotel investment business is to seek opportunities where we may act as an investment fund sponsor, joint venture partner or sole investor in acquiring additional hotel properties. We continue to believe that opportunities to acquire high-quality hotels at reasonable valuations will be present in the future for well-capitalized companies, and we believe that there are partners available to work with us when the appropriate hotel assets are identified.
● We also continue to pursue additional management contracts for other owners, some of which may include small equity investments similar to the investments we have made in the past with strategic equity partners. Although total revenues from an individual hotel management contract are significantly less than from an owned hotel, the operating margins are generally significantly higher due to the fact that all direct costs of operating the property are typically borne by the owner of the property. Management contracts provide us with an opportunity to increase our total number of managed rooms without a significant investment, thereby increasing our returns on equity. In April 2019, we assumed management of the Hyatt Regency Schaumburg hotel in Schaumburg, Illinois. This 468-room hotel recently completed a $15 million renovation and offers upscale accommodations, robust amenities and more than 30,000 square feet of indoor and outdoor meeting and event space, including a 3,100 square foot starlit terrace. This was our first Hyatt-branded hotel under management.
Conversely, we will occasionally lose management contracts due to various circumstances. In May 2019, we ceased managing the Heidel House Resort & Spa in Green Lake, Wisconsin, after the owners of this resort decided to close this property permanently. Early in our fiscal 2019 third quarter, the owners of the Sheraton Chapel Hill Hotel in Chapel Hill, North Carolina sold the hotel, and as a result, our contract to manage this hotel was terminated. We also ceased managing the Hilton Garden Houston NW/Willowbrook in Houston, Texas in March 2020 and the Murieta Inn and Spa in Rancho Murieta, California in July 2020.
● Unlike our theatre assets where the majority of our return on investment comes from the annual cash flow generated by operations, a portion of the return on our hotel investments is derived from effective portfolio management, which includes determining the proper branding strategy for a given asset along with the proper level of investment and upgrades, as well as identifying an effective divestiture strategy for the asset when appropriate. We closed the InterContinental Milwaukee in early January 2019 and undertook a substantial renovation project that converted this hotel into the unbranded experiential arts hotel, the Saint Kate. The newly renovated hotel reopened during June 2019.
● We have been very opportunistic in our past hotel investments as we have, on many occasions, acquired assets at favorable terms and then improved the properties and operations to create value. We also will continue to periodically explore opportunities to monetize one or more owned hotels. We will consider many factors as we actively review opportunities to execute this strategy, including income tax considerations, the ability to retain management, pricing and individual market considerations. We evaluate strategies for our hotels on an asset-by-asset basis. We have not set a specific goal for the number of hotels that may be considered for this strategy, nor have we set a specific timetable. It is possible that we may sell a particular hotel or hotels during fiscal 2021 or beyond if we determine that such action is in the best interest of our shareholders.
● Our future plans for our hotels and resorts division also include continued reinvestment in our existing properties to maintain and enhance their value. Late in fiscal 2018 and carrying over into the first half of fiscal 2019, we made additional reinvestments in the Hilton Madison Monona Terrace. Early in fiscal 2021, we began a lobby renovation and initiated select guest room improvements at the Grand Geneva Resort & Spa. We anticipate additional reinvestments during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2023 at The Pfister Hotel, the Grand Geneva Resort & Spa and the Hilton Milwaukee City Center hotel. We currently believe our total fiscal 2021 hotels and resorts capital expenditures will total approximately $5-$10 million, excluding any presently unidentified growth opportunities.
● In addition to the growth strategies described above, our hotels and resorts division continues to focus on several strategies that are intended to further grow the division’s revenues and profits. These include leveraging our food and beverage expertise for growth opportunities and growing our catering and events revenues. This also includes hotel food and beverage concepts developed by our Marcus Restaurant Group, featuring premier brands such as Mason Street Grill, ChopHouse®, Miller Time® Pub & Grill and SafeHouse® restaurants. Currently, our SafeHouse restaurants remain closed, but upon reopening, our focus will be on maximizing the contribution of our newest restaurant, SafeHouse Chicago. We will consider exploring additional opportunities to expand this concept in the future.
● We have also invested in sales, revenue management and internet marketing strategies in an effort to further increase our profitability, as well as human resource and cost improvement strategies designed to achieve operational excellence and improved operating margins. We are focused on developing our customer service delivery and technology enhancements to improve customer interactions through mobile platforms and other customer touch points.
Corporate
● We periodically review opportunities to make investments in long-term growth opportunities that may not be entirely related to our two primary businesses (but typically have some connection to entertainment, food and beverage, hospitality, real estate, etc.). Although we will prioritize our own finances, we expect to continue to review such opportunities in the future.
● In addition to operational and growth strategies in our operating divisions, we will continue to seek additional opportunities to enhance shareholder value, including strategies related to our dividend policy and share repurchases. We increased our regular quarterly common stock cash dividend rate by 6.7% during the first quarter of fiscal 2019 and 6.3% during the first quarter of fiscal 2020, prior to temporarily suspending dividend payments in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In prior years, we have periodically paid special dividends and repurchased shares of our common stock under our existing Board of Directors stock repurchase authorizations. The Credit Agreement currently allows us, if we believe it is in the best interest of our shareholders, to once again return capital to shareholders through dividends or share repurchases beginning in the third quarter of fiscal 2021, up to a maximum of $1.5 million per quarter. The current restriction on dividends and share repurchases will remain in place until the third quarter of fiscal 2022 or until the Term Loan A is repaid and we have returned to our financial covenants in place prior to the restriction (whichever comes first).
● We will also continue to evaluate opportunities to sell real estate when appropriate, allowing us to benefit from the underlying value of our real estate assets. When possible, we will attempt to avail ourselves of the provisions of Internal Revenue Code §1031 related to tax-deferred like-kind exchange transactions. We are actively marketing a significant number of pieces of surplus real estate and other non-core real estate. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we sold two land parcels and a former budget theatre, generating total proceeds of approximately $3.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had letters of intent or contracts to sell several pieces of real estate with a carrying value of $4.1 million and we believe we may receive total sales proceeds from real estate sales during the next 12-18 months totaling approximately $10-$40 million, depending upon demand for the real estate in question.
The actual number, mix and timing of our potential future new facilities and expansions and/or divestitures will depend, in large part, on industry, economic and COVID-19 pandemic conditions, our financial performance and available capital, the competitive environment, evolving customer needs and trends, and the availability of attractive acquisition and investment opportunities. It is likely that our growth goals and strategies will continue to evolve and change in response to these and other factors, and there can be no assurance that we will achieve our current goals. Each of our goals and strategies are subject to the various risk factors discussed above in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Theatres
Our oldest and historically most profitable division is our theatre division. The theatre division contributed 55.8% of our consolidated revenues and 73.5% of our consolidated operating income (loss), excluding corporate items, during fiscal 2020, compared to 67.9% and 88.4%, respectively, during fiscal 2019 and 63.2% and 87.7%, respectively, during fiscal 2018. As of December 31, 2020, the theatre division operated motion picture theatres in Wisconsin, Illinois, Iowa, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, New York, Pennsylvania, Texas and Virginia, a family entertainment center in Wisconsin and a retail center in Missouri. The following tables set forth revenues, operating income (loss), operating margin, screens and theatre locations for the last three fiscal years:
(1) Includes 6 screens at one location managed for another owner.
(2) Includes 22 budget screens at two locations at the end of fiscal 2020 and 29 budget screens at three locations at the end of fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018. Compared to first-run theatres, budget theatres generally have lower box office revenues and associated film costs, but higher concession sales as a percentage of box office revenues.
The following table provides a further breakdown of the components of revenues for the theatre division for the last three fiscal years:
As described above in the “Current Plans” section of this MD&A, on February 1, 2019, we acquired the assets of Movie Tavern, a New Orleans-based industry leading circuit known for its in-theatre dining concept featuring chef-driven menus, premium quality food and drink and luxury seating. The acquired circuit consisted of 208 screens at 22 locations in nine states - Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, New York, Pennsylvania, Texas and Virginia. The purchase price consisted of $30 million in cash, subject to certain adjustments, and 2,450,000 shares of our common stock, for a total purchase price of approximately $139.3 million, based upon our closing share price on January 31, 2019. At the time, the acquisition of the Movie Tavern circuit increased our total number of screens by an additional 23%.
Fiscal 2020 versus Fiscal 2019
Our theatre division revenues and operating income (loss) decreased significantly during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 due entirely to decreased attendance as a result of the temporary closing of all of our theatres on March 17, 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Other than six theatres that were reopened during the last week of the fiscal 2020 second quarter, all of our theatres remained closed during all of the second quarter and the majority of the third quarter of fiscal 2020. During the five-plus months that most of our theatres were closed, the only additional revenues we reported were the result of five parking lot cinemas opened during the second quarter, curbside sales of popcorn, pizza and other food items and restaurant takeout sales from our three Zaffiro’s restaurants and bars. Over the seven-day period between August 21 and August 28, 2020, we reopened a majority of our theatres in conjunction with the release of several new films, resulting in a total of 72 reopened theatres, representing 80% of our company-owned theatres. In October 2020, we temporarily closed several theatres due to changes in the release schedule for new films, reducing our percentage of theatres open to approximately 66%. In November and December 2020, new state and local restrictions in several of our markets required us to temporarily reclose several theatres, and as a result, approximately 52% of our theatres were open as of December 31, 2020. All of our reopened theatres are operating at significantly reduced attendance levels.
Our theatres were open for all but nine days during the first quarter of fiscal 2020 and the revenue impact of decreased attendance during that period was partially offset by an increase in our average ticket price and average concession revenues per person compared to the first quarter of fiscal 2019. In addition, our revenues during the first quarter of fiscal 2020 included an extra month of Movie Tavern revenues (Movie Tavern theatres were not acquired until February 1, 2019) and a new Movie Tavern theatre opened in Brookfield, Wisconsin during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019.
Our theatre division operating loss during the five-plus months our theatres were closed during fiscal 2020 primarily reflected costs that remained after we temporarily closed all of our theatres and laid off the vast majority of our hourly theatre staff, as well as a portion of our corporate staff. These costs included a certain number of salaried theatre management staff as well as the remaining corporate staff, all of whom were subject to a reduction in pay. Additional ongoing costs included utilities and repairs and maintenance (both at reduced levels), rent, property taxes and depreciation. During the last month of our fiscal 2020 third quarter, we brought back an appropriate level of theatre and corporate staff to meet anticipated reduced levels of initial new film supply and customer demand in our recently reopened theatres. Our theatre division operating results during fiscal 2020 were negatively impacted by nonrecurring expenses totaling approximately $5.8 million related to expenses incurred (primarily payroll continuation payments to employees temporarily laid off) due to the closing of all of our movie theatres during the first quarter and subsequent costs incurred for cleaning, supply purchases and employee training, among other items, related to the reopening of our theatre properties and implementing new operating protocols (described in greater detail above). Conversely, our operating loss during fiscal 2020 was favorably impacted by approximately $5.8 million of state government grants awarded from seven states for COVID-19 relief. The additional week of operations favorably impacted our theatre division revenues during fiscal 2020 by approximately $2.6 million and did not have a material impact on our operating loss.
Although rent continued to be expensed monthly, discussions with our landlords resulted in deferral, or in a limited number of situations, abatements, of the majority of our rent payments during our fiscal 2020 second quarter. While the results of negotiations varied by theatre, the most common result of these discussions was a deferral of rent payments for April, May and June, with repayment generally expected in future periods, most often beginning in calendar 2021. We may discuss additional rent deferrals in the future if new film supply and customer demand dictate that we delay further reopening or close currently open theatres.
In addition to the significant impact the closing of our theatres during the majority of our second and third fiscal quarters had on our operating loss during fiscal 2020, our theatre division operating income (loss) and operating margin also decreased during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 due primarily to the impact of the reduced attendance and revenues at comparable theatres during the fiscal 2020 first quarter and fourth quarter. Impairment charges reported during fiscal 2020 related to intangible assets and several theatre locations also negatively impacted our theatre division fiscal 2020 operating loss by approximately $24.7 million. Our operating income and operating margin during fiscal 2019 was negatively impacted by approximately $2.5 million of acquisition and preopening expenses related to the Movie Tavern Acquisition and the opening of a newly built Movie Tavern theatre in Brookfield, Wisconsin.
Total theatre attendance decreased 77.1% during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, primarily as a result of the closure of our theatres for over five months during fiscal 2020 and subsequent reduced attendance at our reopened theatres. A significant decrease in the number of new films, the lack of awareness of theatres being open (due in part to limited new film advertising), ongoing state and local capacity restrictions and customer concerns regarding visiting indoor businesses contributed to the reductions in attendance during fiscal 2020. The following table sets forth our percentage change in comparable theatre attendance during each of the interim periods of fiscal 2020 compared to the same periods during fiscal 2019. We were not able to compare our overall results to the industry during the final three quarters of fiscal 2020 because of limitations on the data available to us from Rentrak (a national box office reporting service for the theatre industry).:
(1)Excludes Movie Tavern theatres, which were not acquired until February 1, 2019.
Our average ticket price decreased 0.4% during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. During the fiscal 2020 third and fourth quarters, we charged our normal pricing for new film releases and charged only $5.00 for older “library” film product, which negatively impacted our average ticket price compared to the prior year. Our average concession revenues per person increased by 6.8% during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. We believe a change in concession product mix, including increased sales of non-traditional food and beverage items from our increased number of Take Five Lounge, Zaffiro’s Express, Reel Sizzle and in-theatre dining outlets, contributed to our increased average concession sales per person during fiscal 2020. We also believe a portion of the increase in our average concession revenues per person during fiscal 2020 may be attributed to shorter lines at our concession stand due to reduced attendance (during periods of high attendance, some customers do not purchase concessions because the line is too long). We also believe that an increased percentage of customers buying their concessions in advance using our web site or our mobile app likely also contributed to higher average concession revenues per person, as our experience has shown that customers are more likely to purchase more items when they order and pay electronically. We currently do not expect our average ticket price to change significantly during fiscal 2021, but film mix will likely once again impact our final result. We currently expect to report a modest increase in our average concession sales per person during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 due to the same contributing factors described above regarding fiscal 2020, although as noted above, several factors may impact our actual results in this key metric.
Revenues for the theatre business and the motion picture industry in general are heavily dependent on the general audience appeal of available films, together with studio marketing, advertising and support campaigns and the maintenance of a reasonably lengthy “window” between the date a film is released in theatres and the date a film is released to other channels, including premium video-on-demand (“PVOD”), video on-demand (“VOD”), streaming services and DVD. These are factors over which we have no control (see additional detail in the “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” section above). The following top five performing films during fiscal 2020, all from our fiscal 2020 first quarter, accounted for nearly 40% of the total admission revenues for our circuit: Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker, Bad Boys for Life, Jumanji: The Next Level, 1917 and Sonic the Hedgehog. The top five performing films during fiscal 2019 accounted for approximately 26% of our total admission revenues. Our highest grossing films, during the limited time we reopened our theatres during the second half of fiscal 2020, included Tenet, The Croods: A New Age, Wonder Woman 1984, Unhinged and The New Mutants.
Other revenues, which include management fees, pre-show advertising income, family entertainment center revenues, surcharge revenues, rental income and gift card breakage income, decreased by $30.0 million during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the impact of reduced attendance on internet surcharge ticketing fees and preshow advertising income. We currently expect other revenues to increase in fiscal 2021 if attendance increases as we anticipate during the second half of the year and as we return to normalcy.
Admission revenues at comparable theatres during the first quarter of fiscal 2021 through the date of this report have continued to be significantly reduced compared to prior year levels. Sales attributable to our Marcus Private Cinema program (discussed in the “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” section above) have exceeded expectations, partially offsetting reduced traditional attendance. Subsequent to year-end, local and state restrictions have been lifted in several of our markets and, as of the date of this report, approximately 69% of our theatres are currently open. Our remaining temporarily closed theatres are ready to quickly reopen as additional restrictions are lifted, new films are released and demand returns.
The film product release schedule for the remainder of fiscal 2021 has been changing in response to reduced near-term customer demand and changing state and local restrictions in various key markets in the U.S. and the world as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, restrictions in New York and California have been cited by film studios as a reason for not releasing new movies, as these markets are particularly important to a film’s success. As a result, several films originally scheduled to be released during the first months of fiscal 2021 have been delayed or released to alternative consumer channels. We believe that as a greater percentage of the population gets vaccinated and the pandemic subsides, there will be a large demand for out-of-home entertainment and the studios will once again begin releasing a significant number of films to theatres. The film slate for the remainder of fiscal 2021, which now includes multiple films originally scheduled for fiscal 2020, is currently expected to be very strong, particularly during the second half of the year. Although it is possible that more schedule changes may occur, films currently scheduled that have potential to perform very well during the remainder of fiscal 2021 include Godzilla vs. Kong, Mortal Kombat, Black Widow, Peter Rabbit 2: The Runaway, Free Guy, Spiral, Cruella, The Conjuring: The Devil Made Me Do It, In the Heights, Luca, Venom: Let There Be Carnage, Fast & Furious 9, Top Gun: Marerick, The Forever Purge, Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings, Cinderella, Space Jam 2, Old, The Tomorrow War, Jungle Cruise, Hotel Transylvania 4, The Suicide Squad,, The King’s Man, The Hitman’s Bodyguard 2, Candyman, Malignant, The Boss Baby: Family Business, A Quiet Place II, Death on the Nile, The Man From Toronto, Dune, Untitled Addams Family Sequel, No Time To Die, Halloween Kills, The Last Duel, Snake Eyes: G.I. Joe Origins, Eternals, Clifford the Big Red Dog Movie, Ghostbusters: Afterlife, Mission Impossible 7, Encanto, Gucci, West Side Story, Untitled Disney Live Action, Spider-Man: No Way Home, The Untitled Matrix Film and Sing 2. The early list of films scheduled to be released during fiscal 2022 also appears quite strong.
We opened a new eight-screen Movie Tavern by Marcus theatre in Brookfield, Wisconsin early in our fiscal 2019 fourth quarter and added four new screens to an existing Movie Tavern theatre during the first quarter of fiscal 2020. We also completed the addition of DreamLounger recliner seating and added a new SuperScreen DLX to that same Movie Tavern theatre during the first quarter of fiscal 2020. Early in our fiscal 2020 third quarter, we completed the addition of DreamLounger recliner seating to an existing Movie Tavern theatre. During the first quarter of fiscal 2020, we began a project that would add DreamLounger recliner seating, as well as Reel Sizzle and Take Five Lounge outlets, to a Marcus Wehrenberg theatre, but this project was temporarily put on hold as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We currently expect to complete this project during the first half of fiscal 2021. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we ceased operating one six-screen Movie Tavern theatre due to the approaching expiration of its lease, we sold one 7-screen budget cinema and we agreed upon terms related to a termination of our agreement to build a new theatre in Tacoma, Washington.
Hotels and Resorts
The hotels and resorts division contributed 44.0% of our consolidated revenues and 26.5% of our consolidated operating income (loss), excluding corporate items, during fiscal 2020, compared to 32.1% and 11.6%, respectively, during fiscal 2019 and 36.8% and 12.3%, respectively, during fiscal 2018. As of December 31, 2020, the hotels and resorts division owned and operated three full-service hotels in downtown Milwaukee, Wisconsin, a full-service destination resort in Lake Geneva, Wisconsin and full-service hotels in Madison, Wisconsin, Chicago, Illinois, Lincoln, Nebraska and Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (we have a majority-ownership position in the Oklahoma City, Oklahoma hotel). In addition, the hotels and resorts division managed 10 hotels, resorts and other properties for other owners. Included in the 10 managed properties is one hotel owned by a joint venture in which we have a minority interest and two condominium hotels in which we own some or all of the public space. The following tables set forth revenues, operating income (loss), operating margin and rooms data for the hotels and resorts division for the past three fiscal years:
The following table provides a further breakdown of the components of revenues for the hotels and resorts division for the last three fiscal years:
Fiscal 2020 versus Fiscal 2019
Division revenues and operating income (loss) decreased significantly during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Room revenues and food and beverage revenues began decreasing due to COVID-19 pandemic related cancellations in March 2020, even before we temporarily closed all of our hotels in late March/early April. In addition, our restaurants and bars were required to close during the last 10 days of the fiscal 2020 first quarter due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We subsequently reopened four of our company-owned hotels late in our fiscal 2020 second quarter (The Pfister Hotel, the Grand Geneva Resort & Spa, The Skirvin Hilton and the Hilton Madison Monona Terrace), three company-owned hotels during our fiscal 2020 third quarter (the Hilton Milwaukee City Center Hotel, The Lincoln Marriott Cornhusker Hotel and the AC Hotel Chicago Downtown) and our remaining company-owned hotel in our fiscal 2020 fourth quarter (Saint Kate). Once reopened, all of our company-owned hotels have operated with significantly reduced occupancies compared to prior years due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The majority of our restaurants and bars in our hotels have subsequently reopened in conjunction with the hotel reopenings beginning in June 2020, and are operating under applicable state and local restrictions and guidelines. We expect to reopen our two SafeHouse restaurants and bars later in fiscal 2021.
Other revenues during fiscal 2020 included ski, spa and golf revenues at our Grand Geneva Resort & Spa (golf revenues exceeded the prior year), management fees, laundry revenues, parking revenues and rental revenues. Cost reimbursements decreased during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 due to the temporary closure and subsequent reduced revenues upon reopening of our managed hotels, partially offset by the addition of a new large management contract during fiscal 2019. As of the date of this report, nine of our 10 managed hotels and other properties have reopened.
In addition to the impact of significantly reduced revenues, our hotel division operating loss during fiscal 2020 was negatively impacted by nonrecurring expenses totaling approximately $5.7 million, related to costs associated with initially closing our hotels (primarily payments to and on behalf of laid off employees) and extensive cleaning costs, supply purchases and employee training, among other items, related to the reopening of selected hotel properties and implementing new operating protocols (described in greater detail above). Conversely, our operating loss during fiscal 2020 was favorably impacted by approximately $1.2 million of state government grants awarded from two states for COVID-19 relief. The additional week of operations favorably impacted our hotels and resorts division revenues during fiscal 2020 by approximately $2.5 million and did not have a material impact on our operating loss. Our operating results during fiscal 2019 were negatively impacted by approximately $6.8 million of preopening expenses and initial start-up losses related to our conversion of the InterContinental Milwaukee hotel into the Saint Kate.
The following table sets forth certain operating statistics, including our average occupancy percentage (number of occupied rooms as a percentage of available rooms), our average daily room rate (“ADR”), and our total revenue per available room (“RevPAR”), for company-owned properties:
(1) These operating statistics represent averages of our comparable seven distinct company-owned hotels and resorts, branded and unbranded, in different geographic markets with a wide range of individual hotel performance. The statistics are not necessarily representative of any particular hotel or resort. The statistics only include the periods the hotels were open during fiscal 2020. The statistics exclude the Saint Kate, as this hotel was closed for the majority of the first half of fiscal 2019.
According to data received from Smith Travel Research and compiled by us in order to analyze our fiscal 2020 results, comparable “upper upscale” hotels throughout the United States experienced a decrease in RevPAR of 62.0% during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. Although data received from Smith Travel Research for our various “competitive sets” - hotels identified in our specific markets that we deem to be competitors to our hotels - is less comprehensive due to the number of hotels closed during portions of the periods reported, data available to us indicates that these hotels experienced a decrease in RevPAR of 69.8% during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. Higher class segments of the hotel industry, such as luxury and upper upscale, continue to experience lower occupancies compared to lower class hotel segments such as economy and midscale. Based upon the data received and complied by us, it appears our properties significantly outperformed our segment of the hotel industry and our competitive sets during fiscal 2020.
The following table sets forth the change in our average occupancy percentage, ADR and RevPAR for each quarterly period of fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 (excluding the Saint Kate):
The “drive-to leisure” travel customer provided the most demand during the second half of fiscal 2020, with the Grand Geneva Resort & Spa and a managed condo hotel, the Timber Ridge Lodge & Waterpark, experiencing the highest demand among our open hotels, particularly on weekends. Leisure travel historically decreases during our fiscal fourth quarter as students go back to school and we experience colder weather in our predominantly Midwestern hotels. Transient business and group business travel subsequent to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic was minimal during fiscal 2020. Our company-owned hotels, and in particular our largest hotels, have historically derived a significant portion of their revenues from group business, and as a result, we are more susceptible to variations in RevPAR from quarter to quarter depending upon the strength of the group business market during that particular quarter. Group business also tends to have an impact on our food and beverage revenues because groups are more likely to use our banquet and catering services during their stay. As indicated by the smaller decreases in ADR during fiscal 2020 (particularly during the second and third quarters), non-group retail pricing held relatively strong, with most of the decrease in ADR due to an overall reduction in market pricing resulting from the lack of group business and a reduction in local demand drivers (restaurants, museums, etc.) in markets with greater restrictions.
Looking to future periods, overall occupancy in the U.S. has slowly increased since the initial onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020. In the near term, we expect most current demand will continue to come from the drive-to leisure segment. Most organizations implemented travel bans at the onset of the pandemic and are currently only allowing essential travel, which will likely limit business travel in the near term. Our company-owned hotels have experienced a significant decrease in group bookings compared to the same period last year. As of the date of this report, our group room revenue bookings for fiscal 2021 - commonly referred to in the hotels and resorts industry as “group pace” - is running significantly behind where we were last year at this time for fiscal 2020, and a large portion of that decline is because last year’s group bookings included bookings in anticipation of Milwaukee hosting the DNC in July 2020. Banquet and catering revenue pace for fiscal 2021 is also running behind where we were last year at this same time for fiscal 2020, but not as much as group room revenues, due in part to increases in wedding bookings. Many of our cancelled group bookings due to COVID-19 are re-booking for future dates, excluding one-time events that could not rebook for future dates such as those connected to the DNC. However, some group bookings for the first half of fiscal 2021 have subsequently canceled or postponed their event, and we cannot predict to what extent any of our hotel bookings will be canceled or rescheduled due to COVID-19 or otherwise.
Unfortunately, the DNC event in Milwaukee in August 2020 was not nearly as significant to Milwaukee and our hotels as we had originally anticipated. Another major event that we expected would benefit our Milwaukee hotels in fiscal 2020, the Ryder Cup, was originally scheduled for September 2020, but was rescheduled to September 2021. However, this event is contributing to our fiscal 2021 group pace.
Forecasting what future RevPAR growth or decline will be during the next 18 to 24 months is very difficult at this time. The non-group booking window is very short, with most bookings occurring within three days of arrival, making even short-term forecasts of future RevPAR growth very difficult. Hotel revenues have historically tracked very closely with traditional macroeconomic statistics such as the Gross Domestic Product, so we will be monitoring the economic environment very closely. After past shocks to the system, such as the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001 and the 2008 financial crisis, hotel demand took longer to recover than other components of the economy. Conversely, we now anticipate that hotel supply growth will be limited for the foreseeable future, which can be beneficial for our existing hotels. Most industry experts believe the pace of recovery will be steady, but relatively slow. In the near-term, we believe it will be very important to have our marketing message focus on the health and safety of our associates and guests. We are focused on reaching the drive-to leisure market through aggressive campaigns promoting creative packages for our guests. Overall, we generally expect our revenue trends to track or exceed the overall industry trends for our segment of the industry, particularly in our respective markets.
Our hotels and resorts division operating results during fiscal 2020 benefited from a new management contract added during fiscal 2019 - the 468-room Hyatt Regency Schaumburg hotel in Schaumburg, Illinois. Conversely, we ceased management of the Heidel House Resort & Spa in Green Lake, Wisconsin and the Sheraton Chapel Hill Hotel in Chapel Hill, North Carolina during fiscal 2019, partially offsetting the impact of the new contract. In addition, early in our fiscal 2020 second quarter, we ceased management of the Hilton Garden Inn Houston NW/Willowbrook in Houston, Texas and early in our fiscal 2020 third quarter, we ceased management of the Murieta Inn and Spa. As of the date of this filing, our current portfolio of hotels and resorts includes 18 owned and managed properties across the country.
As discussed in the “Current Plans” section of this MD&A, although we will prioritize our own finances, we will consider a number of potential growth opportunities that may impact fiscal 2021 and future period operating results. In addition, if we were to sell one or more hotels during fiscal 2021, our fiscal 2021 operating results could be significantly impacted. The extent of any such impact will likely depend upon the timing and nature of the growth opportunity (pure management contract, management contract with equity, joint venture investment, or other opportunity) or divestiture (management retained, equity interest retained, etc.).
During our fiscal 2020 first quarter, Michael R. Evans joined us as the new president of Marcus Hotels & Resorts. Mr. Evans is a proven lodging industry executive with more than 20 years of experience in the hospitality industry with companies such as Marriott International, Inc. and MGM Resorts International. We believe that Mr. Evans’ proven development, operating and leadership experience and strong roots in the hospitality industry make him extremely qualified to build on our hotels and resorts division’s long history of success. Prior to Mr. Evans joining us, Greg Marcus, our president and chief executive officer, had assumed operational oversight of this division and served as acting-president of our hotels and resorts division during fiscal 2019, supported by a strong and experienced senior leadership team.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Our movie theatre and hotels and resorts businesses, when open and operating normally, each generate significant and consistent daily amounts of cash, because each segment’s revenue is derived predominantly from consumer cash purchases. Under normal circumstances, we believe that these relatively consistent and predictable cash sources, as well as the availability of unused credit lines, would be adequate to support the ongoing operational liquidity needs of our businesses. A detailed description of our liquidity situation as of December 31, 2020 is described in detail above in the “Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic” section of this MD&A.
Credit Agreement
On January 9, 2020, we entered into the Credit Agreement with several banks, including JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent, and U.S. Bank National Association, as Syndication Agent. On April 29, 2020, we entered into the First Amendment, and on September 15, 2020 we entered into the Second Amendment. The Second Amendment became effective on September 22, 2020.
The Credit Agreement provides for a revolving credit facility that matures on January 9, 2025 with an initial maximum aggregate amount of availability of $225 million. We may request an increase in the aggregate amount of availability under the Credit Agreement by an aggregate amount of up to $125 million by increasing the revolving credit facility or adding one or more tranches of term loans. Our ability to increase availability under the Credit Agreement is subject to certain conditions, including, among other things, the absence of any default or event of default or material adverse effect under the Credit Agreement. On January 9, 2020, we borrowed $68 million under the revolving credit facility to refinance the outstanding balance under our then-existing credit facility and to pay certain fees and expenses incurred in connection with the closing of the Credit Agreement. In conjunction with the First Amendment, we also have an initial $90.8 million term loan facility that matures on September 22, 2021 (the maturity date was extended in conjunction with the Second Amendment). We used borrowings under the term loan facility to pay down revolving loans, to pay costs and expenses related to the First Amendment, and for general corporate purposes.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement generally bear interest at a variable rate equal to: (i) LIBOR, subject to a 1% floor, plus a specified margin based upon our consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio as of the most recent determination date; or (ii) the base rate (which is the highest of (a) the prime rate, (b) the greater of the federal funds rate and the overnight bank funding rate plus 0.50% or (c) the sum of 1% plus one-month LIBOR), subject to a 1% floor, plus a specified margin based upon our consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio as of the most recent determination date. In addition, the Credit Agreement generally requires us to pay a facility fee equal to 0.125% to 0.25% of the total revolving commitment, depending on our consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio, as defined in the Credit Agreement. However, pursuant to the First Amendment and the Second Amendment: (A) in respect of revolving loans, (1) we are charged a facility fee equal to 0.40% of the total revolving credit facility commitment and (2) the specified margin is 2.35% for LIBOR borrowings and 1.35% for ABR borrowings, which facility fee rate and specified margins will remain in effect until the end of the first fiscal quarter ending after the end of any period in which any portion of the term loan facility remains outstanding or the testing of any financial covenant in the Credit Agreement is suspended (the “specified period”); and (B) in respect of term loans, the specified margin is 2.75% for LIBOR borrowings and 1.75% for ABR borrowings, in each case, at all times.
The Credit Agreement contains various restrictions and covenants applicable to us and certain of our subsidiaries. Among other requirements, the Credit Agreement (a) limits the amount of priority debt (as defined in the Credit Agreement) held by our restricted subsidiaries to no more than 20% of our consolidated total capitalization (as defined in the Credit Agreement), (b) limits our permissible consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio to a maximum of 0.55 to 1.0, (c) requires us to maintain a consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 3.0 to 1.0 as of the end of the fiscal quarter ending September 29, 2022 and each fiscal quarter thereafter, (d) restricts our ability and certain of our subsidiaries’ ability to incur additional indebtedness, pay dividends and other distributions (the restriction on dividends and other distributions does not apply to subsidiaries), and make voluntary prepayments on or defeasance of our 4.02% Senior Notes due August 2025, 4.32% Senior Notes due February 2027, the notes or certain other convertible securities, (e) requires our consolidated EBITDA not to be less than or equal to (i) $0 as of September 30, 2021 for the fiscal quarter then ending, (ii) $20 million as of December 30, 2021 for the two consecutive fiscal quarters then ending, (iii) $35 million as of March 31, 2022 for the three consecutive fiscal quarters then ending or (iv) $60 million as of June 30, 2022 for the four consecutive fiscal quarters then ending, (f) requires our consolidated liquidity not to be less than or equal to (i) $125 million as of September 24, 2020, (ii) $125 million as of December 31, 2020, (iii) $100 million as of April 1, 2021, (iv) $100 million as of July 1, 2021, or (v) $50 million as of the end of any fiscal quarter thereafter until and including the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2022; however, each such required minimum amount of consolidated liquidity would be reduced to $50 million for each such testing date if the initial term loans are paid in full as of such date, and (g) prohibits us and certain of our subsidiaries from incurring or making capital expenditures, in the aggregate for us and such subsidiaries, (i) during the period beginning on April 1, 2020 through and including December 31, 2020 in excess of the sum of $22.5 million plus certain adjustments, or (ii) during our 2021 fiscal year in excess of $50 million plus certain adjustments.
Pursuant to the Credit Agreement, we are required to apply net cash proceeds received from certain events, including certain asset dispositions, casualty losses, condemnations, equity issuances, capital contributions, and the incurrence of certain debt, to prepay outstanding term loans. In addition, if, at any time during the specified period, we and certain of our subsidiaries’ aggregate unrestricted cash on hand exceeds $75 million, the Credit Agreement requires us to prepay revolving loans under the Credit Agreement by the amount of such excess, without a corresponding reduction in the revolving commitments under the Credit Agreement.
In connection with the Credit Agreement: (i) we and certain of our subsidiaries have pledged, subject to certain exceptions, security interests and liens in and on (a) substantially all of their respective personal property assets and (b) certain of their respective real property assets, in each case, to secure the Credit Agreement and related obligations; and (ii) certain of our subsidiaries have guaranteed our obligations under the Credit Agreement. The foregoing security interests, liens and guaranties will remain in effect until the Collateral Release Date (as defined in the Credit Agreement).
The Credit Agreement contains customary events of default. If an event of default under the Credit Agreement occurs and is continuing, then, among other things, the lenders may declare any outstanding obligations under the Credit Agreement to be immediately due and payable and exercise rights and remedies against the pledged collateral.
4.02% Senior Notes and 4.32% Senior Notes
On June 27, 2013, we entered into a Note Purchase Agreement (the “4.02% Senior Notes Agreement”) with the several purchasers party to the 4.02% Senior Notes Agreement, pursuant to which we issued and sold $50 million in aggregate principal amount of our 4.02% Senior Notes due August 14, 2025 (the “4.02% Notes”) in a private placement exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). We used the net proceeds from the issuance and sale of the 4.02% Notes to reduce existing borrowings under our revolving credit facility and for general corporate purposes. On December 21, 2016, we entered into a Note Purchase Agreement (the “4.32% Senior Notes Agreement”) with the several purchasers party to the 4.32% Senior Notes Agreement, pursuant to which we issued and sold $50 million in aggregate principal amount of our 4.32% Senior Notes due February 22, 2027 (the “4.32% Notes” and, together with the 4.02% Notes, the “Notes”) in a private placement exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act. We used the net proceeds of the sale of the 4.32% Notes to repay outstanding indebtedness and for general corporate purposes.
On September 15, 2020 we entered into an amendment to the 4.02% Senior Notes Agreement (the “4.02% Third Amendment” and the 4.02% Senior Notes Agreement, as previously amended and as amended by the 4.02% Third Amendment, the “Amended 4.02% Senior Notes Agreement”). The modifications of the 4.02% Senior Notes Agreement under the 4.02% Third Amendment became effective on September 22, 2020. On September 15, 2020 we entered into an amendment to the 4.32% Senior Notes Agreement (the “4.32% Third Amendment” and the 4.32% Senior Notes Agreement, as previously amended and as amended by the 4.32% Third Amendment, the “Amended 4.32% Senior Notes Agreement” and, together with the Amended 4.02% Senior Notes Agreement, the “Amended Senior Notes Agreements”). The modifications of the 4.32% Senior Notes Agreement under the 4.32% Third Amendment became effective on September 22, 2020.
Interest on the 4.02% Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears on the 14th day of February and August in each year and at maturity. Interest on the 4.32% Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears on the 22nd day of February and August in each year and at maturity. Beginning on August 14, 2021 and on the 14th day of August each year thereafter to and including August 14, 2024, we will be required to prepay $10 million of the principal amount of the 4.02% Notes. Additionally, we may make optional prepayments at any time upon prior notice of all or part of the Notes, subject to the payment of a make-whole amount (as defined in the Amended Senior Notes Agreements, as applicable). Furthermore, until the last day of the first fiscal quarter ending after the Collateral Release Date (as defined in the Amended Senior Notes Agreements, as applicable), we are required to pay a fee to each Note holder in an amount equal to 0.975% of the aggregate principal amount of Notes held by such holder. Such fee is payable quarterly (0.24375% of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes per quarter). The entire outstanding principal balance of the 4.32% Notes will be due and payable on February 22, 2027. The entire unpaid principal balance of the 4.02% Notes will be due and payable on August 14, 2025. The Notes rank pari passu in right of payment with all of our other senior unsecured debt.
The Amended Senior Notes Agreements contain various restrictions and covenants applicable to us and certain of our subsidiaries. Among other requirements, the Amended Senior Notes Agreements (a) limit the amount of priority debt held by us or by our restricted subsidiaries to 20% of our consolidated total capitalization, (b) limit our permissible consolidated debt to 65% of our consolidated total capitalization, (c) require us to maintain a consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 2.5 to 1.0 as of the end of the fiscal quarter ending September 29, 2022 and each fiscal quarter thereafter, (d) require our consolidated EBITDA not to be less than or equal to (i) $0 as of September 30, 2021 for the fiscal quarter then ending, (ii) $20 million as of December 30, 2021 for the two consecutive fiscal quarters then ending, (iii) $35 million as of March 31, 2022 for the three consecutive fiscal quarters then ending or (iv) $60 million as of June 30, 2022 for the four consecutive fiscal quarters then ending, (e) require our consolidated liquidity not to be less than or equal to (i) $125 million as of September 24, 2020, (ii) $125 million as of December 31, 2020, (iii) $100 million as of April 1, 2021, (iv) $100 million as of July 1, 2021, or (v) $50 million as of the end of any fiscal quarter thereafter until and including the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2022; however, each such required minimum amount of consolidated liquidity would be reduced to $50 million for each such testing date if the initial term loans under the Credit Agreement are paid in full as of such date, and (f) prohibit us and certain of our subsidiaries from incurring or making capital expenditures, in the aggregate for us and such subsidiaries, (i) during the period beginning on April 1, 2020 through and including December 31, 2020 in excess of the sum of $22.5 million plus certain adjustments, or (ii) during our 2021 fiscal year in excess of $50 million plus certain adjustments.
In connection with the Amended Senior Notes Agreements: (i) we and certain of our subsidiaries have pledged, subject to certain exceptions, security interests and liens in and on (a) substantially all of their respective personal property assets and (b) certain of their respective real property assets, in each case, to secure the Notes and related obligations; and (ii) certain subsidiaries of ours have guaranteed our obligations under the Amended Senior Notes Agreements and the Notes. The foregoing security interests, liens and guaranties will remain in effect until the Collateral Release Date.
The Amended Senior Notes Agreements also contain customary events of default. If an event of default under the Amended Senior Notes Agreements occurs and is continuing, then, among other things, the purchasers may declare any outstanding obligations under the Amended Senior Notes Agreements and the Notes to be immediately due and payable and the Note holders may exercise their rights and remedies against the pledged collateral.
Convertible Notes
On September 17, 2020, we entered into a purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, as representative of the several initial purchasers (the “Initial Purchasers”), to issue and sell $100.05 million aggregate principal amount of our 5.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 (the “Convertible Notes”) of which an aggregate principal amount of $13.05 million of Notes was issued pursuant to the exercise by the Initial Purchasers of their option to purchase additional Convertible Notes. We offered and sold the Convertible Notes to the Initial Purchasers in reliance on the exemption from registration provided by Section 4(a) (2) of the Securities Act, and for resale by the Initial Purchasers to persons reasonably believed to be qualified institutional buyers pursuant to the exemption from registration provided by Rule 144A under the Securities Act. We relied on these exemptions from registration based in part on representations made by the Initial Purchasers in the Purchase Agreement. The shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $1.00 per share (the “Common Stock”), issuable upon conversion of the Convertible Notes, if any, have not been registered under the Securities Act and may not be offered or sold in the United States absent registration or an applicable exemption from registration requirements. To the extent that any shares of the Common Stock are issued upon conversion of the Convertible Notes, they will be issued in transactions anticipated to be exempt from registration under the Securities Act by virtue of Section 3(a)(9) thereof because no commission or other remuneration is expected to be paid in connection with conversion of the Convertible Notes and any resulting issuance of shares of the Common Stock. The Purchase Agreement includes customary representations, warranties and covenants by us and customary closing conditions. Under the terms of the Purchase Agreement, we agreed to indemnify the Initial Purchasers against certain liabilities.
The Convertible Notes were issued pursuant to an indenture (the “Indenture”), dated September 22, 2020, between our company and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. The net proceeds from the sale of the Convertible Notes were approximately $78.6 million (after deducting the Initial Purchasers’ fees and our estimated fees and expenses related to the offering and the cost of the capped call transactions). We used approximately $16.9 million of net proceeds from the offering to pay the cost of the Capped Call Transactions (as defined below). We used the remainder of the net proceeds from the offering to repay borrowings under our revolving credit facility and for general corporate purposes. The Convertible Notes are senior unsecured obligations and rank (i) senior in right of payment to any of our indebtedness that is expressly subordinated in right of payment to the Convertible Notes; (ii) equal in right of payment to any of our unsecured indebtedness that is not so subordinated; (iii) effectively junior in right of payment to any of our secured indebtedness to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness; and (iv) structurally junior to all indebtedness and other liabilities (including trade payables) of our subsidiaries.
The Convertible Notes bear interest from September 22, 2020 at a rate of 5.00% per year. Interest will be payable semiannually in arrears on March 15 and September 15 of each year, beginning on March 15, 2021. The Convertible Notes may bear additional interest under specified circumstances relating to our failure to comply with our reporting obligations under the Indenture or if the Convertible Notes are not freely tradeable as required by the Indenture. The Convertible Notes will mature on September 15, 2025, unless earlier repurchased or converted. Prior to March 15, 2025, the Convertible Notes will be convertible at the option of the holders only under the following circumstances: (i) during any fiscal quarter commencing after the fiscal quarter ending on December 31, 2020 (and only during such fiscal quarter), if the last reported sale price of the Common Stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding fiscal quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price on each applicable trading day; (ii) during the five business day period immediately after any five consecutive trading day period, or the measurement period, in which the trading price per $1,000 principal amount of the Convertible Notes for each trading day of the measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of the Common Stock and the conversion rate on each such trading day; or (iii) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events. On or after March 15, 2025, the Convertible Notes will be convertible at the option of the holders at any time until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date.
Upon conversion, the Convertible Notes may be settled, at our election, in cash, shares of Common Stock or a combination thereof. The initial conversion rate is 90.8038 shares of Common Stock per $1,000 principal amount of the Convertible Notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $11.01 per share of Common Stock), representing an initial conversion premium of approximately 22.5% to the $8.99 last reported sale price of the Common Stock on The New York Stock Exchange on September 17, 2020. If we undergo certain fundamental changes, holders of Convertible Notes may require us to repurchase for cash all or part of their Convertible Notes for a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date. In addition, if a make-whole fundamental change occurs prior to the maturity date, we will, under certain circumstances, increase the conversion rate for holders who convert Convertible Notes in connection with such make-whole fundamental change. We may not redeem the Convertible Notes before maturity and no “sinking fund” is provided for the Convertible Notes. The Indenture includes covenants customary for securities similar to the Convertible Notes, sets forth certain events of default after which the Convertible Notes may be declared immediately due and payable and sets forth certain types of bankruptcy or insolvency events of default involving our company and certain of our subsidiaries after which the Convertible Notes become automatically due and payable.
Capped Call Transactions
In connection with the pricing of the Convertible Notes on September 17, 2020, and in connection with the exercise by the Initial Purchasers of their option to purchase additional Convertible Notes on September 18, 2020, we entered into privately negotiated Capped Call Transactions (the “Capped Call Transactions”) with certain of the Initial Purchasers and/or their respective affiliates and/or other financial institutions (the “Capped Call Counterparties”). The Capped Call Transactions are expected generally to reduce potential dilution of our common stock upon any conversion of the Convertible Notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of such converted Convertible Notes, as the case may be, in the event that the market price per share or our common stock, as measured under the terms of the Capped Call Transactions, is greater than the strike price of the Capped Call Transactions, which initially corresponds to the conversion price of the Convertible Notes and is subject to anti-dilution adjustments substantially similar to those applicable to the conversion rate of the Convertible Notes. If, however, the market price per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the Capped Call Transactions, exceeds the cap price of the Capped Call Transactions, there would nevertheless be dilution to the extent that such market price exceeds the cap price of the Capped Call Transactions. The cap price of the Capped Call Transactions will initially be $17.98 per share (in no event shall the cap price be less than the strike price of $11.0128), which represents a premium of 100% over the last reported sale price of the Common Stock of $8.99 per share on The New York Stock Exchange on September 17, 2020, and is subject to certain adjustments under the terms of the Capped Call Transactions. The Capped Call Transactions are separate transactions entered into by us with the Capped Call Counterparties, are not part of the terms of the Convertible Notes and will not change the rights of holders of the Convertible Notes under the Convertible Notes and the Indenture.
Summary
Our long-term debt has scheduled annual principal payments, net of amortization of debt issuance costs, of $10.5 million and $10.9 million in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2022, respectively. We believe that the actions that have been taken will allow us to have sufficient liquidity to meet our obligations as they come due and to comply with our debt covenants for at least 12 months from the issuance date of the consolidated financial statements. However, future compliance with our debt covenants could be impacted if we are unable to resume operations as currently expected, which could be impacted by matters that are not entirely in our control, such as the continuation of protective actions that federal, state and local governments have taken and the timing of new movie releases (as described in the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic section of this MD&A). Future compliance with our debt covenants could also be impacted if the speed of recovery of our theatres and hotels and resorts businesses is slower than currently expected. For example, our current expectations are that our theatre division will significantly underperform during our fiscal 2021 first quarter compared to the prior year, improve during the fiscal 2021 second quarter (but still report results materially below the prior year), before beginning to progressively return to closer-to-normal performance during the second half of fiscal 2021. Our current expectations for our hotels and resorts division are that we will continue to significantly underperform during our fiscal 2021 first quarter compared to the prior year, before beginning to show improvement in each succeeding quarter compared to our current state. We do not expect to return to pre-COVID-19 occupancy levels during fiscal 2021. Even if one or both of our divisions progressively return to closer-to-normal performance and operations in the second half of fiscal 2021, it is possible that the impact of COVID-19 may be greater than currently expected across one or both of our divisions such that we may be unable to comply with our debt covenants. In such an event, we would either seek covenant waivers or attempt to amend our covenants, though there is no certainty that we would be successful in such efforts.
Financial Condition
Fiscal 2020 versus Fiscal 2019
Net cash used in operating activities totaled $68.6 million during fiscal 2020, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $141.5 million during fiscal 2019, a decrease of $210.1 million. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2020 was due primarily to reduced net earnings and the unfavorable timing in the payment of accounts payable and accrued compensation, partially offset by the favorable timing in the collection of accounts receivable.
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2020 totaled $12.1 million compared to $93.9 million during fiscal 2019, a decrease of $81.8 million, or 87.1%. The decrease in net cash used in investing activities was primarily the result of the $30.3 million cash consideration in the Movie Tavern Acquisition during fiscal 2019 and the fact that we have significantly reduced our capital expenditures during fiscal 2020 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Proceeds received from disposals of property, equipment and other assets and the sale of trading securities also contributed to our decrease in net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2020. We did not incur any acquisition-related capital expenditures during fiscal 2020.
Total cash capital expenditures (including normal continuing capital maintenance and renovation projects) totaled $21.4 million during fiscal 2020 compared to $64.1 million during fiscal 2019, a decrease of $42.7 million, or 66.7%. We incurred capital expenditures of approximately $1.8 million during fiscal 2020 related to development costs of a proposed new theatre (as described above, we have subsequently abandoned plans to build this theatre) . We incurred capital expenditures of approximately $3.3 million during fiscal 2019 related to development costs of one new theatre that opened during fiscal 2019. We did not incur any capital expenditures related to developing new hotels during either period. We incurred approximately $15.8 million and $31.5 million, respectively, of capital expenditures during fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 in our theatre division, including the aforementioned costs associated with constructing a new theatre, as well as costs associated with the addition of DreamLounger recliner seating, our Take Five Lounge and Zaffiro’s Express and food and beverage concepts, and UltraScreen DLX and SuperScreen DLX premium large format screens at selected theatres, each as described in the “Current Plans” section of this MD&A. We incurred approximately $4.7 million of capital expenditures in our hotels and resorts division during fiscal 2020, consisting primarily of maintenance capital projects at our company-owned hotels and resorts. We also incurred capital expenditures in our hotels and resorts division during fiscal 2019 of approximately $31.8 million, consisting primarily of costs associated with the conversion of the InterContinental Milwaukee into the Saint Kate and renovation of the Hilton Madison Monona Terrace, as well as normal maintenance capital projects at our other properties. Our current estimated fiscal 2021 cash capital expenditures, which we anticipate may be in the $15-$25 million range, are described in greater detail in the “Current Plans” section of this MD&A.
Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2020 totaled $69.1 million, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $43.8 million during fiscal 2019. As described above, we drew down on the full amount available under our revolving credit facility during the first quarter of fiscal 2020 (after taking into consideration outstanding letters of credit that reduce revolver availability). As also described above, we incurred $90.8 million of new short-term borrowings early in our fiscal 2020 second quarter and issued $100.05 million in convertible notes in our fiscal 2020 third quarter, the majority of which was used to repay existing borrowings under our revolving credit facility. Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2020 was reduced by $16.9 million of Capped Call Transactions described above. As a result, we added $221.5 million of new short-term revolving credit facility borrowings, and we made $302.5 million of repayments on short-term revolving credit facility borrowings during fiscal 2020 (net decrease in borrowings on our credit facility of $81.0 million).
We did not issue any new long-term debt during fiscal 2019. We used excess cash during fiscal 2019 to reduce our borrowings under our revolving credit facility. As short-term revolving credit facility borrowings became due, we replaced them as necessary with new short-term revolving credit facility borrowings. During fiscal 2019, we also used borrowings from our revolving credit facility to fund the cash consideration in the Movie Tavern Acquisition. As a result, we added $335.0 million of new short-term revolving credit facility borrowings and we made $333.0 million of repayments on short-term revolving credit facility borrowings during fiscal 2019 (net increase in borrowings on our credit facility of $2.0 million).
As described in the Hotels and Resorts section of this MD&A, we received PPP loan proceeds during the second quarter of fiscal 2020, the majority of which were used for qualifying expenses during the second quarter that we believe will result in forgiveness of the loan under provisions of the CARES Act. Approximately $3.4 million of the PPP loan proceeds were not used for qualifying expenses as of December 31, 2020 and contributed to the increase in net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2020 compared to the prior year.
Principal payments on long-term debt were $9.4 million during fiscal 2020 and included a $9.0 million final payment on senior notes that matured in April 2020. Principal payments on long-term debt were $24.6 million during fiscal 2019 and included the repayment of a $14.6 million mortgage note on a hotel. We incurred $7.6 million in debt issuance costs during fiscal 2020. We did not incur any debt issuance costs during fiscal 2019.
Our debt-to-capitalization ratio (including short-term borrowings and excluding our finance lease obligations) was 0.37 at December 31, 2020 compared to 0.26 at December 26, 2019. Based upon our current expectations for our fiscal 2021 operating results and capital expenditures, we anticipate that our total long-term debt and debt-to-capitalization ratio may modestly increase during fiscal 2021. Our actual total long-term debt and debt-to-capitalization ratio at the end of fiscal 2021 are dependent upon, among other things, our actual operating results, capital expenditures, asset sales proceeds and potential equity transactions during the year.
We repurchased approximately 38,000 shares of our common stock for approximately $696,000 and 30,000 shares of our common stock for approximately $1.1 million, respectively, during fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 in conjunction with the exercise of stock options. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 2.7 million shares of our common stock remained available for repurchase under prior Board of Directors repurchase authorizations. Under these authorizations, we may repurchase shares of our common stock from time to time in the open market, pursuant to privately-negotiated transactions or otherwise, depending upon a number of factors, including prevailing market conditions. The Credit Agreement, as amended, currently restricts our ability to repurchase shares in the open market until such time as we have paid off the Term Loan A and returned to compliance with our prior covenants under the Credit Agreement.
In conjunction with the Movie Tavern acquisition, we issued 2,450,000 shares of our common stock to the seller during the first quarter of fiscal 2019. This non-cash transaction reduced treasury stock and increased capital in excess of par by the value of the shares at closing of approximately $109.2 million.
We paid regular quarterly dividends totaling $5.1 million and $19.3 million, respectively, during fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019. As described above, the Credit Agreement, as amended, required us to temporarily suspend our quarterly dividend payments for the remainder of 2020 and first two quarters of fiscal 2021. The Credit Agreement also limits the total amount of quarterly dividend payments during the four subsequent quarters beginning with the third quarter of fiscal 2021, unless the Term Loan A is repaid and we are in compliance with prior financial covenants under the Credit Agreement, at which point we have the ability to declare quarterly dividend payments as we deem appropriate.
Contractual Obligations, Commercial Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The following schedule details our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1) Interest on variable-rate debt obligations is excluded due to significant variations that may occur in each year related to the amount of variable-rate debt and the accompanying interest rate.
Additional detail describing our long-term debt is included in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no additional material purchase obligations other than those created in the ordinary course of business related to property and equipment, which generally have terms of less than 90 days. We had long-term obligations related to our employee benefit plans, which are discussed in detail in Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements. We have not included uncertain tax obligations in the table of contractual obligations set forth above due to uncertainty as to the timing of any potential payments.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no debt or lease guarantee obligations.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
We are exposed to market risk related to changes in interest rates, and we manage our exposure to this market risk by monitoring available financing alternatives.
Variable interest rate debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020 (including short-term borrowings) totaled $87.8 million ($87.2 million net of debt issuance costs), carried an average interest rate of 3.75% and represented 27.7% of our total debt portfolio. After adjusting for outstanding swap agreements described below, variable interest rate debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020 (including short term borrowing) totaled $37.8 million, carried an average interest rate of 3.75% and represented 11.9% of our total debt portfolio. Our earnings may be affected by changes in short-term interest rates as a result of our borrowings under our revolving credit facility. Our Credit Agreement currently provides for a 1.0% LIBOR floor. Based upon the interest rates in effect on our variable rate debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020, LIBOR would need to increase by approximately 81 basis points before our annual interest expense would be impacted. If that were to happen, an additional 100 basis point increase in market interest rates above the LIBOR floor would increase our annual interest expense by approximately $378,000, taking our outstanding swap agreements into consideration.
Fixed interest rate debt totaled $229.7 million as of December 31, 2020, carried an average interest rate of 4.9% and represented 72.3% of our total debt portfolio. After adjusting for outstanding swap agreements described below, fixed interest rate debt totaled $279.7 million as of December 31, 2020, carried an average interest rate of 5.0% and represented 88.1% of our total debt portfolio. Fixed interest rate debt included the following: senior notes bearing interest semiannually at fixed rates ranging from 4.02% to 4.32% (plus a specified period fee of 0.975% described above), maturing in fiscal 2021 through 2027; convertible senior notes bearing interest of 5.0%, maturing in fiscal 2025, fixed rate mortgages and other debt instruments bearing interest from 3.00% to 5.75%, maturing in fiscal 2025 and 2042, and PPP loans bearing interest at 1.0%, maturing in fiscal 2024. The fair value of our fixed interest rate debt is subject to interest rate risk. Generally, the fair market value of our fixed interest rate debt will increase as interest rates fall and decrease as interest rates rise. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of our $100.0 million of senior notes was approximately $100.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of our $100.05 million of convertible senior notes was approximately $144.7 million. Based upon the respective rate and prepayment provisions of our remaining fixed interest rate mortgage and unsecured term note at December 31, 2020, the carrying amounts of such debt approximated fair value as of such date.
The variable interest rate debt (including short-term borrowings) and fixed interest rate debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020 matures as follows (in thousands):
We periodically enter into interest rate swap agreements to manage our exposure to interest rate changes. These swaps involve the exchange of fixed and variable interest rate payments. Payments or receipts on the agreements are recorded as adjustments to interest expense.
On March 1, 2018, we entered into two interest rate swap agreements covering $50.0 million of floating rate debt which require us to pay interest at a defined fixed rate while receiving interest at a defined variable rate of one-month LIBOR. The first swap had a notional amount of $25.0 million, expired on March 1, 2021 and had a fixed rate of 2.559%. The second swap has a notional amount of $25.0 million, expires on March 1, 2023 and has a fixed rate of 2.687%. The interest rate swaps are considered effective for accounting purposes and qualify as cash flow hedges. These swap agreements did not materially impact our fiscal 2020 earnings and we do not expect the interest rate swaps to materially impact our fiscal 2021 earnings.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This MD&A is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates associated with critical accounting policies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
● We review long-lived assets, including property and equipment, operating lease right-of-use assets and our trade name intangible asset, for impairment at least annually, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of any such asset may not be recoverable. Such review is primarily done at the individual theatre or hotel property level, which represents the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other asset groups. We use judgment to determine whether indicators of impairment exist. The determination of the occurrence of a triggering event is based upon our knowledge of the theatre and hospitality industries, historical experience such as recent operating results, location of the property, market conditions, recent events or transactions, and property-specific information available at the time of the assessment. When a triggering event occurs, judgment is also required in determining the assumptions and estimates to use within the recoverability analysis and when calculating the fair value of the asset if it is determined that the long-lived asset is not recoverable. In performing these analyses, we must make assumptions regarding the estimated future cash flows and other factors that a market participant would make to determine the fair value of the respective assets. The estimate of cash flows is based upon, among other things, certain assumptions about expected future operating performance and anticipated sales prices. Our estimates of cash flows are sensitive to assumed revenue growth rates and may differ from actual cash flows due to factors such as economic conditions, the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, changes to our business model or changes in our operating performance and anticipated sales prices. For long-lived assets other than goodwill, if the sum of the undiscounted estimated cash flows is less than the current carrying value, we then prepare a fair value analysis of the asset. If the carrying value of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset, we recognize an impairment loss, measured as the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the asset. During fiscal 2020, we recorded before-tax impairment charges totaling $24.7 million related to our trade name intangible asset and multiple theatre locations. During fiscal 2019, we recorded a before-tax impairment charge of $1.9 million related to a specific theatre location. We did not record any impairment losses during fiscal 2018.
● Periodically, we make acquisitions that may have a material impact on our consolidated financial position. Assets acquired and liabilities assumed in acquisitions are recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date. We use judgment to allocate the purchase price of the businesses acquired to the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. In some cases, we may use an independent valuation firm to assist with our valuation, and our assumptions and estimates are based upon comparable market data and information obtained from our management and the management of the acquired businesses using acceptable valuation techniques. Generally, tangible assets acquired include property and equipment, finance lease right-of-use assets and operating lease right-of-use assets. Intangible assets acquired may include tradename intangibles, non-compete agreements or goodwill in a business combination. While we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year following the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. During fiscal 2019, we acquired the assets of Movie Tavern for a total purchase price of approximately $139.3 million.
● We review goodwill for impairment annually or more frequently if certain indicators arise. We perform our annual impairment test on the last day of our fiscal year. We believe performing the test at the end of the fiscal year is preferable as the test is predicated on qualitative factors which are developed and finalized near fiscal year-end. Goodwill is tested for impairment at a reporting unit level, determined to be at an operating segment level. When reviewing goodwill for impairment, we consider the amount of excess fair value over the carrying value of the reporting unit, the period of time since the last quantitative test, and other factors to determine whether or not to first perform a qualitative test. When performing a qualitative test, we assess numerous factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Examples of qualitative factors that we assess include our share price, our financial performance, market and competitive factors in our industry, and other events specific to the reporting unit. If we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we perform a quantitative test by comparing the carrying value of the reporting unit to the estimated fair value. Primarily all of our goodwill relates to our theatre segment.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the temporary closing of all of our theatre locations, we determined that a triggering event occurred during the 13 weeks ended March 26, 2020 and performed a quantitative analysis. In order to determine fair value, we used assumptions based on information available to us as of March 26, 2020, including both market data and forecasted cash flows. We then used this information to determine fair value and determined that the fair value of our theatre reporting unit exceeded our carrying value by approximately 20% and deemed that no impairment was indicated as of March 26, 2020. During the 13 weeks ended June 25, 2020, we determined that there were no indicators of impairment that would require an additional quantitative analysis as of June 25, 2020. Due to the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the continued temporary closing of several of our theatre locations, and a reduction in our share price, we determined that a triggering event occurred during the 13 weeks ended September 24, 2020 and performed a quantitative analysis. In order to determine fair value, we used assumptions based on information available to us as of September 24, 2020, including both market data and forecasted cash flows. We then used this information to determine fair value and determined that the fair value of our theatre reporting unit exceeded our carrying value by approximately 17% and deemed that no impairment was indicated as of September 24, 2020. We also performed a quantitative analysis as of December 31, 2020. In order to determine fair value, we used assumptions based on information available to us as of December 31, 2020, including both market data and forecasted cash flows. We then used this information to determine fair value and determined that the fair value of our theatre reporting unit exceeded our carrying value by approximately 21% and deemed that no impairment was indicated as of December 31, 2020. If we are unable to achieve our forecasted cash flow or if market conditions worsen, our goodwill could be impaired at a later date. The fair value of our theatre reporting unit exceeded our carrying value for fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018 by a substantial amount.
● When accounting for the issuance of convertible debt instruments, we separate the convertible debt instrument into a liability component and an equity component. The carrying amount of the liability component is calculated by estimating the fair value using assumptions that market participants would use in pricing a similar debt instrument of similar credit quality and maturity that does not have an associated convertible feature, including market interest rates. Determining the fair value of the debt component requires the use of accounting estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions are judgmental in nature and could have a significant impact on the determination of the debt component and the associated non-cash interest expense. The carrying amount of the equity component, representing the conversion option, which does not meet the criteria for separate accounting as a derivative if it is indexed in our own stock, is determined by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the par value of the convertible debt instrument. The equity component is included in capital in excess of par in the consolidated balance sheet and is not remeasured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification. The difference between the principal amount of the convertible debt instrument and the liability component represents the debt discount, which is recorded as a direct deduction from the related debt liability and amortized to interest expense using the effective interest method over the term of the convertible debt instrument.
In addition, debt issuance costs related to the issuance of convertible debt instruments are allocated to the liability and equity components based on their relative values. Debt issuance costs allocated to the liability component are amortized over the life of the convertible debt instrument as additional non-cash interest expense. The transaction costs allocated to the equity component are netted with the equity component of the convertible debt instrument in stockholders’ equity.
On January 1, 2021, the first day of our fiscal 2021, we early adopted ASU No. 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, which eliminates the separation of the convertible debt instrument into a lability component and an equity component. Refer to Note 1 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
● Depreciation expense is based on the estimated useful life of our assets. The life of the assets is based on a number of assumptions, including cost and timing of capital expenditures to maintain and refurbish the asset, as well as specific market and economic conditions. While management believes its estimates are reasonable, a change in the estimated lives could affect depreciation expense and net earnings or the gain or loss on the sale of any of the assets. During fiscal 2018, we changed the estimated lives of certain assets at our InterContinental Milwaukee due to our decision to convert this hotel into a new, art-themed hotel, the Saint Kate. As a result, we reported additional depreciation of approximately $3.7 million during fiscal 2018.
Accounting Changes
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements, Sec Note 1 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this annual report on Form 10K.