ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion highlights the principal factors that have affected our financial condition and results of operations as well as our liquidity and capital resources for the periods described. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements. Please see the explanatory note concerning “Forward-Looking Statements” preceding Part I of this Form 10-K
and Item 1A. Risk Factors for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these forward-looking statements. The operating results for the periods presented were not significantly affected by inflation.
OVERVIEW
Mednax is a leading provider of physician services including newborn, maternal-fetal, pediatric cardiology and other pediatric subspecialty care. Our national network is comprised of affiliated physicians who provide clinical care in 39 states and Puerto Rico. At December 31, 2020, our national network comprised over 2,300 affiliated physicians, including 1,320 physicians who provide neonatal clinical care, primarily within hospital-based neonatal intensive care units (“NICUs”), to babies born prematurely or with medical complications. We have 425 affiliated physicians who provide maternal-fetal and obstetrical medical care to expectant mothers experiencing complicated pregnancies primarily in areas where our affiliated neonatal physicians practice. Our network also includes other pediatric subspecialists, including 245 physicians providing pediatric intensive care, 100 physicians providing pediatric cardiology care, 175 physicians providing hospital-based pediatric care, 35 physicians providing pediatric surgical care and urology services, 10 physicians providing pediatric ear, nose and throat services, and five physicians providing pediatric ophthalmology services. Mednax divested its anesthesiology services medical group on May 6, 2020 and its radiology medical group on December 15, 2020.
Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID-19)
COVID-19
and related “stay at home” and social distancing measures implemented across the country have significantly impacted demand for medical services provided by our affiliated clinicians. Beginning in mid-March
2020, we experienced a significant decline in the number of elective surgeries at the facilities where our affiliated clinicians provided anesthesia services. Much of this decline was due to the closure of operating suites or facilities following federal advisories to cancel non-urgent
procedures and the prohibition of such procedures by several states. Within our radiology service line, orders for radiological studies declined by a meaningful amount from historically normal levels, with much of this reduction focused in non-urgent
studies. We divested our anesthesiology and radiology services medical groups in May 2020 and December 2020, respectively, where operating results were significantly impacted by COVID-19.
Our affiliated women’s and children’s office-based practices, which specialize in maternal-fetal medicine, pediatric cardiology, and numerous pediatric subspecialties, experienced a significant elevation of appointment cancellations compared to historical normal levels. We believe COVID-19,
either directly or indirectly, has also had an impact on our NICU patient volumes, and there is no assurance that impacts from COVID-19
will not further adversely affect our NICU patient volumes or otherwise adversely affect our NICU and related neonatology business. Overall, our operating results were significantly impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic beginning in mid-March
2020, but volumes did begin to normalize in May 2020 and substantially recovered during the months of June 2020 through December 2020.
We implemented a number of actions to preserve financial flexibility and partially mitigate the significant impact of COVID-19.
These steps included a suspension of most activities related to our transformational and restructuring programs, limiting these expenditures to those that provide essential support for our response to COVID-19.
In addition, (i) we temporarily reduced executive and key management base salaries, including 50% reductions in salaries for our named executive officers through June 30, 2020; (ii) our Board of Directors agreed
to forego their annual cash retainer and cash meeting payments, also through June 30, 2020; (iii) we enacted a combination of salary reductions and furloughs for non-clinical
employees; and (iv) we enacted significant operational and practice-specific expense reduction plans across our clinical operations.
We also implemented a variety of solutions across specialties to support clinicians and patients during COVID-19,
including
•
Clinician Shortage Support: Pediatric clinicians are lending their expertise to help fulfill the need for added adult care.
•
Strengthening of Supply Chain: We helped to address the shortage of personal protective equipment (PPE) by partnering with vendors across industries to source high filtration respirators, surgical masks and other forms of PPE for protective use.
•
Expanded Virtual Care Offerings: Utilizing VSee, an internationally recognized telehealth platform, we have deployed a national multi-specialty virtual clinic to expand our telehealth offerings and make virtual care available to our clinical workforce, enabling continued patient consults and clinician collaboration while minimizing COVID-19
exposure.
•
Early Virus Detection Using Cutting-Edge Imaging Diagnostic Tools: Our former radiology services medical group led early detection efforts through chest imaging and diagnosed one of the first COVID-19
patients in the United States via chest computed tomography (“CT”), which showed findings consistent with a severe acute respiratory viral infection. In the absence of laboratory testing kits, chest CT can serve as a diagnostic tool.
•
Virtual Forum to Provide Clinician Support: To support frontline clinicians while abiding by social distancing recommendations, we have created a virtual doctors’ lounge for clinicians across specialties to connect and socialize in the absence of typical in-person
lounges, helping to boost morale and preserve a sense of normalcy.
We currently expect that COVID-19
will continue to materially impact our financial results, but due to the rapidly evolving environment and continued uncertainties surrounding the timeline of and impacts from COVID-19,
we are unable to predict the ultimate impact on our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and the trading price of our securities at this time.
CARES Act
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was signed into law. The CARES Act is a relief package intended to assist many aspects of the American economy, including providing up to $100 billion in aid to the healthcare industry to reimburse healthcare providers for lost revenue and expenses attributable to COVID-19.
The remaining $70 billion in aid is intended to focus on providers in areas particularly impacted by COVID-19,
rural providers, providers of services with lower shares of Medicare reimbursement or who predominantly serve the Medicaid population, and providers requesting reimbursement for the treatment of uninsured Americans. It is unknown what, if any, portion of the remaining healthcare industry funding on the CARES Act our affiliated physician practices will qualify for and receive. The Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”) is administering this program, and our affiliated physician practices within continuing operations have received an aggregate of approximately $22.0 million in relief payments during the year ended December 31, 2020. We have applications pending for certain affiliated physician practices for incremental relief beyond what has been received.
In addition, the CARES Act also provides for deferred payment of the employer portion of social security taxes through the end of 2020, with 50% of the deferred amount due December 31, 2021 and the remaining 50% due December 31, 2022. We utilized this deferral option throughout 2020.
Reclassifications
Reclassifications have been made to certain prior period financial statements and footnote disclosures to conform to the current period presentation, specifically to reflect the impact of our anesthesiology and radiology services medical groups being classified as discontinued operations. See - “Divestiture of the Anesthesiology Services Medical Group” and “Divestiture of the Radiology Services Medical Group” below.
2020 Acquisition Activity
During 2020, we completed the acquisition of one pediatric subspecialty practice. Based on our experience, we expect that we can improve the results of acquired physician practices through improved managed care contracting, improved collections, identification of growth initiatives and operating and cost savings based upon the significant infrastructure that we have developed.
Divestiture of the Anesthesiology Services Medical Group
On May 6, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with an affiliate of North American Partners in Anesthesia (“NAPA”) to divest our anesthesiology services medical group, and the transaction closed on May 6, 2020. Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the agreement, at the closing of the transaction, we received a cash payment of $50.0 million, subject to certain customary adjustments, as well as a contingent economic interest in NAPA with a value ranging from $0 to $250 million based upon the multiple of invested capital returned to NAPA’s owners upon exit of the investment. The operating results of the anesthesiology services medical group were reported as discontinued operations in our consolidated statements of income for the year ended December 31, 2020 and prior period financial statements have been presented on a consistent basis.
Divestiture of the Radiology Services Medical Group
On September 9, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with Radiology Partners, Inc. to divest our radiology services medical group, and the transaction closed on December 15, 2020. The purchase consideration was comprised of $885 million paid in cash at closing, subject to certain cash, minimum net working capital, indebtedness and other adjustments. The Company received approximately $865 million at closing and used a portion of the proceeds of the transaction to redeem its $750 million in outstanding principal amount of 5.25% senior notes due in 2023 (the “2023 Notes”) with a redemption date of January 7, 2021. The operating results of the radiology services medical group were reported as a component of discontinued operations, net of income taxes, in our consolidated statements of income for the year ended December 31, 2020 and prior period financial statements have been presented on a consistent basis.
Transformation and Restructuring Initiatives
Beginning in 2019, we developed a number of strategic initiatives across our organization, in both our shared services functions and our operational infrastructure, with a goal of generating improvements in our general and administrative expenses and our operational infrastructure. We had broadly classified these workstreams in four broad categories including practice operations, revenue cycle management, information technology and human resources. We have included the expenses, which in certain cases represent estimates, related to such activity on a separate line item in our consolidated statements. A significant amount of transformational and restructuring activities were related to our anesthesiology services medical group, which was divested in May 2020, and to a lesser extent our radiology services medical group, which was divested in December 2020. Beginning in April 2020, we reduced the scope of our transformation and restructuring related initiatives unless they were initiatives that provided essential support for our response to COVID-19
or were critical to our continuing operations. Various expenses related to our executive management and board restructuring in 2020 were recorded as transformation and restructuring related expenses during the third and fourth quarters of 2020.
Common Stock Repurchase Programs
In July 2013, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of shares of our common stock up to an amount sufficient to offset the dilutive impact from the issuance of shares under our equity compensation programs. The share repurchase program allows us to make open market purchases from time-to-time
based on general economic and market conditions and trading restrictions. The repurchase program also allows for the repurchase of shares of our common stock to offset the dilutive impact from the issuance of shares, if any, related to our acquisition program. We did not repurchase any shares under this program during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
In August 2018, we announced that our Board of Directors had authorized the repurchase of up to $500.0 million of shares of our common stock in addition to our existing share repurchase program, of which $107.2 million remained available as of January 1, 2020. Under this share repurchase program, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased 0.5 million shares of our common stock for $8.5 million to satisfy minimum statutory withholding obligations in connection with the vesting of restricted stock. As of December 31, 2020, $98.7 million remained available under this share repurchase program.
We may utilize various methods to effect any future share repurchases, including, among others, open market purchases and accelerated share repurchase programs.
General Economic Conditions and Other Factors
Our operations and performance depend significantly on economic conditions. Economic conditions in the United States (“U.S.”) have deteriorated, primarily as a result of COVID-19,
and patient volumes have declined. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the percentage of our patient service revenue being reimbursed under government-sponsored healthcare programs (“GHC Programs”) increased as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was more pronounced during the three months ended December 31, 2020. We could experience additional shifts toward GHC Programs if continued changes occur in economic behaviors or population demographics within geographic locations in which we provide services, including an increase in unemployment and underemployment as well as losses of commercial health insurance. Payments received from GHC Programs are substantially less for equivalent services than payments received from commercial insurance payors. In addition, due to the rising costs of managed care premiums and patient responsibility amounts, we may experience lower net revenue resulting from increased bad debt due to patients’ inability to pay for certain services. See Item 1A. Risk Factors, in this Form 10-K
for additional discussion on the general economic conditions in the United States and recent developments in the healthcare industry that could affect our business.
Healthcare Reform
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (the “ACA”) contains a number of provisions that have affected us and, absent amendment or repeal, may continue to affect us over the next several years. These provisions include the establishment of health insurance exchanges to facilitate the purchase of qualified health plans, expanded Medicaid eligibility, subsidized insurance premiums and additional requirements and incentives for businesses to provide healthcare benefits. Other provisions have expanded the scope and reach of the Federal Civil False Claims Act and other healthcare fraud and abuse laws. Moreover, we could be affected by potential changes to various aspects of the ACA, including changes to subsidies, healthcare insurance marketplaces and Medicaid expansion.
Despite the ACA going into effect over a decade ago, continuous legal and Congressional challenges to the law’s provisions and persisting uncertainty with respect to the scope and effect of certain provisions have made compliance costly. In 2017, Congress unsuccessfully sought to replace substantial parts of the ACA with different mechanisms for facilitating insurance coverage in the commercial and Medicaid markets. Congress may again attempt to enact substantial or target changes to the ACA in the future. Additionally, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”) has administratively revised a number of provisions and may seek to advance additional significant changes through regulation, guidance and enforcement in the future.
At the end of 2017, Congress repealed the part of the ACA that required most individuals to purchase and maintain health insurance or face a tax penalty, known as the individual mandate. In light of these changes, in December 2018, a federal district court in Texas declared that key portions of the ACA were inconsistent with the U.S. Constitution and that the entire ACA is invalid as a result. Several states appealed this decision, and in December 2019, a federal court of appeals upheld the district court’s conclusion that part of the ACA is unconstitutional but remanded for further evaluation whether in light of this defect the entire ACA must be invalidated. Democratic attorneys general and the House appealed the Fifth Circuit’s decision to the Supreme Court. On March 2, 2020, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case, styled California v. Texas
, during the 2020-21
term. Oral arguments took place on November 2, 2020 and while the Court has yet to issue its opinion, it is predicted that the Supreme Court will find that even if the individual mandate is struck down, that the rest of the ACA can continue. Nevertheless, we cannot say for certain what the Supreme Court’s decision will be or what impact, if any, it may have on our business. Changes resulting from these proceedings could have a material impact on our business. In the meantime, it also is possible that as a result of these actions, enrollment in healthcare exchanges could decline.
In late 2020 and early 2021, the results of the federal and state elections have changed which persons and parties occupy the Office of the President of the United States and control both chambers of Congress and many states’ governors and legislatures. The new Administration may propose sweeping changes to the U.S. healthcare system, including expanding government-funded health insurance options and replacing current healthcare financing mechanisms with systems that would be entirely administered by the federal government. Any legislative or administrative change to the current healthcare financing system could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and the trading price of our securities.
In addition to the potential impacts to the ACA, there could be changes to other GHC Programs, such as a change to the structure of Medicaid. Congress and the Administration have sought to convert Medicaid into a block grant or to institute per capita spending caps, among other things. These changes, if implemented, could eliminate the guarantee that everyone who is eligible and applies for benefits would receive them and could potentially give states new authority to restrict eligibility, cut benefits and make it more difficult for people to enroll. Additionally, several states are considering and pursuing changes to their Medicaid programs, such as requiring recipients to engage in employment or education activities as a condition of eligibility for most adults, disenrolling recipients for failure to pay a premium, or adjusting premium amounts based on income. Many states have recently shifted a majority or all of their Medicaid program beneficiaries into Managed Medicaid Plans. Managed Medicaid Plans have some flexibility to set rates for providers, but many states require minimum provider rates in their contracts with such plans. In July of each year, CMS releases the annual Medicaid Managed Care Rate Development Guide which provides federal baseline rules for setting reimbursement rates in managed care plans. We could be affected by lower reimbursement rates in some of all of the Managed Medicaid Plans with which we participate. We could also be materially impacted if we are dropped from the provider network in one or more of the Managed Medicaid Plans with which we currently participate. In Florida, more than 75% of the Medicaid population participates in a Managed Medicaid Plan, with even higher participation rates for children.
We cannot predict with any assurance the ultimate effect of these laws and resulting changes to payments under GHC Programs, nor can we provide any assurance that they will not have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and the trading price of our securities. Further, any fiscal tightening impacting GHC Programs or changes to the structure of any GHC Programs could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and the trading price of our securities.
The Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act
The Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (“MACRA”) requires Medicare providers to choose to participate in one of two payment formulas, Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (“MIPS”) or Alternative
Payment Models (“APMs”). Beginning in 2020, MIPS allowed eligible physicians to receive incentive payments based on the achievement of certain quality and cost metrics, among other measures, and be reduced for those who are underperforming against those same metrics and measures. As an alternative, physicians can choose to participate in an advanced APM, and physicians who are meaningful participants in APMs will receive bonus payments from Medicare pursuant to the law. MACRA also remains subject to review and potential modification by Congress, as well as shifting regulatory requirements established by CMS. We currently anticipate that our affiliated physicians who are eligible to participate in the MIPS program will continue to be eligible to receive MIPS bonus payments, although the amounts of such bonus payments are not expected to be material. We will continue to operationalize the provisions of MACRA and assess any further changes to the law or additional regulations enacted pursuant to the law.
We cannot predict the ultimate effect that these changes will have on us, nor can we provide any assurance that its provisions will not have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and the trading price of our securities.
Medicaid Expansion
The ACA also allows states to expand their Medicaid programs through federal payments that fund most of the cost of increasing the Medicaid eligibility income limit from a state’s historic eligibility levels to 133% of the federal poverty level. To date, 38 states and the District of Columbia have expanded Medicaid eligibility to cover this additional low-income
patient population, and other states are considering expansion. All of the states in which we operate, however, already cover children in the first year of life and pregnant women if their household income is at or below 133% of the federal poverty level.
“Surprise” Billing Legislation
In late 2020, Congress enacted legislation intended to protect patients from “surprise” medical bills when services are furnished by providers who are not subject to contractual arrangements and payment limitations with the patient’s insurer. Effective January 1, 2022, patients will be protected from unexpected or “surprise” medical bills that could arise from out-of-network
emergency care provided at an out-of-network
facility or at in-network
facilities by out-of-network
providers and out-of-network
nonemergency care provided at in-network
facilities without the patient’s informed consent. Many states have passed similar legislation, but the federal government has been working to enact a ban on surprise billing for quite some time.
Under the “No Surprises Act,” patients are only required to pay the in-network
cost-sharing amount, which will be determined through an established formula and will count toward the patient’s health plan deductible and out-of-pocket
cost-sharing limits. Providers will generally not be permitted to balance bill patients beyond this cost-sharing amount. An out-of-network
provider will only be permitted to bill a patient more than the in-network
cost-sharing amount for care if the provider gives the patient notice of the provider’s network status and delivers to the patient or their health plan an estimate of charges within certain specified timeframes, and obtains the patient’s written consent prior to the delivery of care. Providers that violate these surprise billing prohibitions may be subject to state enforcement action or federal civil monetary penalties.
These measures could limit the amount we can charge and recover for services we furnish where we have not contracted with the patient’s insurer, and therefore could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and the trading price of our securities. Moreover, these measures could affect our ability to contract with certain payors and under historically similar terms and may cause, and the prospect of these changes may have caused, payors to terminate their contracts with us and our affiliated practices, further affecting our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and the trading price of our securities. Should any relationships with payors continue on an out-of-network
basis, the No Surprises Act requires that rate disputes be resolved through binding arbitration, in which both the payor and provider submit a requested rate and the arbitrator selects one submission without hearing or modification of the selected request. These unpredictable results will bind both the provider and payor for a 90-day
period.
Medicare Sequestration
The Budget Control Act of 2011, as amended by the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012, required across-the-board
cuts (“sequestrations”) to Medicare reimbursement rates. These annual reductions of 2%, on average, apply to mandatory and discretionary spending through 2025. Unless Congress acts in the future to modify these sequestrations, Medicare reimbursements will be reduced by 2%, on average, annually. In connection with the CARES Act, the Medicare sequestrations were suspended beginning on May 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020. Aside from the suspension, the reduction in Medicare reimbursement rates is not expected to have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or the trading price of our securities as the services we provide that are reimbursed under Medicare programs are not material.
Geographic Coverage
During 2020, 2019, and 2018, approximately 62%, 52% and 59%, respectively, of our net revenue from continuing operations was generated by operations in our five largest states. During 2020, 2019 and 2018, our five largest states consisted of Texas, Florida, Georgia, California, and Washington. During 2020, 2019 and 2018, our operations in Texas accounted for approximately 29%, 28% and 28%, respectively, of our net revenue.
Payor Mix
We bill payors for professional services provided by our affiliated physicians to our patients based upon rates for specific services provided. Our billed charges are substantially the same for all parties in a particular geographic area regardless of the party responsible for paying the bill for our services. We determine our net revenue based upon the difference between our gross fees for services and our estimated ultimate collections from payors. Net revenue differs from gross fees due to (i) managed care payments at contracted rates, (ii) GHC Program reimbursements at government-established rates, (iii) various reimbursement plans and negotiated reimbursements from other third-parties, and (iv) discounted and uncollectible accounts of private-pay
patients.
Our payor mix is composed of contracted managed care, government, principally Medicare and Medicaid, other third-parties and private-pay
patients. We benefit from the fact that most of the medical services provided in the NICU are classified as emergency services, a category typically classified as a covered service by managed care payors.
The following is a summary of our payor mix, expressed as a percentage of net revenue from continuing operations, exclusive of administrative fees and miscellaneous revenue, for the periods indicated:
The payor mix shown in the table above is not necessarily representative of the amount of services provided to patients covered under these plans. For example, the gross amount billed to patients covered under GHC Programs for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 represented approximately 57% of our total gross patient service revenue. These percentages of gross revenue and the percentages of net revenue provided in the table above include the payor mix impact of acquisitions completed through December 31, 2020.
Quarterly Results
We have historically experienced and expect to continue to experience quarterly fluctuations in net revenue and net income. These fluctuations are primarily due to the following factors:
•
There are fewer calendar days in the first and second quarters of the year, as compared to the third and fourth quarters of the year. Because we provide services in NICUs on a 24-hours-a-day
basis, 365 days a year, any reduction in service days will have a corresponding reduction in net revenue.
•
The majority of physician services provided by our office-based practices consist of office visits and scheduled procedures that occur during business hours. As a result, volumes at those practices fluctuate based on the number of business days in each calendar quarter.
•
A significant number of our employees and our associated professional contractors, primarily physicians, exceed the level of taxable wages for social security during the first and second quarters of the year. As a result, we incur a significantly higher payroll tax burden and our net income is lower during those quarters.
We have significant fixed operating costs, including physician compensation, and, as a result, are highly dependent on patient volume and capacity utilization of our affiliated professional contractors to sustain profitability. Additionally, quarterly results may be affected by the timing of acquisitions and fluctuations in patient volume. As a result, the operating results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for any future period or for the full year. Our unaudited quarterly results are presented in further detail in Note 20 to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) requires estimates and assumptions that affect the reporting of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements provides a summary of our significant accounting policies, which are all in accordance with GAAP. Certain of our accounting policies are critical to understanding our Consolidated Financial Statements because their application requires management to make assumptions about future results and depends to a large extent on management’s judgment, because past results have fluctuated and are expected to continue to do so in the future.
We believe that the application of the accounting policies described in the following paragraphs is highly dependent on critical estimates and assumptions that are inherently uncertain and highly susceptible to change. For all of these policies, we caution that future events rarely develop exactly as estimated, and the best estimates routinely require adjustment. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions, including those discussed below.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize patient service revenue at the time services are provided by our affiliated physicians. Our performance obligations relate to the delivery of services to patients and are satisfied at the time of service. Accordingly, there are no performance obligations that are unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied at the end of the reporting period with respect to patient service revenue. Almost all of our patient service revenue is reimbursed by GHC Programs and third-party insurance payors. Payments for services rendered to our patients are generally less than billed charges. We monitor our revenue and receivables from these sources and record an estimated contractual allowance to properly account for the anticipated differences between billed and reimbursed amounts.
Accordingly, patient service revenue is presented net of an estimated provision for contractual adjustments and uncollectibles. Management estimates allowances for contractual adjustments and uncollectibles on accounts receivable based upon historical experience and other factors, including days sales outstanding (“DSO”) for
accounts receivable, evaluation of expected adjustments and delinquency rates, past adjustments and collection experience in relation to amounts billed, an aging of accounts receivable, current contract and reimbursement terms, changes in payor mix and other relevant information. Collection of patient service revenue we expect to receive is normally a function of providing complete and correct billing information to the GHC Programs and third-party insurance payors within the various filing deadlines and typically occurs within 30 to 60 days of billing. Contractual adjustments result from the difference between the physician rates for services performed and the reimbursements by GHC Programs and third-party insurance payors for such services. The evaluation of these historical and other factors involves complex, subjective judgments. On a routine basis, we compare our cash collections to recorded net patient service revenue and evaluate our historical allowance for contractual adjustments and uncollectibles based upon the ultimate resolution of the accounts receivable balance. These procedures are completed regularly in order to monitor our process of establishing appropriate reserves for contractual adjustments. We have not recorded any material adjustments to prior period contractual adjustments and uncollectibles in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, or 2018.
Some of our agreements require hospitals to pay us administrative fees. Some agreements provide for fees if the hospital does not generate sufficient patient volume in order to guarantee that we receive a specified minimum revenue level. We also receive fees from hospitals for administrative services performed by our affiliated physicians providing medical director or other services at the hospital.
DSO is one of the key factors that we use to evaluate the condition of our accounts receivable and the related allowances for contractual adjustments and uncollectibles. DSO reflects the timeliness of cash collections on billed revenue and the level of reserves on outstanding accounts receivable. Any significant change in our DSO results in additional analyses of outstanding accounts receivable and the associated reserves. We calculate our DSO using a three-month rolling average of net revenue. Our net revenue, net income and operating cash flows may be materially and adversely affected if actual adjustments and uncollectibles exceed management’s estimated provisions as a result of changes in these factors. As of December 31, 2020, our DSO was 52.3 days. We had approximately $1.03 billion in gross accounts receivable for continuing operations outstanding at December 31, 2020, and considering this outstanding balance, based on our historical experience, a reasonably likely change of 0.5% to 1.50% in our estimated collection rate would result in an impact to net revenue of $4.9 million to $14.7 million. The impact of this change does not include adjustments that may be required as a result of audits, inquiries and investigations from government authorities and agencies and other third-party payors that may occur in the ordinary course of business. See Note 19 to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K.
Professional Liability Coverage
We maintain professional liability insurance policies with third-party insurers generally on a claims-made basis, subject to self-insured retention, exclusions and other restrictions. Our self-insured retention under our professional liability insurance program is maintained primarily through a wholly owned captive insurance subsidiary. We record liabilities for self-insured amounts and claims incurred but not reported based on an actuarial valuation using historical loss information, claim emergence patterns and various actuarial assumptions. Liabilities for claims incurred but not reported are not discounted. The average lag period from the date a claim is reported to the date it reaches final settlement is approximately four years, although the facts and circumstances of individual claims could result in lag periods that vary from this average. Our actuarial assumptions incorporate multiple complex methodologies to determine the best liability estimate for claims incurred but not reported and the future development of known claims, including methodologies that focus on industry trends, paid loss development, reported loss development and industry-based expected pure premiums. The most significant assumptions used in the estimation process include the use of loss development factors to determine the future emergence of claim liabilities, the use of frequency and trend factors to estimate the impact of economic, judicial and social changes affecting claim costs, and assumptions regarding legal and other costs associated with the ultimate settlement of claims. The key assumptions used in our actuarial valuations are subject to constant adjustments as a result of changes in our actual loss history and the movement of projected emergence patterns as
claims develop. We evaluate the need for professional liability insurance reserves in excess of amounts estimated in our actuarial valuations on a routine basis, and as of December 31, 2020, based on our historical experience for continuing operations, a reasonably likely change of 2% to 6% in our estimates would result in an increase or decrease to net income of $1.2 million to $4.3 million. However, because many factors can affect historical and future loss patterns, the determination of an appropriate professional liability reserve involves complex, subjective judgment, and actual results may vary significantly from estimates.
Goodwill
We record acquired assets, including identifiable intangible assets and liabilities at their respective fair values, recording to goodwill the excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired. We test goodwill for impairment at a reporting unit level on an annual basis, and more frequently if impairment indicators exist. We may elect to perform a qualitative assessment, focused on various factors including macroeconomic conditions, market trends, specific reporting unit financial performance and other entity specific events, to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of our single reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, including goodwill. We may also bypass the qualitative assessment and perform a quantitative test. The quantitative test focuses on income and market-based valuation approaches to determine the fair value of reporting units. These approaches focus on various significant assumptions, including the weighted average cost of capital discount factor, revenue growth rates and market multiples for revenue and earnings before interest, taxes and depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”). We consider the economic outlook for the healthcare services industry and various other factors during both the qualitative and quantitative testing process, including hospital and physician contract changes, local market developments, changes in third-party payor payments, and other publicly available information.
Other Matters
Other significant accounting policies, not involving the same level of measurement uncertainties as those discussed above, are nevertheless important to an understanding of our Consolidated Financial Statements. For example, our Consolidated Financial Statements are presented on a consolidated basis with our affiliated professional contractors because we or one of our subsidiaries have entered into management agreements with our affiliated professional contractors meeting the “controlling financial interest” criteria set forth in accounting guidance for consolidations. Our management agreements are further described in Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K.
The policies described in Note 3 often require difficult judgments on complex matters that are often subject to multiple sources of authoritative guidance and are frequently reexamined by accounting standards setters and regulators. See “New Accounting Pronouncements” below for matters that may affect our accounting policies in the future.
Non-GAAP
Measures
In our analysis of our results of operations, we use certain non-GAAP
financial measures. We have incurred certain expenses related to transformational and restructuring related expenses that are expected to be project-based and periodic in nature. Accordingly, beginning with the first quarter of 2019, we began reporting Adjusted earnings before interest, taxes and depreciation and amortization from continuing operations, defined as income (loss) from continuing operations before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, and transformational and restructuring related expenses. Adjusted earnings per share (“Adjusted EPS”) from continuing operations has also been further adjusted for these items and beginning with the first quarter of 2019 consists of diluted income (loss) from continuing operations per common and common equivalent share adjusted for amortization expense, stock-based compensation expense and transformational and restructuring related expenses. Adjusted EPS from continuing operations has been further adjusted to reflect the impacts from discrete tax events.
We believe these measures, in addition to income (loss) from continuing operations, net income (loss) and diluted net income (loss) from continuing operations per common and common equivalent share, provide
investors with useful supplemental information to compare and understand our underlying business trends and performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis. These measures should be considered a supplement to, and not a substitute for, financial performance measures determined in accordance with GAAP. In addition, since these non-GAAP
measures are not determined in accordance with GAAP, they are susceptible to varying calculations and may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies
For a reconciliation of each of Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations and Adjusted EPS from continuing operations to the most directly comparable GAAP measures for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, refer to the tables below (in thousands, except per share data).
(1) The statutory tax rate of 25% was used to calculate the tax effects of the adjustments for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain information related to our continuing operations expressed as a percentage of our net revenue:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 as Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Our net revenue attributable to continuing operations was $1.73 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1.78 billion for 2019. The decrease in revenue of $45.8 million, or 2.6%, was primarily attributable to the unfavorable impacts from COVID-19
on same-unit revenue, driven by declines in volume, partially offset by an increase in revenue from net acquisitions. Same units are those units at which we provided services for the entire current period and the entire comparable period. Same-unit net revenue declined by $66.6 million, or 3.8%. The decline in same-unit net revenue was comprised of a decrease of $89.0 million, or 5.1%, related to patient service volumes, partially offset by a net increase of $22.4 million, or 1.3%, from net reimbursement-related factors. The decrease in revenue from patient service volumes was primarily related to a decline across all our services, primarily as a result of COVID-19.
The net increase in revenue related to net reimbursement-related factors was primarily due to approximately $22.0 million in CARES Act relief, an increase in administrative fees received from our hospital partners and modest improvements in managed care contracting.
Practice salaries and benefits attributable to continuing operations increased $13.2 million, or 1.1%, to $1.19 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1.18 billion for 2019. The increase was comprised of $13.2 million from salaries and a net nominal change in benefits and incentive compensation, primarily reflecting increases in malpractice expense almost entirely offset by decreases in incentive compensation expense. We anticipate that we will experience a higher rate of growth in clinician compensation expense at our existing units over historic averages, which could adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and the trading price of our securities.
Practice supplies and other operating expenses attributable to continuing operations decreased $5.2 million, or 5.4%, to $90.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $95.9 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreases in other practice operating expenses as compared to the prior year, primarily related to decreased activity across many expense categories such as travel, office expenses and professional services resulting from impacts of COVID-19,
partially offset by increases in supplies and other operating expenses related to acquisitions.
General and administrative expenses attributable to continuing operations primarily include all billing and collection functions and all other salaries, benefits, supplies and operating expenses not specifically identifiable to the day-to-day
operations of our physician practices and services. General and administrative expenses were $248.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $244.5 million for 2019. The increase of $4.4 million is primarily related to legal and professional services fees, partially offset by decreases in compensation from net staffing reductions primarily resulting from cost mitigation for COVID-19.
General and administrative expenses as a percentage of net revenue was 14.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 13.7% for 2019. Certain general and administrative expenses related to corporate overhead represent various support services provided across the company, including approximately $18 million in costs related to support for the anesthesiology services medical group divested in May 2020 through a transition services agreement and to a much lesser extent the recently divested radiology services medical group. Because a portion of such expenses were previously allocated to but not specifically identifiable to the anesthesiology services medical group, they are required to be presented as continuing operations. Therefore, general and administrative expenses do not reflect potential general and administrative cost savings that may be achieved in future periods.
Transformational and restructuring related expenses attributable to continuing operations were $73.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $60.9 million for 2019. Approximately $33.6 million of the expenses incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 were for external consulting costs for various process improvement and restructuring initiatives and approximately $31.9 million were for compensation-related expenses resulting from the restructuring changes in executive management and the board of directors, with the remainder for position eliminations and contract termination and other fees. Beginning in April 2020, we reduced the scope of our transformation and restructuring related initiatives unless they were initiatives critical to our business operations or those that provide essential support for our response to COVID-19.
Various activities related to executive management and board of directors restructuring were recorded as transformational and restructuring related expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Depreciation and amortization expense attributable to continuing operations was $28.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $25.9 million for 2019. The increase is primarily related to the amortization of intangible assets related to acquisitions.
Income from operations attributable to continuing operations decreased $73.7 million, or 42.9%, to $98.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $171.8 million for 2019. Our operating margin was 5.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 9.7% for the same period in 2019. The decrease in our operating margin was primarily due to a decrease in revenue related to COVID-19
and increases in transformation and restructuring related expenses and practice salaries and benefits. Excluding transformation and restructuring expenses, our income from operations attributable to continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $171.9 million and $232.7 million, respectively, and our operating margin was 9.9% and 13.1%, respectively. We believe excluding the impacts from the transformational and restructuring related activity provides a more comparable view of our operating income and operating margin from continuing operations; however, this comparison is affected by the unfavorable impacts from COVID-19
during 2020.
Total non-operating
expenses attributable to continuing operations were $91.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $113.0 million for 2019. The decrease in non-operating
expenses was primarily related to an increase in other income related to the transition services being provided to the buyers of our divested medical groups and a decrease in interest expense, primarily due to lower average borrowings under our Credit Agreement, partially offset by a decrease in equity earnings resulting from the impacts to the underlying joint venture from COVID-19
and the settlement of a litigation matter.
Our effective income tax rate attributable to continuing operations of 234.0% is not meaningful as calculated for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the decline in pre-tax
income, primarily due to the impacts from our transformational and restructuring related expenses and COVID-19.
Our effective income tax rate attributable to continuing operations was 28.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Loss from continuing operations was $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to income from continuing operations of $42.2 million for 2019. Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations was $219.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $264.5 million for 2019.
Diluted loss from continuing operations per common and common equivalent share was $0.11 on weighted average shares outstanding of 83.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to diluted income per common and common equivalent share of $0.50 on weighted average shares outstanding of 84.0 million for 2019. Adjusted EPS from continuing operations was $0.95 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1.40 for 2019.
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $786.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to loss from discontinued operations of $1.54 billion for 2019. Diluted loss from discontinued operations per common and common equivalent share was $9.44 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to a diluted loss from discontinued operations per common and common equivalent share of $18.33 for 2019.
Net loss was $796.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to a net loss of $1.50 billion for 2019. Diluted net loss per common and common equivalent share was $9.55 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $17.83 for 2019.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 as Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Our net revenue attributable to continuing operations was $1.78 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $1.72 billion for 2018. The increase in revenue of $56.7 million, or 3.3%, was primarily attributable to an increase in same-unit net revenue as well as an increase in revenue from net acquisitions. Same units are those units at which we provided services for the entire current period and the entire comparable period. Same-unit net revenue grew by $34.7 million, or 2.1%, in the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the same period in 2018. The increase in same-unit net revenue was comprised of a net increase of $26.5 million, or 1.6%, related to patient service volumes and a net increase of $8.2 million, or 0.5%, from net reimbursement-related factors. The increase in revenue from patient service volumes was primarily related to growth across almost all of our services, driven by growth in neonatology and other pediatric services, including newborn nursery. The net increase in revenue related to net reimbursement-related factors was primarily due to modest increases from managed care contracting and an increase in administrative fees received from our hospital partners.
Practice salaries and benefits attributable to continuing operations increased $55.1 million, or 4.9%, to $1.18 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $1.13 billion for 2018. This increase was primarily attributable to increased costs associated with physicians and other staff to support organic growth initiatives and growth at our existing units, as well as increases in malpractice expense due to unfavorable trends in claims experience. We anticipate that we will continue to experience a higher rate of growth in clinician compensation expense and malpractice expense at our existing units over historic averages, which could adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and the trading price of our securities.
Practice supplies and other operating expenses attributable to continuing operations increased $3.4 million, or 3.7%, to $95.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $92.5 million for 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in other practice operating expenses as compared to the prior year.
General and administrative expenses attributable to continuing operations primarily include all billing and collection functions and all other salaries, benefits, supplies and operating expenses not specifically related to the day-to-day
operations of our physician practices and services. General and administrative expenses were
$244.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $232.2 million for 2018. General and administrative expenses as a percentage of net revenue was 13.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to 13.5% for the same period in 2018.
Transformational and restructuring related expenses attributable to continuing operations were $60.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 of which $40.3 million was related to external consulting costs for various process improvement and restructuring initiatives, $17.6 million was related to severance benefits for eliminated positions and $3.0 million was associated with contract terminations and other such activities.
Depreciation and amortization expense attributable to continuing operations was $25.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $24.4 million for 2019. The increase is primarily related to the amortization of intangible assets related to acquisitions.
Income from operations attributable to continuing operations was $171.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to income from operations attributable to continuing operations of $248.4 million for 2018. Our operating margin was 9.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to 14.4% for 2018. The decrease in our operating margin was primarily due to higher operating expense growth, including transformation and restructuring expenses, combined with lower revenue growth. Excluding the transformation and restructuring expenses, our income from operations attributable to continuing operations was $232.7 million, and our operating margin was 13.1%. We believe excluding the impacts from the transformational and restructuring activity provides a more comparable view of our operating income and operating margin from continuing operations.
Net non-operating
expenses attributable to continuing operations were $113.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $82.2 million for 2018. The net increase of $30.8 million, or 37.5%, was primarily related to an increase in interest expense related to a higher average interest rate on our outstanding debt, driven by the incremental senior notes issuances in late 2018 and early 2019.
Our effective income tax rate attributable to continuing operations was 28.2% and 26.9% for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Income from continuing operations was $42.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to income from continuing operations of $121.5 million for 2018. Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations was $264.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $283.5 million for the same period in 2018.
Diluted income from continuing operations per common and common equivalent share was $0.50 on weighted average shares outstanding of 84.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to diluted income from continuing operations of $1.33 on weighted average shares outstanding of 91.6 million for 2018. Adjusted EPS from continuing operations was $1.40 for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $1.68 for 2018. The decrease of 7.6 million in our weighted average shares outstanding is primarily due to the impact of shares repurchased under a 2018 accelerated share repurchase program and through open market repurchase activity in 2018 and 2019.
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $1.54 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting the preliminary loss on the divestiture of MedData and a non-cash
goodwill impairment charge recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily related to the anesthesiology medical group, as compared to income from discontinued operations, net of tax, of $147.1 million for 2018. Diluted loss from discontinued operations per common and common equivalent share was $18.33 for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to diluted income from discontinued operations per common and common equivalent share of $1.60 for 2018.
Net loss was $1.50 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to net income of $268.6 million for 2018. Diluted net loss per common and common equivalent share was $17.83 for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to diluted net income per common and common equivalent share of $2.93 for 2018.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.12 billion of cash and cash equivalents attributable to continuing operations as compared to $107.9 million at December 31, 2019. Additionally, we had working capital attributable to continuing operations of $1.11 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $894.4 million from our working capital from continuing operations of $210.7 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in cash and working capital relates primarily to the net proceeds of $865.0 million received in December 2020 from the divestiture of the radiology services medical group, of which approximately $764.0 million was used to redeem our 2023 Notes in January 2021.
Cash Flows
Cash provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities from continuing operations is summarized as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities
We generated cash flow from operating activities for continuing operations of $153.9 million, $74.1 million and $59.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The net increase in cash flow provided of $79.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to an increase in cash flow from deferred income taxes and income taxes payable as well as accounts receivable, partially offset by a decrease in cash from lower earnings and changes in prepaid expenses and other assets.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash flow from accounts receivable for continuing operations was $37.9 million, as compared to $6.5 million for the same period in 2019. The increase in cash flow from accounts receivable for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to decreases in ending accounts receivable balances at existing units due to timing of cash collections.
DSO is one of the key factors that we use to evaluate the condition of our accounts receivable and the related allowances for contractual adjustments and uncollectibles. DSO reflects the timeliness of cash collections on billed revenue and the level of reserves on outstanding accounts receivable. Our DSO for continuing operations was 52.3 days at December 31, 2020 as compared to 51.0 days at December 31, 2019.
Our cash flow from operating activities is significantly affected by the payment of physician incentive compensation. A large majority of our affiliated physicians participate in our performance-based incentive compensation program and almost all of the payments due under the program are made annually in the first quarter. As a result, we typically experience negative cash flow from operations in the first quarter of each year and fund our operations during this period with cash on hand or funds borrowed under our Credit Agreement. In addition, during the first quarter of each year, we use cash to make any discretionary matching contributions for participants in our qualified contributory savings plans.
We generated cash flow from operating activities for continuing operations of $74.1 million and $59.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The net increase in cash flow was primarily related to increases in cash flow from accounts receivable and a combination of favorable impacts from lower tax payments in 2019 and a decrease in cash flow in 2018 for tax payments made in the first quarter of 2018 for 2017 taxes that were deferred by the Internal Revenue Service for companies impacted by the 2017 hurricanes. Cash flow from operating activities in 2019 was also impacted by cash payments made for transformation and restructuring related expenses. Cash flow for the year ended December 31, 2018 was impacted by a decrease in cash flow from income taxes payable resulting from tax payments made in the first quarter of 2018 for 2017 taxes that were deferred by the Internal Revenue Service for companies impacted by the 2017 hurricanes, as well as a net decrease in cash flow related to accounts receivable, partially offset by an increase in cash flow related to changes in deferred taxes.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash used in investing activities for continuing operations of $58.3 million consisted primarily of capital expenditures of $28.8 million and net purchases of investments of $28.4 million.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash used in financing activities for continuing operations of $2.9 million primarily consisted of the repurchase of $8.5 million of our common stock and payments of $1.2 million for capital leases, partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $7.0 million.
Liquidity
On March 25, 2020, we amended and restated our Credit Agreement to, among other things, (i) establish a deemed Consolidated EBITDA of $139.2 million for the second and third quarters of 2020, reflecting average Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations for the prior eight quarters (calculated for purposes of the Credit Agreement), which will be used in the calculation of rolling four consecutive quarter Consolidated EBITDA under the Credit Agreement, (ii) temporarily increase the maximum consolidated net leverage ratio required to be maintained by us from 4.50:1:00 to 5.00:1:00 for the second and third quarters of 2020 and 4.75:1:00 for the fourth quarter of 2020, before returning to 4.50:1:00 for the first quarter of 2021 and beyond, (iii) require that we maintain minimum availability under the Credit Agreement of $300.0 million through the third quarter of 2021, (iv) provide for a weekly repayment of borrowings under the Credit Agreement through the second quarter of 2021 using unrestricted cash on hand in excess of $300.0 million, plus a reserve for certain payables, and (v) temporarily restrict our ability to make restricted payments under the Credit Agreement for the remainder of 2020, subject to certain exceptions.
The Credit Agreement provides for a $1.2 billion unsecured revolving credit facility, subject to the limitations discussed above, and includes a $37.5 million sub-facility
for the issuance of letters of credit. The Credit Agreement matures on March 28, 2024 and is guaranteed by substantially all of our subsidiaries and affiliated professional associations and corporations. At our option, borrowings under the Credit Agreement will bear interest at (i) the alternate base rate (defined as the higher of (a) the prime rate, (b) the Federal Funds Rate plus 1/2 of 1.00% and (c) LIBOR for an interest period of one month plus 1.00%) plus an applicable margin rate ranging from 0.125% to 0.750% based on our consolidated leverage ratio or (ii) the LIBOR rate plus an applicable margin rate ranging from 1.125% to 1.750% based on our consolidated leverage ratio. The Credit Agreement also calls for other customary fees and charges, including an unused commitment fee ranging from 0.150% to 0.200% of the unused lending commitments, based on our consolidated leverage ratio. The Credit Agreement contains customary covenants and restrictions, including covenants that require us to maintain a minimum interest charge ratio, not to exceed a specified consolidated leverage ratio and to comply with laws,
and restrictions on the ability to pay dividends and make certain other distributions, as specified therein. Failure to comply with these covenants would constitute an event of default under the Credit Agreement, notwithstanding the ability of the company to meet its debt service obligations. The Credit Agreement also includes various customary remedies for the lenders following an event of default, including the acceleration of repayment of outstanding amounts under the Credit Agreement.
At December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding principal balance on our Credit Agreement. We had outstanding letters of credit of $0.1 million which reduced the amount available on our Credit Agreement to $899.9 million at December 31, 2020, after giving effect to the temporary reduction of the capacity of our Credit Agreement described above through September 30, 2021.
At December 31, 2020, we had an outstanding principal balance of $750.0 million on our 5.25% senior unsecured notes due 2023 (the “2023 Notes”) and an outstanding principal balance of $1.0 billion on our 6.25% senior unsecured notes due 2027 (the “2027 Notes”). On January 7, 2021, we redeemed the outstanding principal balance of $750.0 million on our 2023 Notes. Our obligations under the 2023 Notes were, and the 2027 Notes are, guaranteed on an unsecured senior basis by the same subsidiaries and affiliated professional contractors that guarantee our Credit Agreement. Interest on the 2023 Notes accrued at the rate of 5.25% per annum, or $39.4 million, and was payable semi-annually in arrears on June 1 and December 1. Interest on the 2027 Notes accrues at the rate of 6.25% per annum, or $62.5 million, and is payable semi-annually in arrears on January 15 and July 15.
The indenture under which the 2027 Notes are issued, among other things, limits our ability to (1) incur liens and (2) enter into sale and lease-back transactions, and also limits our ability to merge or dispose of all or substantially all of our assets, in all cases, subject to a number of customary exceptions. Although we are not required to make mandatory redemption or sinking fund payments with respect to the 2027 Notes, upon the occurrence of a change in control of Mednax, we may be required to repurchase the 2027 Notes at a purchase price equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2027 Notes repurchased plus accrued and unpaid interest.
At December 31, 2020, we believe we were in compliance, in all material respects, with the financial covenants and other restrictions applicable to us under the Credit Agreement and the 2023 Notes and the 2027 Notes.
The exercise of employee stock options and the purchase of common stock by participants in our 1996 Non-Qualified
Employee Stock Purchase Plan, as amended (the “ESPP”), and our 2015 Non-Qualified
Stock Purchase Plan (the “SPP”) generated cash proceeds of $7.0 million, $11.3 million and $16.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Because stock option exercises and purchases under the ESPP and SPP are dependent on several factors, including the market price of our common stock, we cannot predict the timing and amount of any future proceeds.
We maintain professional liability insurance policies with third-party insurers, subject to self-insured retention, exclusions and other restrictions. We self-insure our liabilities to pay self-insured retention amounts under our professional liability insurance coverage through a wholly owned captive insurance subsidiary. We record liabilities for self-insured amounts and claims incurred but not reported based on an actuarial valuation using historical loss information, claim emergence patterns and various actuarial assumptions. Our total liability related to professional liability risks at December 31, 2020 was $315.9 million, of which $50.6 million is classified as a current liability within accounts payable and accrued expenses in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. In addition, there is a corresponding insurance receivable of $61.4 million recorded as a component of other assets for certain professional liability claims that are covered by insurance policies.
We anticipate that funds generated from operations, together with our current cash on hand and funds available under our Credit Agreement, will be sufficient to finance our working capital requirements, fund
anticipated acquisitions and capital expenditures, fund expenses related to our transformational and restructuring activities, fund our share repurchase programs and meet our contractual obligations as described below for at least the next 12 months from the date of issuance of this Form 10-K.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
At December 31, 2020, we had the following obligations and commitments (in thousands):
(1)
Amounts include interest payments at the applicable rate as of December 31, 2020 and assumed the amount outstanding under our 2023 Notes were paid on the early redemption date of January 7, 2021, including the early redemption premium, and the 2027 Notes will be paid on their maturity date of January 15, 2027.
At December 31, 2020, our total liability for uncertain tax positions was $7.2 million, all of which is included within other liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The timing and amount of future cash flows for each year beyond 2020 cannot be reasonably estimated. See Note 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K
for more information regarding our uncertain tax positions.
OFF-BALANCE
SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020 that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
In December 2019, accounting guidance related to income taxes was issued with the goal of enhancing and simplifying various aspects of the income tax accounting guidance, including requirements related to hybrid tax regimes, deferred taxes on step-up
in tax basis of goodwill obtained in a transaction that is not a business combination, separate financial statements of entities not subject to tax, the intraperiod tax allocation exception to the incremental approach, deferred tax liabilities on outside basis differences, and interim-period accounting for enacted changes in tax law and certain year-to-date
loss limitations. The guidance became effective for us on January 1, 2021. We do not believe the adoption of this guidance will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.