Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on our fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to our fiscal years ended January 31 and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years.
Overview
MongoDB is the leading modern, general purpose database platform. Our robust platform enables developers to build and modernize applications rapidly and cost-effectively across a broad range of use cases. Organizations can deploy our platform at scale in the cloud, on-premise, or in a hybrid environment. Software applications are redefining how organizations across industries engage with their customers, operate their businesses and compete with each other. A database is at the heart of every software application. As a result, selecting a database is a highly strategic decision that directly affects developer productivity, application performance and organizational competitiveness. Our platform addresses the performance, scalability, flexibility and reliability demands of modern applications, while maintaining the strengths of legacy databases. Our business model combines the developer mindshare and adoption benefits of open source with the economic benefits of a proprietary software subscription business model.
We generate revenue primarily from sales of subscriptions, which accounted for 96%, 95% and 93% of our total revenue for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
MongoDB Atlas is our hosted multi-cloud database-as-a-service (“DBaaS”) offering that includes comprehensive infrastructure and management, which we run and manage in the cloud. During the year ended January 31, 2021, MongoDB Atlas revenue represented 46% of our total revenue, as compared to 39% in the prior year, reflecting the continued growth of MongoDB Atlas since its introduction in June 2016. We have experienced strong growth in self-serve customers of MongoDB Atlas. These customers are charged monthly based on their usage. In addition, we have also seen growth in MongoDB Atlas customers sold by our sales force. These customers typically sign annual contracts and pay in advance or are invoiced monthly in arrears based on usage.
MongoDB Enterprise Advanced is our proprietary commercial database server offering for enterprise customers that can run in the cloud, on-premise or in a hybrid environment. MongoDB Enterprise Advanced revenue represented 44%, 50% and 60% of our subscription revenue for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We sell subscriptions directly through our field and inside sales teams, as well as indirectly through channel partners. The majority of our subscription contracts are one year in duration and are invoiced upfront. When we enter into multi-year subscriptions, we typically invoice the customer on an annual basis.
Many of our enterprise customers initially get to know our software by using Community Server, which is our free-to-download version of our database that includes the core functionality developers need to get started with MongoDB without all the features of our commercial platform. Our platform has been downloaded from our website more than 155 million times since February 2009 and over 65 million times in the last 12 months alone. We also offer a free tier of MongoDB Atlas, which provides access to our hosted database solution with limited processing power and storage, as well as certain operational limitations. As a result, with the availability of both Community Server and MongoDB Atlas free tier offerings, our direct sales prospects are often familiar with our platform and may have already built applications using our technology. A core component of our growth strategy for MongoDB Atlas and MongoDB Enterprise Advanced is to convert developers and their organizations who are already using Community Server or the free tier of MongoDB Atlas to become customers of our commercial products and enjoy the benefits of either a self-managed or hosted offering.
We also generate revenue from services, which consist primarily of fees associated with consulting and training services. Revenue from services accounted for 4%, 5% and 7% of our total revenue for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect to continue to invest in our services organization as we believe it plays an important role in accelerating our customers’ realization of the benefits of our platform, which helps drive customer retention and expansion.
We believe the market for our offerings is large and growing. We have experienced rapid growth and have made substantial investments in developing our platform and expanding our sales and marketing footprint. We intend to continue to invest heavily to grow our business to take advantage of our market opportunity rather than optimizing for profitability or cash flow in the near term.
Impact of the Ongoing COVID-19 Pandemic
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has continued to impact the U.S. and the world. As a result, authorities have implemented numerous measures to contain the virus, including travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and business limitations and shutdowns. Although some jurisdictions previously relaxed such restrictions, in many cases these restrictions have been or may in the future be re-instituted, and other jurisdictions are imposing restrictions for the first time. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to spread, it is highly uncertain to what extent and when restrictions will be lifted in various jurisdictions. The full extent of the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our future operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic; the public health measures taken by authorities and other entities to contain and treat COVID-19; the actions taken to effect a widespread roll-out of the available vaccines; and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and on our current and prospective customers, employees, vendors and other parties with whom we do business, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
We adopted several measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including temporarily requiring employees to work remotely, suspending non-essential travel by our employees, and replacing in-person marketing events (including our annual developer conference) with virtual events. We have informed our employees that they may continue to elect to work remotely until September 1, 2021, even if their office reopens.
While the broader implications of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations and overall financial performance remain uncertain, we currently expect our revenue to continue to be negatively impacted by the slowdown in activity associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and global uncertainty in the near term. In addition, we recorded a higher allowance for doubtful accounts during the year ended January 31, 2021 due to the potential adverse impact the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may have on factors that affect our estimate of current expected credit losses, including possible financial difficulties faced by a portion of our customers, in accordance with the recently adopted accounting standard for credit losses.
During the year ended January 31, 2021, we experienced a decrease in our travel costs due to global travel restrictions and stay-at-home or similar orders in effect as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We expect those lower travel costs to continue in the near-term. We have invested and intend to continue to invest a portion of these savings in additional marketing program spend and research and development headcount.
We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our business. For further discussion of the potential impacts of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operating results, and financial condition, see the section titled “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K. Other factors affecting our performance are discussed below, although we caution you that the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may also further impact these factors.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Extending Product Leadership and Maintaining Developer Mindshare
We are committed to delivering market-leading products to continue to build and maintain credibility with the global software developer community. We believe we must maintain our product leadership position and the strength of our brand to drive further revenue growth. For example, we introduced MongoDB Atlas in 2016, an important part of our run-anywhere solution, to capitalize on the existing demand for a managed version of our Community Server offering which many companies currently self-deploy and manage in the cloud. In 2017, we introduced cross-region replication for MongoDB Atlas, which helps ensure that an application remains operational even if an entire cloud region goes down, as well as allowing MongoDB customers to locate data closer to their users for performance or compliance reasons. During 2018, we expanded functionality available in MongoDB Atlas to support mission-critical enterprise workloads and we released MongoDB 4.0, which extended ACID support to multi-document transactions. Most recently, during 2020, we released MongoDB 4.4, which included significant updates to the query language to enhance analytics capabilities and to provide increased flexibility of data distribution in order to further improve resiliency and performance. In addition, we introduced a number of additional features and products within MongoDB Atlas including the general availability of MongoDB Atlas Search, which integrates full-text search capabilities with our operational database, reducing implementation complexity for developers and eliminating the need to maintain multiple technologies. We also announced the general availability of MongoDB Atlas Data Lake and MongoDB Atlas Online Archive, which allow customers to store data more cost effectively on our platform and make that data readily available to their applications running on MongoDB Atlas. Finally, we fully integrated Realm, the leading mobile application database we acquired in 2019, with MongoDB Atlas allowing developers to build highly performant mobile applications with seamless data synchronization. We intend to continue to invest in our
engineering capabilities and marketing activities to maintain our strong position in the developer community. We have spent $674.2 million on research and development since our inception. Our results of operations may fluctuate as we make these investments to drive increased customer adoption and usage.
Growing Our Customer Base and Expanding Our Global Reach
We are intensely focused on continuing to grow our customer base. We have invested and expect to continue to invest, heavily in our sales and marketing efforts and developer community outreach, which are critical to driving customer acquisition. As of January 31, 2021, we had over 24,800 customers across a wide range of industries and in over 100 countries, compared to over 17,000 customers and over 13,400 customers as of January 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. All affiliated entities are counted as a single customer.
Our customer count as of January 31, 2021 includes customers acquired from ObjectLabs Corporation (“mLab”) and Tightdb, Inc. (“Realm”), which acquisitions closed on November 1, 2018 and May 7, 2019, respectively. Our definition of “customer” excludes (1) users of our free offerings, (2) users acquired from mLab who spend $20 or less per month with us and (3) self-serve users acquired from Realm. The excluded mLab and Realm users collectively represent an immaterial portion of the revenue associated with users acquired from those acquisitions.
As of January 31, 2021, we had over 3,000 customers that were sold through our direct sales force and channel partners, as compared to over 2,000 and over 1,750 such customers as of January 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These customers, which we refer to as our Direct Sales Customers, accounted for 82%, 78% and 85% of our subscription revenue for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The percentage of our subscription revenue from Direct Sales Customers increased, in part, due to existing self-serve customers of MongoDB Atlas becoming Direct Sales Customers. We are also focused on increasing the number of overall MongoDB Atlas customers as we emphasize the on-demand scalability of MongoDB Atlas by allowing our customers to consume the product with minimal commitment. After launching in June 2016, we had over 23,300 MongoDB Atlas customers as of January 31, 2021. The growth in MongoDB Atlas customers included customers from mLab and Realm, as described above, as well as new customers to MongoDB and existing MongoDB Enterprise Advanced customers adding incremental MongoDB Atlas workloads.
In an effort to expand our global reach, in October 2019, we announced a partnership with Alibaba Cloud to offer an authorized MongoDB-as-a-service solution allowing customers of Alibaba Cloud to use this managed offering from their data centers globally. We expanded our reach in China in February 2021 when we announced the launch of a global partnership with Tencent Cloud that allows customers to easily adopt and use MongoDB-as-a-Service across Tencent’s global cloud infrastructure.
Increasing Adoption of MongoDB Atlas
MongoDB Atlas, our hosted multi-cloud offering, is an important part of our run-anywhere strategy. To accelerate adoption of this DBaaS offering, in 2017, we introduced tools to easily migrate existing users of our Community Server offering to MongoDB Atlas. We have also expanded our introductory offerings for MongoDB Atlas, including a free tier, which provides limited processing power and storage in order to drive usage and adoption of MongoDB Atlas among developers. Our MongoDB Atlas free tier offering is now available on all three major cloud providers (Amazon Web Services (“AWS”), Google Cloud Platform (“GCP”) and Microsoft Azure) in North America, Europe and Asia Pacific. In addition, MongoDB Atlas is available on AWS Marketplace, making it easier for AWS customers to buy and consume MongoDB Atlas. Our business partnership with GCP provides deeper product integration and unified billing for GCP customers who are also MongoDB Atlas customers and offers GCP customers a seamless integration between MongoDB Atlas and GCP. The availability of MongoDB Atlas on the Microsoft Azure Marketplace offers unified billing for joint customers of MongoDB Atlas and Microsoft and makes it easier for established Azure customers to purchase and use MongoDB Atlas. In addition, MongoDB is part of Microsoft’s strategic partner program.
We have also expanded the functionality available in MongoDB Atlas beyond that of our Community Server offering. We expect this will drive further adoption of MongoDB Atlas as companies migrate mission-critical applications to the public cloud. The enterprise capabilities that we have introduced to MongoDB Atlas include advanced security features, enterprise-standard authentication and database auditing. We have invested significantly in MongoDB Atlas and our ability to drive adoption of MongoDB Atlas is a key component of our growth strategy.
Retaining and Expanding Revenue from Existing Customers
The economic attractiveness of our subscription-based model is driven by customer renewals and increasing existing customer subscriptions over time, referred to as land-and-expand. We believe that there is a significant opportunity to drive additional sales to existing customers and expect to invest in sales and marketing and customer success personnel and activities to achieve additional revenue growth from existing customers. If an application grows and requires additional capacity, our customers increase their subscriptions to our platform. In addition, our customers expand their subscriptions to our platform as they migrate additional existing applications or build new applications, either within the same department or in other lines of business or geographies. Also, as customers modernize their information technology infrastructure and move to the cloud, they may migrate applications from legacy databases. Our goal is to increase the number of customers that standardize on our database within their organization. Over time, the subscription amount for our typical Direct Sales Customer has increased.
We calculate annualized recurring revenue (“ARR”) and annualized monthly recurring revenue (“MRR”) to help us measure our subscription revenue performance. ARR includes the revenue we expect to receive from our customers over the following 12 months based on contractual commitments and, in the case of Direct Sales Customers of MongoDB Atlas, by annualizing the prior 90 days of their actual consumption of MongoDB Atlas, assuming no increases or reductions in their subscriptions or usage. For all other customers of our self-serve products, we calculate annualized MRR by annualizing the prior 30 days of their actual consumption of such products, assuming no increases or reductions in usage. ARR and annualized MRR exclude professional services. The number of customers with $100,000 or greater in ARR and annualized MRR was 975, 751 and 557 as of January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Prior to January 31, 2020, ARR related to Direct Sales Customers of MongoDB Atlas was based on their contractual commitments, regardless of their actual consumption. To better reflect actual customer behavior, we modified our ARR calculation related to Direct Sales Customers of MongoDB Atlas to incorporate their prior 90 days of actual consumption. The impact of this change on prior reported periods is immaterial. Our ability to increase sales to existing customers will depend on a number of factors, including customers’ satisfaction or dissatisfaction with our products and services, competition, pricing, economic conditions or overall changes in our customers’ spending levels.
We also examine the rate at which our customers increase their spend with us, which we call net ARR expansion rate. We calculate net ARR expansion rate by dividing the ARR at the close of a given period (the “measurement period”), from customers who were also customers at the close of the same period in the prior year (the “base period”), by the ARR from all customers at the close of the base period, including those who churned or reduced their subscriptions. For Direct Sales Customers included in the base period, measurement period or both such periods that were self-serve customers in any such period, we also include annualized MRR from those customers in the calculation of the net ARR expansion rate. Our net ARR expansion rate has consistently been over 120%.
Our ability to increase sales to existing customers will depend on a number of factors, including customers’ satisfaction or dissatisfaction with our products and services, competition, pricing, economic conditions or overall changes in our customers’ spending levels.
Investing in Growth and Scaling Our Business
We are focused on our long-term revenue potential. We believe that our market opportunity is large and we will continue to invest significantly in scaling across all organizational functions in order to grow our operations both domestically and internationally. Any investments we make in our sales and marketing organization will occur in advance of experiencing the benefits from such investments, so it may be difficult for us to determine if we are efficiently allocating resources in those areas. We have increased our sales and marketing headcount to 1,171 employees as of January 31, 2021 from 789 employees and 466 employees as of January 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Subscription Revenue. Our subscription revenue is comprised of term licenses and hosted as-a-service solutions. Subscriptions to term licenses include technical support and access to new software versions on a when-and-if available basis. Revenue from our term licenses is recognized upfront for the license component and ratably for the technical support and when-and-if available update components. Revenue from term licenses is typically billed annually in advance. Revenue from our hosted as-a-service solutions is primarily generated on a usage basis and is billed either in arrears or paid up front. The majority of our subscription contracts are one year in duration and are invoiced upfront. Our subscription contracts are
generally non-cancelable and non-refundable. When we enter into multi-year subscriptions, we typically invoice the customer on an annual basis.
Services Revenue. Services revenue is comprised of consulting and training services and is recognized over the period of delivery of the applicable services. We recognize revenue from services agreements as services are delivered.
We expect our revenue may vary from period to period based on, among other things, the timing and size of new subscriptions, the proportion of term license contracts that commence within the period, the rate of customer renewals and expansions, delivery of professional services, the impact of significant transactions and seasonality of or fluctuations in usage for our consumption-based customers. Further, we currently expect our revenue to be negatively impacted by the slowdown in activity associated with the COVID-19 pandemic in fiscal 2022.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of Subscription Revenue. Cost of subscription revenue primarily includes personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses and benefits and stock-based compensation, for employees associated with our subscription arrangements principally related to technical support and allocated shared costs, as well as depreciation and amortization. Our cost of subscription revenue for our hosted as-a-service solutions also includes third-party cloud infrastructure expenses. We expect our cost of subscription revenue to increase in absolute dollars as our subscription revenue increases and, depending on the results of MongoDB Atlas, our cost of subscription revenue may increase as a percentage of subscription revenue as well.
Cost of Services Revenue. Cost of services revenue primarily includes personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses and benefits, and stock-based compensation, for employees associated with our professional service contracts, as well as, travel costs, allocated shared costs and depreciation and amortization. We expect our cost of services revenue to increase in absolute dollars as our services revenue increases.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross Profit. Gross profit represents revenue less cost of revenue.
Gross Margin. Gross margin, or gross profit as a percentage of revenue, has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, including the average sales price of our products and services, the mix of products sold, transaction volume growth and the mix of revenue between subscriptions and services. We expect our gross margin to fluctuate over time depending on the factors described above and, to the extent MongoDB Atlas revenue increases as a percentage of total revenue, our gross margin may decline as a result of the associated hosting costs of MongoDB Atlas.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of sales and marketing, research and development and general and administrative expenses. Personnel costs are the most significant component of each category of operating expenses. Operating expenses also include travel and related costs and allocated overhead costs for facilities, information technology and employee benefit costs.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, sales commission and benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation. These expenses also include costs related to marketing programs, travel-related expenses and allocated overhead. Marketing programs consist of advertising, events, corporate communications, and brand-building and developer-community activities. We expect our sales and marketing expense to increase in absolute dollars over time as we expand our sales force and increase our marketing resources, expand into new markets and further develop our self-serve and partner channels.
Research and Development. Research and development expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses and benefits, and stock-based compensation. It also includes amortization associated with intangible acquired assets and allocated overhead. We expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars, as we continue to invest in our platform and develop new products.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses and benefits, and stock-based compensation for administrative functions including finance, legal, human resources and external legal and accounting fees, as well as allocated overhead. We expect general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars over time as we continue to invest in the growth of our business and incur the costs of compliance associated with being a publicly traded company.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income, interest expense and gains and losses from foreign currency transactions.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of state income taxes in the United States and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. As of January 31, 2021, we had net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards for federal, state, Irish and U.K. income tax purposes of approximately $1.2 billion, $1.1 billion, $384.0 million and $22.1 million, respectively, which begin to expire in the year ending January 31, 2028 for federal purposes and January 31, 2021 for state purposes. Ireland, U.K. and the U.S. federal losses for the years after January 31, 2018 allows NOLs to be carried forward indefinitely. The deferred tax assets associated with the NOL carryforwards in each of these jurisdictions are subject to a full valuation allowance. Under Section 382 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (the “Code”), a corporation that experiences an “ownership change” is subject to a limitation on its ability to utilize its pre-change NOLs to offset future taxable income. The Company also has federal and state research credit carryforwards of $52.9 million and $4.1 million, respectively, which begin to expire in the year ending January 31, 2029 for federal purposes and January 31, 2025 for state purposes. Utilization of the federal NOL carryforwards and credits may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to the ownership change limitations provided by the Code, as amended and similar state provisions. The annual limitation, should the Company undergo an ownership change, may result in the expiration of federal or state net operating losses and credits before utilization, however the Company does not expect any such limitation to be material.
Highlights for the Years Ended January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
For the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our total revenue was $590.4 million, $421.7 million and $267.0 million, respectively. Our net loss was $266.9 million, $175.5 million and $99.0 million for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our operating cash flow was $(42.7) million, $(29.5) million and $(42.0) million for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our free cash flow was $(59.1) million, $(35.0) million and $(48.8) million for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See the section titled “Liquidity and Capital Resources-Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow” below.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented in dollars and as a percentage of our total revenue. Percentage of revenue figures are rounded and therefore may not subtotal exactly.
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows (in thousands):
Comparison of the Years Ended January 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Total revenue growth reflects increased demand for our platform and related services. Subscription revenue increased by $165.5 million primarily from additional sales to existing customers, which was estimated to have been $122.1 million. The remainder of the estimated $43.4 million increase in subscription revenue resulted from sales to new customers. The increase in services revenue was driven primarily by an increase in sales of professional services to new customers.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin Percentage
The increase in subscription cost of revenue was primarily due to a $31.5 million increase in third-party cloud infrastructure costs, including costs associated with the growth of MongoDB Atlas, as well as a $9.7 million increase in personnel costs and stock-based compensation associated with increased headcount in our support organization. The increase in services cost of revenue was primarily due to higher compensation costs from increased headcount in our services organization and higher expense associated with our China Stock Appreciation Rights Plan, partially offset by lower travel costs resulting from global travel restrictions and stay-at-home or similar orders in effect due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Total headcount in our support and services organizations increased 28% from January 31, 2020 to January 31, 2021.
Our overall gross margin remained flat. Our subscription gross margin declined due to the increase in subscription revenue from MongoDB Atlas as a percentage of our overall revenue. This change in revenue mix caused gross margin to decline due to the increase in third-party cloud infrastructure costs associated with MongoDB Atlas. In addition, our cost of revenue included higher personnel costs and stock-based compensation. Our services gross margin was impacted by higher compensation costs combined with lower utilization of our services personnel due to impacts of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and is subject to fluctuations as a result of timing of sales of standalone consulting and training services.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
The increase in sales and marketing expense included $88.0 million from higher personnel costs and stock-based compensation, driven by an increase in our sales and marketing headcount to 1,171 as of January 31, 2021 from 789 as of January 31, 2020, which includes non-quota-carrying hires in sales operations, customer success and marketing. In addition, we experienced increased payroll taxes associated with employee stock option exercises and restricted stock unit vesting as a result of our higher average stock price as compared to the prior year. Sales and marketing expense also increased $20.4 million from costs associated with our higher headcount, including higher commissions expense and higher facilities and computer hardware and software expenses. In addition, expenses increased $6.8 million due to higher spend on marketing programs. These increases were partially offset by lower travel costs resulting from global travel restrictions and stay-at-home or similar orders in effect due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Research and Development
The increase in research and development expense was primarily driven by a $63.0 million increase in personnel costs and stock-based compensation as we increased our research and development headcount by 34% to 638 as of January 31, 2021 from 476 as of January 31, 2020. The increase in personnel costs was impacted by higher payroll taxes associated with employee stock option exercises and restricted stock unit vesting as a result of our higher average stock price as compared to the prior-year period. These increases were partially offset by the full amortization of previously acquired developed technology intangible assets and the full amortization of the founder holdback associated with our acquisition of mLab and by lower travel costs resulting from global travel restrictions and stay-at-home or similar orders in effect due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
The increase in general and administrative expense was due to higher costs to support the growth of our business and to maintain compliance as a public company. In particular, these higher costs were driven by an increase in general and administrative personnel headcount resulting in $26.0 million of higher personnel costs and stock-based compensation. A portion of the increased personnel costs was from higher payroll taxes associated with employee stock option exercises and restricted stock unit vesting as a result of our higher average stock price as compared to the prior year. These higher costs were partially offset by lower travel costs resulting from global travel restrictions and stay-at-home or similar orders in effect due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The prior-year period included $0.6 million of costs associated with our acquisition of Realm, with no comparable costs for the year ended January 31, 2021.
Other Income (Expense), net
The increase in other expense, net for the January 31, 2021 was primarily due to the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, as well as interest expense, associated with our 0.25% convertible senior notes due 2026, which we issued in January 2020.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes during the year ended January 31, 2021 was primarily due to an increase in foreign taxes as we continued our global expansion. The benefit for income taxes for the year ended January 31, 2020 was primarily due to a non-recurring tax benefit associated with the acquisition of Realm intangible assets, which reduced our deferred tax asset and the related valuation allowance.
Comparison of the Years Ended January 31, 2020 and 2019
For a discussion of our results of operations for the year ended January 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended January 31, 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 27, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of January 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments and restricted cash totaling $958.3 million. Our cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of bank deposits and money market funds. Our short-term investments consist of U.S. government treasury securities and our restricted cash represents collateral for our available credit on corporate credit cards. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to fund our operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months.
In January 2020, we issued $1.15 billion aggregate principal amount of 0.25% convertible senior notes due 2026 in a private placement (the “2026 Notes”). In June 2018, we issued $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of 0.75% convertible senior notes due 2024 in a private placement and, in July 2018, we issued an additional $50.0 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes pursuant to the exercise in full of the initial purchasers’ option to purchase additional convertible senior notes (collectively, the “2024 Notes”). The total net proceeds from the issuance of the 2026 Notes and 2024 Notes, after deducting initial purchase discounts and estimated debt issuance costs, were approximately $1.13 billion and $291.1 million, respectively. In connection with the pricing of the 2026 Notes and 2024 Notes, we entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain counterparties (the “Capped Calls”). The Capped Calls are expected to partially offset the potential dilution to our Class A common stock upon any conversion of the 2026 Notes and 2024 Notes, with such offset subject to a cap based on the cap price. We used $92.9 million of the proceeds from the 2026 Notes and $37.1 million of the proceeds from the 2024 Notes to purchase the Capped Calls, which was recorded as a reduction to additional paid-in capital.
On January 14, 2020, in connection with the issuance of the 2026 Notes, we used a portion of the net proceeds to repurchase $210.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes (“2024 Notes Partial Repurchase”) leaving $90.0 million aggregate principal outstanding on the 2024 Notes as of January 31, 2020. The 2024 Notes Partial Repurchase were not pursuant to a redemption notice and were individually privately negotiated transactions for aggregate cash consideration of $479.2 million. For further discussion on the 2024 Notes and 2026 Notes, please refer to Note 6, Convertible Senior Notes, in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Form 10-K.
We have generated significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations as reflected in our accumulated deficit and consolidated statements of cash flows. As of January 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $935.4 million. We expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative cash flows from operations in the future and may require additional capital resources to execute strategic initiatives to grow our business. Our future capital requirements and adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing and international operation activities, the timing of new subscription introductions, the continuing market acceptance of our subscriptions and services and the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and our business, financial condition and results of operations. As the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and our operations continues to evolve, we will continue to assess our liquidity needs. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results and financial condition would be adversely affected.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities during the year ended January 31, 2021 was $42.7 million primarily driven by our net loss of $266.9 million, which was partially offset by non-cash charges of $149.3 million for stock-based compensation, $49.1 million for the amortization of our debt discount and issuance costs, $14.2 million for depreciation and amortization and $10.4 million for lease-related non-cash charges. In addition, our accrued and other liabilities increased $41.6 million, primarily from commissions, bonuses and related payroll taxes accrued as of January 31, 2021. The overall growth of our sales and our expanding customer base led to an increase in deferred revenue by $48.2 million, offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $47.6 million and an increase of $41.6 million in deferred commissions.
Cash used in operating activities during the year ended January 31, 2020 was $29.5 million primarily driven by our net loss of $175.5 million and was partially offset by non-cash charges of $75.8 million for stock-based compensation, $14.8 million for the amortization of our debt discount and issuance costs, $14.5 million for the loss on early extinguishment of debt, $12.8 million for depreciation and amortization and $8.8 million for lease-related non-cash charges. In addition, we increased our deferred revenue by $53.1 million, partially offset by a decrease in accounts receivable of $12.7 million, reflecting the overall growth of our sales and our expanding customer base. Additionally, our accrued liabilities increased $20.4 million, primarily from commissions and bonuses accrued as of January 31, 2020. Partially offsetting these benefits to our operating cash flow were an increase of $28.4 million in deferred commissions, non-cash benefits of $3.3 million from the non-recurring tax benefit associated with the acquisition of Realm intangible assets, a non-cash benefit of $4.1 million associated with the discount on our short-term investments and a reduction of our prepaid expenses of $3.8 million.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended January 31, 2021 of $262.7 million resulted from the purchase of marketable securities, net of maturities, $11.8 million used to purchase property and equipment and $0.5 million of net cash used to purchase non-marketable securities.
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended January 31, 2020 of $1.6 million resulted from the purchase of marketable securities, net of maturities, $38.6 million of net cash used to acquire Realm and $3.6 million used to purchase property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended January 31, 2021 was $27.6 million, primarily due to $18.5 million of proceeds from the issuance of Class A common stock under the Employee Stock Purchase Plan and $17.0 million of proceeds from the exercises of stock options, partially offset by $4.6 million principal repayments of finance leases, as well as $4.2 million used for payments of issuance costs related to our January 2020 offering of 0.25% convertible senior notes due 2026 that had been accrued as of January 31, 2020.
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended January 31, 2020 was $589.2 million primarily due to $1.1 billion of proceeds from the issuance of the 2026 Notes, net of issuance costs and the Capped Calls, as well as the proceeds from the exercise of stock options and issuance of common stock under the Employee Stock Purchase Plan. These proceeds were partially offset by $479.1 million used for the 2024 Notes Partial Repurchase.
Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”), we provide investors with the amount of free cash flow, which is a non-GAAP financial measure. Free cash flow represents net cash used in operating activities less capital expenditures, principal repayments of finance lease liabilities and capitalized software development costs, if any. For the fiscal years ended January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we did not capitalize any software development costs. Free cash flow is
a measure used by management to understand and evaluate our liquidity and to generate future operating plans. The exclusion of capital expenditures, principal repayments of finance lease liabilities and amounts capitalized for software development facilitates comparisons of our liquidity on a period-to-period basis and excludes items that we do not consider to be indicative of our liquidity. We believe that free cash flow is a measure of liquidity that provides useful information to our management, investors and others in understanding and evaluating the strength of our liquidity and future ability to generate cash that can be used for strategic opportunities or investing in our business in the same manner as our management and Board of Directors. Nevertheless, our use of free cash flow has limitations as an analytical tool and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. Further, our definition of free cash flow may differ from the definitions used by other companies and therefore comparability may be limited. You should consider free cash flow alongside our other GAAP-based financial performance measures, such as net cash used in operating activities and our other GAAP financial results.
The following table presents a reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash used in operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of January 31, 2021 (in thousands):
Our principal contractual obligations and commitments consist of the principal and future interest payments related to our 2024 Notes and 2026 Notes, our purchase obligations under non-cancelable agreements for cloud infrastructure capacity commitments and subscription and marketing services and our finance and operating lease obligations under non-cancelable leases for office space expiring through 2029. In December 2020, we expanded our enterprise partnership arrangement with a cloud infrastructure provider that includes a non-cancelable commitment of $160.0 million over the next three years, which commenced during January 2021. Excluded in the contractual obligations and commitments table above are lease commitments for additional office space that commence after January 31, 2021.
For further details of our contractual obligations and lease agreements, refer to our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, within Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K, specifically Note 6, Convertible Senior Notes, Note 7, Leases and Note 8, Commitments and Contingencies.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenue from two sources: (1) sales of subscriptions, including term license and post-contract customer support (“PCS”) and consumption-based database-as-a-service offerings; and (2) services revenue comprised of consulting and training arrangements. We recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of our agreements, we perform the following steps:
i.Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer. We contract with our customers through order forms, which are governed by master sales agreements. We determine we have a contract with a customer when the contract is approved, each party’s rights regarding the products or services to be transferred is identified, the payment terms for the services can be identified, we have determined the customer has the ability and intent to pay and the contract has commercial substance. We apply judgment in determining the customer’s ability and intent to pay, which is based on a variety of factors, including the customer’s historical payment experience or, in the case of a new customer, credit, reputation and financial or other information pertaining to the customer. At contract inception, we evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as a single contract and whether the combined or single contract includes more than one performance obligation. We have concluded that our contracts with customers do not contain warranties that give rise to a separate performance obligation.
ii.Identification of the performance obligations in the contract. Performance obligations promised in a contract are identified based on the services or products that will be transferred to the customer that are both (1) capable of being distinct, whereby the customer can benefit from the service or product either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available from third parties or from us and (2) distinct in the context of the contract, whereby the transfer of the services or products is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. To the extent a contract includes multiple promised services or products, we apply judgment to determine whether promised services or products are capable of being distinct and distinct in the context of the contract. If these criteria are not met, the promised services or products are accounted for as a combined performance obligation.
iii.Determination of the transaction price. The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring services and products to the customer. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will not occur. None of our contracts contain a significant financing component.
iv.Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract. If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. For contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on a relative standalone selling price (“SSP”) basis. We also consider if there are any additional material rights inherent in a contract and if so, we allocate a portion of the transaction price to such rights based on SSP. We determine each SSP based on multiple factors, including past history of selling such performance obligations as standalone products. We estimate SSP for performance obligations with no observable evidence using adjusted market, cost plus and residual methods to establish the SSPs. In cases where directly observable standalone sales are not available, we utilize all observable data points including competitor pricing for a similar or identical product, market and industry data points and our pricing practices.
v.Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation. We recognize revenue at the time the related performance obligation is satisfied when control of the services or products are transferred to the customers,
in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services or products. We record our revenue net of any value added or sales tax.
Business Combinations
We use our best estimates and assumptions to assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date. These estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are initially established in connection with a business combination as of the acquisition date. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements, of this Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, including our adoption of the new credit loss standard under Accounting Standards Codification 326.