Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by, the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This item contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those indicated in such forward-looking statements. Factors that may cause such a difference include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Item 1A, Risk Factors Relating to our Business.” This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Overview
Industry Conditions and Outlook for MDC*
The Coronavirus/COVID-19 pandemic began impacting the U.S. economy during the latter part of March 2020, adversely affecting consumer demand, financial markets and employment levels. The homebuilding industry was not immune to the impact of the pandemic as we experienced an industry-wide decrease in traffic and order activity as well as increased cancellation levels during the months of March and April. However, with some limited exceptions, residential construction was designated an essential business, allowing us to continue to construct and sell homes. We implemented numerous operational changes to promote social distancing and comply with health and safety standards required by state and local governments, taking into consideration guidelines of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other public health authorities.
We began experiencing a resurgence in demand in May 2020 that continued through year-end. This increase in demand was driven by low interest rates, a continued undersupply of affordable homes and a renewed focus on homeownership. We believe that the homebuilding industry potentially is poised for further growth, with (1) millennials continuing to age into their prime home-buying years, (2) homeownership becoming more important due to the increased prominence of remote work and school arrangements, and (3) many consumers migrating away from high cost, densely populated urban areas.
The resurgence in demand resulted in an 87% year-over-year increase in the dollar value of our backlog to $3.26 billion at the end of 2020. It also allowed us to increase pricing in the majority of our communities, resulting in a year-over-year increase in the estimated average gross margin of our homes in backlog at December 31, 2020. The improvement in our backlog provides us with the opportunity for significant year-over-year increases in home sale revenues and pretax income in coming quarters. However, even with this strong demand to end the year, we remain cautious and continue to closely monitor developments related to COVID-19, which are highly uncertain and could adversely impact our operations and financial results in future periods.
We ended the year with total liquidity of $1.70 billion following the expansion of our credit facility in December, which increased the total amount available under the facility to $1.20 billion. Additionally, on January 11, 2021, we issued $350 million of 10-year senior notes at a rate of 2.500%, which is the lowest rate for any senior note issuance in our Company's history. We believe that our financial position ranks among the best in the homebuilding industry and provides us with the capital resources to drive the continued growth of our business. We enter 2021 with a goal of delivering between 10,000 and 11,000 homes and growing our year-end active community count by at least 10%.
Results for the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we reported net income of $367.6 million, or $5.58 per diluted share, a 54% increase compared to net income of $238.3 million, or $3.72 per diluted share, for the prior year period. Both our homebuilding and financial services businesses contributed to these year-over-year improvements, as pretax income from our homebuilding operations increased $133.8 million, or 55%, and our financial services pretax income increased $18.8 million, or 31%. The increase in homebuilding pretax income was the result of a 260 basis point increase in our operating margin and a 17% increase in home sale revenues. The increase in operating margin is the result of our improved pricing over the last twelve months as well as better operating leverage as we continue to grow our homebuilding operations. The increase in financial services pretax income was due to our mortgage business, which experienced a higher interest rate lock volume, an increase in the number of mortgages we originated as a percentage of our total homes delivered ("Capture Rate") and an increased profit margin on loans originated during the year. Additionally, our net income benefited from a decrease in our effective tax rate, primarily due to a larger benefit from energy tax credits.
The dollar value of our net new home orders increased 56% from the prior year, due to a 40% increase in the number of net new orders and a 11% increase in the average selling price of those orders. The increase in the number of net new orders was due to an increase in the monthly sales absorption rate driven by strong demand during the second half of the year. The increase in the average selling price was the result of price increases implemented over the past twelve months as well as a shift in geographical mix to some higher priced markets.
* See “Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Homebuilding
Pretax Income (Loss)
Homebuilding pretax income for 2020 was $378.5 million, an increase of $133.8 million from $244.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to a 17% increase in home sale revenues as well as a 200 basis point improvement in gross margin from home sales.
Our West segment experienced a $66.9 million year-over-year increase in pretax income, due to a 19% increase in home sales revenue and an improved gross margin, which were slightly offset by a $14.0 million increase in general and administrative expenses resulting from the change in our Corporate cost allocation discussed below. Our Mountain segment experienced a $38.7 million increase in pretax income from the prior year, as a result of a 14% increase in home sales revenue and an improved gross margin, which were slightly offset by a $7.2 million increase in general and administrative expenses due to the change in our Corporate cost allocation. Our East segment experienced a $10.1 million increase in pretax income from the prior year, due primarily to a 21% increase in home sales revenue and an improved gross margin, which were slightly offset by a $3.0 million increase in general and administrative expenses resulting from the change in our Corporate cost allocation. Our Corporate segment experienced an $18.0 million increase in pretax income, due primarily to the impact of the change in our Corporate cost allocation.
On a periodic basis, we assess our Corporate cost allocation estimates. Our most recent assessment resulted in increases in Corporate cost allocations to both our homebuilding and financial services segments beginning January 1, 2020, to reflect the use of centralized administrative functions. Applying the most recent cost allocation estimate to the year ended December 31, 2019 would have resulted in decreased pretax income for our homebuilding and financial services segments of approximately $11.1 million and $1.6 million, respectively, with corresponding increases in our Corporate segment pretax income. Additionally, beginning January 1, 2020, we have reflected the expense associated with all homebuilding employee bonuses in the respective homebuilding segment to which the employee reports, consistent with how the CODM is now evaluating homebuilding division performance and making operating decisions. Had these bonuses been reflected in a similar manner during the year ended December 31, 2019, pretax income for our homebuilding segments would have decreased by an additional $13.1 million with a corresponding decrease in our Corporate segment pretax loss.
Assets
Total homebuilding assets increased 16% from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. Increases in each of our homebuilding segments were the result of increases in our inventory balances. These increases were driven by a greater number of lots acquired during 2020 than those delivered to homebuyers during the year as well as an increase in homes completed or under construction as of year-end. The funds for this land acquisition and construction activity came from our Corporate segment, causing a decline in our Corporate segment's assets that was mostly offset by the net proceeds from home sales.
New Home Deliveries & Home Sale Revenues:
Changes in home sale revenues are impacted by changes in the number of new homes delivered and the average selling price of those delivered homes. Commentary for each of our segments on significant changes in these two metrics is provided below.
West Segment Commentary
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the increase in new home deliveries was the result of a 33% year-over-year increase in the number of homes in backlog to begin the year. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in backlog conversion rates in most markets due to construction delays as a result of (1) certain state and local governments not identifying residential construction as an essential business at the outset of the pandemic, which impacted our ability to physically construct homes for a short period of time and (2) more general construction related delays from the pandemic coupled with an increase in the number of homes under construction.
Mountain Segment Commentary
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the increase in new home deliveries was the result of a 16% year-over-year increase in the number of homes in backlog to begin the year.
East Segment Commentary
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the increase in new home deliveries was the result of a 53% year-over-year increase in the number of homes in backlog to begin the year. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in backlog conversion rates in most of our markets within this segment due to (1) a lower percentage of homes in backlog to start the period that were under construction at that time and (2) an increase in cancellation rates during the first half of the year, most notably in our Florida markets, resulting from the pandemic. The decrease in the average selling price of homes delivered in our East segment was the result of a greater percentage of closings from our more affordable product offerings.
Gross Margin
Our gross margin from home sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 200 basis points year-over-year from 18.8% to 20.8%. Gross margin from home sales increased across each of our segments on both build-to-order and speculative home deliveries driven by price increases implemented across nearly all of our communities over the past twelve months.
Inventory Impairments
Inventory impairments recognized by segment for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are shown in the table below.
The table below provides quantitative data, for the periods presented, where applicable, used in determining the fair value of the impaired inventory.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the increase in our general and administrative expenses was primarily due to an increase in salaries and other compensation-related expenses due to a higher average headcount and strong operating results.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, marketing expenses increased as a result of increased deferred selling amortization and master marketing fees resulting from increased closings as well as increased compensation expense due to a higher average headcount.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, commissions expenses increased as a result of the increase in homes sale revenues year-over-year.
Other Homebuilding Operating Data
Net New Orders and Active Subdivisions:
Changes in the dollar value of net new orders are impacted by changes in the number of net new orders and the average selling price of those homes. Commentary for each of our segments on significant changes in these two metrics is provided below
*Calculated as total net new orders in period ÷ average active communities during period ÷ number of months in period
West Segment Commentary
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the increase in net new orders was primarily due to an increase in the monthly sales absorption rates in all of our markets in the West segment. An increase in active subdivisions within our California markets also contributed to the increase in net new orders. The increase in average selling price was due to price increases implemented over the past twelve months within nearly all of our communities as well as a shift in mix of homes sold to more expensive Southern California markets. These increases were slightly offset by a shift in mix to lower priced communities, consistent with our ongoing strategy of offering more affordable home plans.
Mountain Segment Commentary
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the increase in net new orders was due to an increase in the monthly sales absorption rates in each of our Colorado and Utah markets. The increase in average selling price was due to price increases implemented over the last twelve months within nearly all of our communities.
East Segment Commentary
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the increase in net new orders was driven by increases in the monthly sales absorption rate and the number of average active subdivisions. The increase in the average selling price of net new orders is due to price increases implemented over the last twelve months within nearly all of our communities. Additionally, we experienced a shift in mix to our mid-Atlantic market resulting from an increase in net new orders that was driven by increases in both monthly sales absorption rates and average active subdivisions.
Cancellation Rate:
Our cancellations as a percentage of gross sales (“cancellation rate”) decreased from 21% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 19% for the year ended December 31, 2020. While our full year cancellation rate decreased, we did experience higher cancellation rates during the first and second quarter of 2020 as a result of general economic uncertainty surrounding the pandemic.
Consistent with our quarterly homebuilding operating data provided, we have also included below the cancellations as a percentage of homes in beginning backlog for each quarter during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Backlog:
At December 31, 2020, we had 6,655 homes in backlog with a total value of $3.26 billion, representing respective increases of 75% and 87% from December 31, 2019. The increase in the number of homes in backlog is primarily a result of the year-over-year increase in net new orders in the second half of 2020. The increase in the average selling price of homes in backlog is due to price increases implemented over the past twelve months in nearly all of our communities as well as a shift in our net new order mix in our East segment as discussed above. These increases were slightly offset by a shift in mix to lower priced communities, consistent with our ongoing strategy of offering more affordable home plans. Our ability to convert backlog into closings could be negatively impacted in future periods by the pandemic, the extent to which is highly uncertain and depends on future developments.
Homes Completed or Under Construction:
The increase in sold homes under construction or completed is due to the year-over-year increase in the number of homes in backlog noted above. Total unsold started homes have decreased year-over-year due to the strong demand for new homes.
Lots Owned and Optioned (including homes completed or under construction):
Our total owned and optioned lots at December 31, 2020 were 29,469, up 8% from December 31, 2019, due to our land acquisition approval activity over the past year across nearly all of our markets. We believe that our total lot supply can support growth in future periods. See "Forward-Looking Statements" above.
Financial Services
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our financial services pretax income increased $18.8 million or 31% from the same period in the prior year. The increase was due to our mortgage operations, which saw an increase in pretax income of $42 million due to (1) a higher interest rate lock volume driven by the year-over-year increase in homes in backlog, (2) an increased Capture Rate and (3) an increased profit margin on loans originated during the year due to diminished competition driven by the refinance volume experienced by the mortgage industry during the year. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in our other financial services segment, which had $8.3 million of net losses on equity securities during the period as compared to $11.8 million of net gains for the same period in the prior year.
The table below sets forth information for our mortgage operations relating to mortgage loans originated and capture rate.
Income Taxes
We recorded an income tax provision of $89.9 million, $66.7 million and $53.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, and our resulting effective income tax rates were 19.7%, 21.9% and 20.1%, respectively. Our tax provision and effective tax rate is driven by (i) pre-tax book income for the full year, adjusted for items that are deductible/non-deductible for tax purposes only (i.e., permanent items); (ii) benefits from federal energy credits; (iii) taxable income generated in state jurisdictions that varies from consolidated income and (iv) stock based compensation windfalls recorded as discrete items. The difference between our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the federal statutory rate was primarily due to 5.1% in benefits for federal energy credits and 1.7% in benefits for stock based compensation windfalls, partially offset by 3.8% in state taxes and 1.8% for limitations on deductible executive compensation.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We use our liquidity and capital resources to (1) support our operations, including the purchase of land, land development and construction of homes; (2) provide working capital; and (3) provide mortgage loans for our homebuyers. Our liquidity includes our cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities, Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below) and Mortgage Repurchase Facility (as defined below). Additionally, we have an existing effective shelf registration statement that allows us to issue equity, debt or hybrid securities up to $2.0 billion. Following the issuance of $350 million of 2.500% senior notes on January 11, 2021 (see Note 24, Subsequent Events, in the notes to the financial statements for further discussion), $1.35 billion remains on our effective shelf registration statement.
Capital Resources
Our capital structure is primarily a combination of (1) permanent financing, represented by stockholders’ equity; (2) long-term financing, represented by our 5.500% senior notes due 2024, 3.850% senior notes due 2030 and our 6.000% senior notes due 2043; (3) our Revolving Credit Facility and (4) our Mortgage Repurchase Facility. On January 11, 2021, we completed an offering of $350 million of 2.500% senior notes due January 2031 (see Note 24, Subsequent Events, in the notes to the financial statements for further discussion). Because of our current balance of cash, cash equivalents, ability to access the capital markets, and available capacity under both our Revolving Credit Facility and Mortgage Repurchase Facility, we believe that our capital resources are adequate to satisfy our short and long-term capital requirements, including meeting future payments on our senior notes as they become due. See “Forward-Looking Statements” above.
We may from time to time seek to retire or purchase our outstanding senior notes through cash purchases, whether through open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material.
Senior Notes, Revolving Credit Facility and Mortgage Repurchase Facility
Senior Notes. Our senior notes are not secured and, while the senior note indentures contain some restrictions on secured debt and other transactions, they do not contain financial covenants. Our senior notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on an unsecured basis, jointly and severally, by most of our homebuilding segment subsidiaries. We believe that we are in compliance with the representations, warranties and covenants in the senior note indentures.
Revolving Credit Facility. We have an unsecured revolving credit agreement (“Revolving Credit Facility”) with a group of lenders, which may be used for general corporate purposes. This agreement was amended on December 28, 2020 to (1) increase the aggregate commitment from $1.0 billion to $1.2 billion (the "Commitment"), (2) extend the Revolving Credit Facility maturity of $1.125 billion of the Commitments to December 18, 2025 with the remaining Commitment continuing to terminate on December 18, 2023 and (3) provide that the aggregate amount of the commitments may increase to an amount not to exceed $1.7 billion upon our request, subject to receipt of additional commitments from existing or additional lenders and, in the case of additional lenders, the consent of the co-administrative agents. As defined in the Revolving Credit Facility, interest rates on base rate borrowings are equal to the highest of (1) 0.0%, (2) a prime rate, (3) a federal funds effective rate plus 1.50%, and (4) a specified eurocurrency rate plus 1.00% and, in each case, plus a margin that is determined based on our credit ratings and leverage ratio. Interest rates on eurocurrency borrowings are equal to a specified eurocurrency rate plus a margin that is determined based on our credit ratings and leverage ratio. At any time at which our leverage ratio, as of the last day of the most recent calendar quarter, exceeds 55%, the aggregate principal amount of all consolidated senior debt borrowings outstanding may not exceed the borrowing base. There is no borrowing base requirement if our leverage ratio, as of the last day of the most recent calendar quarter, is 55% or less.
The Revolving Credit Facility is fully and unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally, by most of our homebuilding segment subsidiaries. The facility contains various representations, warranties and covenants that we believe are customary for agreements of this type. The financial covenants include a consolidated tangible net worth test and a leverage test, along with a consolidated tangible net worth covenant, all as defined in the Revolving Credit Facility. A failure to satisfy the foregoing tests does not constitute an event of default, but can trigger a “term-out” of the facility. A breach of the consolidated tangible net worth covenant (but not the consolidated tangible net worth test) or a violation of anti-corruption or sanctions laws would result in an event of default.
The Revolving Credit Facility is subject to acceleration upon certain specified events of default, including breach of the consolidated tangible net worth covenant, a violation of anti-corruption or sanctions laws, failure to make timely payments, breaches of certain representations or covenants, failure to pay other material indebtedness, or another person becoming beneficial owner of 50% or more of our outstanding common stock. We believe we were in compliance with the representations, warranties and covenants included in the Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $10.0 million in borrowings and $25.1 million in letters of credit outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility, leaving remaining borrowing capacity of $1.16 billion.
Mortgage Repurchase Facility. HomeAmerican has a Master Repurchase Agreement (the “Mortgage Repurchase Facility”) with U.S. Bank National Association (“USBNA”). The Mortgage Repurchase Facility provides liquidity to HomeAmerican by providing for the sale of up to an aggregate of $75 million (subject to increase by up to $75 million under certain conditions) of eligible mortgage loans to USBNA with an agreement by HomeAmerican to repurchase the mortgage loans at a future date. Until such mortgage loans are transferred back to HomeAmerican, the documents relating to such loans are held by USBNA, as custodian, pursuant to the Custody Agreement (“Custody Agreement”), dated as of November 12, 2008, by and between HomeAmerican and USBNA. In the event that an eligible mortgage loan becomes ineligible, as defined under the Mortgage Repurchase Facility, HomeAmerican may be required to repurchase the ineligible mortgage loan immediately. The Mortgage Repurchase Facility terminates on May 20, 2021. Effective September 24, 2020, the Mortgage Repurchase Facility was amended to adjust the commitments to purchase for specific time periods and increase the Adjusted Tangible Net Worth Ratio from 8.0 to 1.0 to 10.0 to 1.0. As part of the amendment, the commitments to purchase were increased to $100 million for the periods September 24, 2020 through October 23, 2020 and March 25, 2021 through April 23, 2021 and $200 million for the period December 22, 2020 through February 4, 2021.
The maximum aggregate commitment of the Mortgage Repurchase Facility was temporarily increased by $50 million on December 28, 2020 effective through January 27, 2021. The maximum aggregate commitment of the Mortgage Repurchase Facility was temporarily increased by $75 million on December 24, 2019 effective through January 22, 2020, which increased the maximum aggregate commitment from $75 million to $150 million. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, HomeAmerican had $202.4 million and $149.6 million, respectively, of mortgage loans that HomeAmerican was obligated to repurchase under the Mortgage Repurchase Facility. Mortgage loans that HomeAmerican is obligated to repurchase under the Mortgage Repurchase Facility are accounted for as a debt financing arrangement and are reported as mortgage repurchase facility in the consolidated balance sheets. Advances under the Mortgage Repurchase Facility carry a price range that is based on a LIBOR rate or successor benchmark rate.
The Mortgage Repurchase Facility contains various representations, warranties and affirmative and negative covenants that we believe are customary for agreements of this type. The negative covenants include, among others, (i) a minimum Adjusted Tangible Net Worth requirement, (ii) a maximum Adjusted Tangible Net Worth ratio, (iii) a minimum adjusted net income requirement, and (iv) a minimum Liquidity requirement. The foregoing capitalized terms are defined in the Mortgage Repurchase Facility. We believe HomeAmerican was in compliance with the representations, warranties and covenants included in the Mortgage Repurchase Facility as of December 31, 2020.
Dividends
In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we paid dividends of $1.39 per share and $1.18 per share, respectively. In addition to the cash dividends paid, the Company distributed a stock dividend of 8% during 2019.
MDC Common Stock Repurchase Program
At December 31, 2020, we were authorized to repurchase up to 4,000,000 shares of our common stock. We did not repurchase any shares of our common stock under this repurchase program during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Consolidated Cash Flow
Our operating cash flows are primarily impacted by: (1) land purchases and construction of homes; (2) closing homes and the associated timing of collecting receivables from home closings; (3) sales of mortgage loans originated by HomeAmerican; (4) payments on accounts payables and accrued liabilities; and (5) funding for payroll. When we close on the sale of a house, our homebuilding subsidiaries will generally receive the proceeds from the sale of the homes within a few days of the home being closed. Therefore, our home sales receivable balance can increase or decrease from period to period based upon the timing of our home closings. Additionally, the amount of mortgage loans held-for-sale can be impacted period to period based upon the number of mortgage loans that were originated by HomeAmerican that have not been sold to third party purchasers and by the timing of fundings by third party mortgage purchasers. Accordingly, mortgage loans held-for-sale may increase if HomeAmerican originates more homes towards the end of one reporting period when compared with the same period in the previous year. HomeAmerican will generally sell mortgage loans it originates between 5 to 35 days after origination.
Operating Cash Flow Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $23.1 million compared with net cash provided by operating activities of $57.8 million in the prior year. Cash used to increase housing completed or under construction was $449.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as our homes in inventory increased by 1,845 homes year-over-year. Cash used to increase housing completed or under construction was only $83.5 million in the prior year as homes in inventory increased by 561 homes from December 31, 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used to increase land and land under development was $15.0 million compared to $149.6 million in the prior year. The most significant source of cash provided by operating activities in all years was net income.
Investing Flow Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was $21.7 million compared with net cash used in investing activities of $28.8 million in the prior year. The primary driver of this increase in cash from investing activities relates to $48.5 million in net cash provided by the sale of marketable securities during the year. Cash used to purchase property and equipment remained consistent year-over-year.
Financing Cash Flow Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $31.2 million compared with net cash used in financing activities of $25.0 million in the prior year. The primary driver of this increase in cash provided by financing activities is due to $48.1 million in net proceeds from the issuance of senior notes during the year. In addition, increases in advances on the mortgage repurchase facility driven by the increase in mortgage loans held-for-sale as of December 31, 2020 and net proceeds received in connection with the issuance of shares under stock-based compensation programs driven by a greater number of stock-options exercised during the year also contributed to the increase in cash provided by financing activities. Cash used to fund dividend payments increased year-over year as a result of the 10% increase in the cash dividend declared in January 2020 and the 21% increase in the cash dividend declared in October 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Lot Option Purchase Contracts. In the ordinary course of business, we enter into lot option purchase contracts in order to procure lots for the construction of homes. Lot option contracts enable us to control lot positions with a minimal capital investment, which substantially reduces the risks associated with land ownership and development. At December 31, 2020, we had deposits of $30.0 million in the form of cash and $7.9 million in the form of letters of credit that secured option contracts to purchase 7,987 lots for a total estimated purchase price of $591.4 million.
Surety Bonds and Letters of Credit. At December 31, 2020, we had outstanding surety bonds and letters of credit totaling $261.0 million and $127.1 million, respectively, including $102.0 million in letters of credit issued by HomeAmerican. The estimated cost to complete obligations related to these bonds and letters of credit were approximately $117.4 million and $85.6 million, respectively. We expect that the obligations secured by these performance bonds and letters of credit generally will be performed in the ordinary course of business and in accordance with the applicable contractual terms. To the extent that the obligations are performed, the related performance bonds and letters of credit should be released and we should not have any continuing obligations. However, in the event any such performance bonds or letters of credit are called, our indemnity obligations could require us to reimburse the issuer of the performance bond or letter of credit.
We have made no material guarantees with respect to third-party obligations.
Contractual Obligations
The table below summarizes our known contractual obligations at December 31, 2020.
Payments due by Period (in thousands)
Total Less than 1 Year 1 - 3 Years 4 - 5 Years After 5 Years
Senior notes $ 1,050,000 $ - $ - $ 250,000 $ 800,000
Interest on senior notes $ 832,850 55,300 110,600 89,975 576,975
Operating leases $ 35,783 6,773 13,307 10,987 4,716
Total (1)
$ 1,918,633 $ 62,073 $ 123,907 $ 350,962 $ 1,381,691
_____________________________
(1)The table above excludes $202.4 million of mortgage loans that we are obligated to repurchase under our Mortgage Repurchase Facility since it is not long-term indebtedness. Additionally, there were outstanding performance bonds and letters of credit totaling approximately $261.0 million and $127.1 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020 , which have been excluded from the table above due to the uncertainty as to whether any payments may be made.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND POLICIES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Management evaluates such estimates and judgments on an on-going basis and makes adjustments as deemed necessary. Actual results could differ from these estimates if conditions are significantly different in the future. See “Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Listed below are those estimates and policies that we believe are critical and require the use of complex judgment in their application. Our critical accounting estimates and policies are as follows and should be read in conjunction with the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Homebuilding Inventory Valuation. Refer to Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the notes to the financial statements for information on the composition of the inventory balances.
In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment (“ASC 360”), homebuilding inventories, excluding those classified as held for sale, are carried at cost unless events and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the underlying subdivision may not be recoverable. We evaluate inventories for impairment at each quarter end on a subdivision level basis as each such subdivision represents the lowest level of identifiable cash flows. In making this determination, we review, among other things, the following for each subdivision:
•actual and trending “Operating Margin” (which is defined as home sale revenues less home cost of sales and all incremental costs associated directly with the subdivision, including sales commissions and marketing costs);
•estimated future undiscounted cash flows and Operating Margin;
•forecasted Operating Margin for homes in backlog;
•actual and trending net home orders;
•homes available for sale;
•market information for each sub-market, including competition levels, home foreclosure levels, the size and style of homes currently being offered for sale and lot size; and
•known or probable events indicating that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
If events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of our inventory may not be recoverable, assets are reviewed for impairment by comparing the undiscounted estimated future cash flows from an individual subdivision (including capitalized interest) to its carrying value. We generally determine the estimated fair value of each subdivision by determining the present value of the estimated future cash flows at discount rates, which are Level 3 inputs (see Note 7, Fair Value Measurements, in the notes to the financial statements for definitions of fair value inputs), that are commensurate with the risk of the subdivision under evaluation. The evaluation for the recoverability of the carrying value of the assets for each individual subdivision can be impacted significantly by our estimates of future home sale revenues, home construction costs, and development costs per home, all of which are Level 3 inputs. These estimates of undiscounted future cash flows are dependent on specific market or sub-market conditions for each subdivision. While we consider available information to determine what we believe to be our best estimates as of the end of a reporting period, these estimates are subject to change in future reporting periods as facts and circumstances change. Local market-specific conditions that may impact these estimates for a subdivision include:
•historical subdivision results, and actual and trending Operating Margin, base selling prices and home sales incentives;
•forecasted Operating Margin for homes in backlog;
•the intensity of competition within a market or sub-market, including publicly available home sales prices and home sales incentives offered by our competitors;
•increased levels of home foreclosures;
•the current sales pace for active subdivisions;
•subdivision specific attributes, such as location, availability and size of lots in the sub-market, desirability and uniqueness of subdivision location and the size and style of homes currently being offered;
•potential for alternative home styles to respond to local market conditions;
•changes by management in the sales strategy of a given subdivision; and
•current local market economic and demographic conditions and related trends and forecasts.
These and other local market-specific conditions that may be present are considered by personnel in our homebuilding divisions as they prepare or update the forecasted assumptions for each subdivision. Quantitative and qualitative factors other than home sales prices could significantly impact the potential for future impairments. The sales objectives can differ among subdivisions, even within a given sub-market. For example, facts and circumstances in a given subdivision may lead us to price our homes with the objective of yielding a higher sales absorption pace, while facts and circumstances in another subdivision may lead us to price our homes to minimize deterioration in our gross margins from home sales, even though this could result in a slower sales absorption pace. Furthermore, the key assumptions included in our estimated future undiscounted cash flows may be interrelated. For example, a decrease in estimated base sales price or an increase in home sales incentives may result in a corresponding increase in sales absorption pace. Additionally, a decrease in the average sales price of homes to be sold and closed in future reporting periods for one subdivision that has not been generating what management believes to be an adequate sales absorption pace may impact the estimated cash flow assumptions of a nearby subdivision. Changes in our key assumptions, including estimated construction and land development costs, absorption pace and selling strategies could materially impact future cash flow and fair value estimates. Due to the number of possible scenarios that would result from various changes in these factors, we do not believe it is possible to develop a sensitivity analysis with a level of precision that would be meaningful to an investor.
If the undiscounted future cash flows of a subdivision are less than its carrying value, the carrying value of the subdivision is written down to its then estimated fair value. We determine the estimated fair value of each subdivision either: (1) by determining the present value of the estimated future cash flows at discount rates that are commensurate with the risk of the subdivision under evaluation; or (2) assessing the market value of the land in its current condition by considering the estimated price a willing buyer would pay for the land (other than in a forced liquidation), and recent land purchase transactions that we believe are indicators of fair value. The estimated future cash flows are the same for both our recoverability and fair value assessments. Factors we consider when determining the discount rate to be used for each subdivision include, among others:
•the number of lots in a given subdivision;
•the amount of future land development costs to be incurred;
•risks associated with the home construction process, including the stage of completion for the entire subdivision and the number of owned lots under construction; and
•the estimated remaining lifespan of the subdivision.
We allocate the impairments recorded between housing completed or under construction and land and land under development for each impaired subdivision based upon the status of construction of a home on each lot (i.e., if the lot is in housing completed or under construction, the impairment for that lot is recorded against housing completed or under construction). The allocation of impairment is the same with respect to each lot in a given subdivision. Changes in management’s estimates, particularly the timing and amount of the estimated future cash inflows and outflows and forecasted average selling prices of homes to be sold and closed can materially affect any impairment calculation. Because our forecasted cash flows are impacted significantly by changes in market conditions, it is reasonably possible that actual results could differ significantly from those estimates. Please see the “Inventory Impairments” section for a detailed discussion and analysis of our asset impairments.
If land is classified as held for sale, we measure it at the lower of the carrying value or fair value less estimated costs to sell. In determining fair value, we primarily rely upon the most recent negotiated price. If a negotiated price is not available, we will consider several factors including, but not limited to, current market conditions, recent comparable sales transactions and market analysis studies. If the fair value less estimated costs to sell is lower than the current carrying value, the land is impaired down to its estimated fair value less costs to sell.
Warranty Accrual. Our homes are sold with limited third-party warranties. We record expenses and warranty accruals for general and structural warranty claims, as well as accruals for known, unusual warranty-related expenditures. A warranty accrual is recorded for each home closed based upon historical payment experience in an amount estimated to be adequate to cover expected costs of materials and outside labor during warranty periods. The determination of the warranty accrual rate for closed homes and the evaluation of our warranty accrual balance at period end are based on an internally developed analysis that includes known facts and interpretations of circumstances, including, among other things, our trends in historical warranty payment levels and warranty payments for claims not considered to be normal and recurring. It is possible that changes in the warranty payment experience used in estimating our ultimate warranty losses could have a material impact on our warranty accrual balances.
Insurance Reserves. The establishment of reserves for estimated losses associated with insurance policies issued by Allegiant and re-insurance agreements issued by StarAmerican are based on actuarial studies that include known facts and interpretations of circumstances, including our experience with similar cases and historical trends involving claim payment patterns, pending levels of unpaid claims, product mix or concentration, claim severity, frequency patterns depending on the business conducted, and changing regulatory and legal environments. It is possible that changes in the insurance payment experience used in estimating our ultimate insurance losses could have a material impact on our insurance reserves.
Litigation Accruals. In the normal course of business, we are a defendant in claims primarily relating to premises liability, product liability and personal injury claims. These claims seek relief from us under various theories, including breach of implied and express warranty, negligence, strict liability, misrepresentation and violation of consumer protection statutes. We have accrued for losses that may be incurred with respect to legal claims based upon information provided by our legal counsel, including counsel’s on-going evaluation of the merits of the claims and defenses and the level of estimated insurance coverage. Due to uncertainties in the estimation process, actual results could vary from those accruals and could have a material impact on our results of operations.
Revenue Recognition for Homebuilding Segments. We recognize home sale revenues from home deliveries when we have satisfied the performance obligations within the sales agreement, which is generally when title to and possession of the home are transferred to the buyer at the home closing date. Revenue from a home delivery includes the base sales price and any purchased options and upgrades and is reduced for any sales price incentives.
We generally do not record the sale of a home or recognize the associated revenue if the following criteria are present: (1) HomeAmerican originates the mortgage loan and has not sold the mortgage loan, or loans, as of the end of the pertinent reporting period; and (2) the homebuyer does not meet certain collectability thresholds, based on the type of mortgage loan, related to their credit score, debt to income ratio and loan to value ratio. The deferral is subsequently recognized at the time HomeAmerican sells the respective loan to a third-party purchaser. In the event the gross margin is a loss, we recognize such loss at the time the home is closed.
In certain states where we build, we are not always able to complete certain outdoor features (such as landscaping or pools) prior to closing the home. To the extent these separate deliverables are not complete upon the closing of a home, we defer home sale revenues related to incomplete outdoor features, and recognize that revenue upon completion of the outdoor features.
Revenue Recognition for HomeAmerican: Revenues recorded by HomeAmerican primarily reflect (1) origination fees and (2) the corresponding sale, or expected future sale, of a loan, which will include the estimated earnings from either the release or retention of a loan’s servicing rights. Origination fees are recognized when a loan is originated. When an interest rate lock commitment is made to a customer, we record the expected gain on sale of the mortgage, plus the estimated earnings from the expected sale of the associated servicing rights, adjusted for a pull-through percentage (which is defined as the likelihood that an interest rate lock commitment will be originated), as revenue. As the interest rate lock commitment gets closer to being originated, the expected gain on the sale of that loan plus its servicing rights is updated to reflect current market value and the increase or decrease in the fair value of that interest rate lock commitment is recorded through revenues. At the same time, the expected pull-through percentage of the interest rate lock commitment to be originated is updated (typically an increase as the interest lock commitment gets closer to origination) and, if there has been a change, revenues are adjusted as necessary. After origination, our mortgage loans, generally including their servicing rights, are sold to third-party purchasers in accordance with sale agreements entered into by us with a third-party purchaser of the loans. We make representations and warranties with respect to the status of loans transferred in the sale agreements. The sale agreements generally include statements acknowledging the transfer of the loans is intended by both parties to constitute a sale. Sale of a mortgage loan has occurred when the following criteria, among others, have been met: (1) fair consideration has been paid for transfer of the loan by a third party in an arms-length transaction, (2) all the usual risks and rewards of ownership that are in substance a sale have been transferred by us to the third party purchaser; and (3) we do not have a substantial continuing involvement with the mortgage loan.
We carry interest rate lock commitments and mortgage loans held-for-sale at fair value.
Home Cost of Sales. Refer to the Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the notes to the financial statements for information on the composition of home cost of sales. When a home is closed, we generally have not yet paid or incurred all costs necessary to complete the construction of the home and certain land development costs. At the time of a home closing, we compare the home construction budgets to actual recorded costs to determine the additional estimated costs remaining to be paid on each closed home. For amounts not incurred or paid as of the time of closing a home, we record an estimated accrual associated with certain home construction and land development costs. Generally, these accruals are established based upon contracted work which has yet to be paid, open work orders not paid at the time of home closing, as well as land completion costs more likely than not to be incurred, and represent estimates believed to be adequate to cover the expected remaining home construction and land development costs. We monitor the adequacy of these accruals on a house-by-house basis and in the aggregate on both a market-by-market and consolidated basis.
Stock-Based Compensation. ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”) requires that share-based compensation expense be measured and recognized at an amount equal to the fair value of share-based payments granted under compensation arrangements. Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of stock option awards requires judgment, including estimating stock price volatility, annual forfeiture rates and the expected life of an award. For stock option awards granted with just service and/or performance conditions, we estimate the fair value using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. For any stock option awards granted that contain a market condition, we estimate the fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model. Both the Black-Scholes option pricing model and Monte Carlo simulation utilize the following inputs to calculate the estimated fair value of stock options: (1) closing price of our common stock on the measurement date (generally the date of grant); (2) exercise price; (3) expected stock option life; (4) expected volatility; (5) risk-free interest rate; and (6) expected dividend yield rate. The expected life of employee stock options represents the period for which the stock options are expected to remain outstanding and is derived primarily from historical exercise patterns. The expected volatility is determined based on our review of the implied volatility that is derived from the price of exchange traded options of the Company. The risk-free interest rate assumption is determined based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the expected term of our employee stock options. The expected dividend yield assumption is based on our historical dividend payouts. We determine the estimated fair value of the stock option awards on the date they were granted. The fair values of previously granted stock option awards are not adjusted as subsequent changes in the foregoing assumptions occur; for example, an increase or decrease in the price of our common stock. However, changes in the foregoing inputs, particularly the price of our common stock, expected stock option life and expected volatility, significantly change the estimated fair value of future grants of stock options.
An annual forfeiture rate is estimated at the time of grant, and revised if necessary, in subsequent periods if the actual forfeiture rate differs from our estimate.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
See Note 2 in our consolidated financial statements.