Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
THE FOLLOWING PRESENTATION OF THE PLAN OF OPERATION OF MADISON TECHNOLOGIES INC. SHOULD BE READ IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND OTHER FINANCIAL INFORMATION INCLUDED HEREIN.
Overview
Madison was incorporated in the State of Nevada on June 15, 1998 under the name “Madison-Taylor General Contractors, Inc.” Effective May 24, 2004, Madison changed its name to “Madison Explorations, Inc.” by a majority vote of the shareholders. Effective March 9, 2015, Madison changed its name to “Madison Technologies Inc,” by a majority vote of the shareholders. See Exhibit 3.3 - Certificate of Amendment for more details.
On September 16, 2016, pursuant to the terms of the Product License Agreement Madison was granted the exclusive rights to distribute Tuffy Pack’s product line of line custom inserts that provide a level of personal protection from ballistic threats similar to what law enforcement officers wear daily as bullet proof vests. See Exhibit 10.5 - Product License Agreement for more details.
Effective the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 Madison abandoned the Tuffy Pack product line to focus on the deployment of the Luxurie Legs line of products
On July 17, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement to acquire the Casa Zeta-Jones Brand License Agreement from Luxurie Legs, LLC of Delaware. Luxurie Legs transferred all of its rights, title and interest in the License Agreement to the Company in exchange for the Company’s newly issued preferred convertible Series A stock. See Form 8-K - Current Report filed July 20, 2020 for more details.
On February 16, 2021, Madison Technologies Inc., a Nevada corporation (the “Company”) entered into a Share Exchange Agreement (the “Share Exchange Agreement”) with Sovryn Holdings, Inc. (“Sovryn”) and the holders (the “Sovryn Shareholders”) of Sovryn’s issued and outstanding shares of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Sovryn Common Shares”), pursuant to which the Shareholders exchanged 100% of the outstanding Sovryn Common Shares, for (i) 100 shares of series B preferred stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Series B Preferred Stock”), of the Company which was transferred by Jeffrey Canouse, the Company’s controlling shareholder and existing Chief Executive Officer (the “Controlling Shareholder”), to the designee of Sovryn and (ii) 1,000 shares of series E convertible preferred stock, par value $0.001 per share of Sovryn (“Series E Preferred Stock,” and together with Series B Preferred Stock, the “Preferred Exchange Shares,” and the foregoing exchange of Sovryn Common Shares for Preferred Exchange Shares being the “Equity Exchange”).See Form 8-K - Current Report filed February 23, 2021 for more details
Madison Technologies Inc. Form 10-K - 2020 Page 12
Results of Operation for the Period Ended December 31, 2020
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred net losses of $910,163, compared to our net losses in fiscal 2019 of $42,263. Our losses in the current fiscal year were higher due to an increase in amortization expense, operating expenses and consulting fees.
We have not attained profitable operations and are dependent upon obtaining financing to complete our proposed business plan. For these reasons our auditors believe that there is substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern.
Our financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern and, accordingly, do not include adjustments relating to the recoverability and realization of assets and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue in operation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, Madison had total assets of $510,616, and a working capital deficit of $533,548, compared with a working capital deficit of $358,377 as of December 31, 2019. The increase in the working capital deficit was primarily due to an increase in demand notes and interest payable and convertible notes and interest payable. The assets consisted of $9,491 in cash ($1,366 in 2019) and $67,718 in prepaid expenses ($5,718 in 2019). The liabilities consisted of $61,779 in accounts payable and accrued liabilities ($33,655 in 2019), $33,500 in license fee payable ($33,500 in 2019), $20,486 in notes payable and accrued interest, $494,992 in convertible notes payable to third parties ($297,766 in 2019).
There are no assurances that Madison will be able to achieve further sales of its Common Stock or any other form of additional financing. If Madison is unable to achieve the financing necessary to continue its plan of operations, then Madison will not be able to continue its plan of operations and its business will fail.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities increased to $489,325 compared with $51,177 for the previous fiscal year. The use of cash was primarily due to a net loss of $910,163 less non-cash items of interest on the convertible debt of $25,134, amortization of intangible assets of $64,687, amortization of interest of $212,769, services of $95,000 and $164 of foreign exchange. Changes in current assets and liabilities of $23,084 also affected cash used.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
The Company did not invest any cash in investing activities in either the year ending December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash flows provided by financing activities was $507,450 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with financing activities of $50,000 for the previous fiscal year. The net cash provided by financing activities was due to the proceeds from convertible debt issued.
Plan of Operation
Luxurie Legs Products
Madison’s plan of operation for the next 12 months is to deliver the Luxurie Legs Products into the US market via the use of online marketing strategies developed by Facebook, Instagram and Youtube and to use fulfillment services including but not limited to The Jay Group, ModusLink and Echodata. By implementing these companies’ services Madison will be able to establish a reliable supply chain that will receive delivery of the Luxurie Legs Products, warehouse the Luxurie Legs Products, package as per each customer order, and ship the Luxurie Legs Products to the customer efficiently and cost effectively.
Madison Technologies Inc. Form 10-K - 2020 Page 13
Management expects to expand Madison’s sales distribution strategy beginning in May 2021 and to be operational by November 2021, this includes the following components:
1. Initial inventory with an estimated cost of $600,000
2. Social media and online advertising of $50,000
Madison sales strategy is to develop online exposure through the use of social media marketing and brand influencers and top social media personas in an aggressive strategy to use the power of their social networks to help build and maintain the shave club membership base.
Sovryn Holdings, Inc.
Madison’s plan is to acquire 50 independent TV stations in the top 30 DMA’s over the next 6-12 months. In addition, Madison expects to grow the station base to 100 tv stations nationwide through additional acquisitions targeting the top 100 DMA’s across the nation, ultimately covering 80% of the population of the U.S. over the next 18-24 months.
Each licensed TV station has the capability of delivering 10+ different revenue “streams” (channels) of content Over-the-Air, 24 hours per day/7 days per week . If converted to the new FCC approved ATSC 3.0 technology, the streaming capacity will increase to 25+ channels or more, giving Sovryn the potential to stream content upon completion of the roll-up to over 2500 channels aggregated over expected 100 stations.
Madison will operate the stations remotely and centrally, eliminating the need for in-market personnel or a studio facility. Remote operations of stations results in significant cost efficiencies. Recent FCC deregulation in TV broadcasting has eliminated the need for full time employees and studio facilities operating Class A and Low Power stations allowing for greater cost efficiency.
In addition to the costs associated to Madison’s sales and distribution strategy, management anticipates incurring the following expenses during the next 12 month period:
● Management anticipates spending approximately $30,000 in ongoing general and administrative expenses per month for the next 12 months, for a total anticipated expenditure of $360,000 over the next 12 months. The general and administrative expenses for the year will consist primarily of professional fees for the audit and legal work relating to Madison’s regulatory filings throughout the year, as well as transfer agent fees, annual mineral claim fees and general office expenses.
● Management anticipates spending approximately $15,000 in complying with Madison’s obligations as a reporting company under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and as a reporting issuer in Canada. These expenses will consist primarily of professional fees relating to the preparation of Madison’s financial statements and completing and filing its annual report, quarterly report, and current report filings with the SEC and with SEDAR in Canada.
Madison Technologies Inc. Form 10-K - 2020 Page 14
As at December 31, 2020, Madison had cash of $9,491 and current liabilities of $610,757. Accordingly, Madison will require additional financing in the amount of $601,266 in order to fund its obligations as a reporting company under the Securities Act of 1934 and its general and administrative expenses for the next 12 months.
During the 12 month period following the date of this annual report, management anticipates that Madison will not generate any revenue. Accordingly, Madison will be required to obtain additional financing in order to continue its plan of operations. Management believes that debt financing will not be an alternative for funding Madison’s plan of operations as it does not have tangible assets to secure any debt financing. Rather, management anticipates that additional funding will be in the form of equity financing from the sale of Madison’s Common Stock. However, Madison does not have any financing arranged and cannot provide investors with any assurance that it will be able to raise sufficient funding from the sale of its Common Stock to fund its plan of operations. In the absence of such financing, Madison will not be able to acquire any interest in a new technology and its business plan will fail. Even if Madison is successful in obtaining equity financing and acquire an interest in a new technology, additional research and development will be required before a determination as to whether the technology will be commercially viable. If Madison does not continue to obtain additional financing, it will be forced to abandon its business and plan of operations.
Purchase of Significant Equipment
We do not intend to purchase any significant equipment during the next 12 months.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Madison has no off-balance sheet arrangements including arrangements that would affect its liquidity, capital resources, market risk support and credit risk support or other benefits.
Material Commitments for Capital Expenditures
Madison had no contingencies or long-term commitments at December 31, 2020.
Going Concern
The independent auditors’ report accompanying our December 31, 2020 and 2019 financial statements contains an explanatory paragraph expressing substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates that we will realize our assets and satisfy our liabilities and commitments in the ordinary course of business.
Tabular Disclosure of Contractual Obligations
Madison is a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and is not required to provide the information required under this item.
Madison Technologies Inc. Form 10-K - 2020 Page 15
Critical Accounting Policies
Madison’s financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. Preparing financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by management’s application of accounting policies. Management believes that understanding the basis and nature of the estimates and assumptions involved with the following aspects of Madison’s financial statements is critical to an understanding of Madison’s financial statements.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses in the reporting period. Madison regularly evaluates estimates and assumptions related to deferred income tax asset valuation allowances. Madison bases its estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. The actual results experienced by Madison may differ materially and adversely from Madison’s estimates. To the extent there are material differences between the estimates and the actual results, future results of operations will be affected.
Fair Value Measurements
Madison follows FASB ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures”, for all financial instruments and non-financial instruments accounted for at fair value on a recurring basis. This new accounting standard establishes a single definition of fair value and a framework for measuring fair value, sets out a fair value hierarchy to be used to classify the source of information used in fair value measurement and expands disclosures about fair value measurements required under other accounting pronouncements. It does not change existing guidance as to whether or not an instrument is carried at fair value. Madison defines fair value as the price that would be received from selling an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. When determining the fair value measurements for assets and liabilities, which are required to be recorded at fair value, Madison considers the principal or most advantageous market in which Madison would transact and the market-based risk measurements or assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, such as inherent risk, transfer restrictions and credit risk. Madison has adopted FASB ASC 825, “Financial Instruments”, which allows companies to choose to measure eligible financial instruments and certain other items at fair value that are not required to be measured at fair value. Madison has not elected the fair value option for any eligible financial instruments.