Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K under the heading “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” and the other financial information that appears elsewhere in this Form 10-K. We assume no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law.
Overview
Our Business Overview and Regulatory Environment
We deliver information technology (“IT”) solutions and services to help healthcare organizations achieve optimal clinical, financial and operational results. We sell our solutions to physicians, hospitals, governments, health systems, health plans, life sciences companies, retail clinics, retail pharmacies, pharmacy benefit managers, insurance companies, employer wellness clinics, and post-acute organizations, such as home health and hospice agencies. We help our clients improve the quality and efficiency of health care with solutions that include electronic health records (“EHRs”), information connectivity, private cloud hosting, outsourcing, analytics, patient access and population health management. We derive our revenues primarily from sales of our proprietary software (either as a perpetual license sale or under a subscription delivery model), support and maintenance services, and managed services, such as outsourcing, private cloud hosting and revenue cycle management.
Our solutions empower healthcare professionals with the data, insights and connectivity to other caregivers they need to succeed in an industry that is rapidly changing from fee-for-service models to fee-for-value advanced payment models. We believe we offer some of the most comprehensive solutions in our industry today. Healthcare organizations can effectively manage patients and patient populations across all care settings using a combination of our physician, hospital, health system, post-acute care and population health management products and services. We believe these solutions will help transform health care as the industry seeks new ways to manage risk, improve quality and reduce costs.
Globally, healthcare providers face the urgency of the COVID-19 crisis, as well as an aging population and the challenge of caring for an increasing number of patients with chronic diseases. At the same time, practitioners worldwide are also under growing pressure to demonstrate the delivery of high-quality care at lower costs and to fully embrace expectations of efficient, patient-centered information exchange. Congressional oversight of EHRs and health information technology has increased in recent years. This increased oversight could impact our clients and our business. The passage of the 21st Century Cures Act in December 2016 assuaged some concerns about interoperability and possible U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) oversight of EHRs, and the ensuing regulations on data blocking and interoperability were released by the Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”) in March 2020. Some aspects of the new regulations will have a significant effect on our business processes and how our clients must exchange patient information. In particular, Allscripts will need to complete development work to satisfy the revised and new certification criterion, and we and our clients will be making adjustments to business practices associated with information exchange and provision of Electronic Health Information.
Population health management, analytics, data connectivity based on open APIs and other exchange mechanisms, and patient engagement are strategic imperatives that can help address these challenges. In the United States, for example, such initiatives are critical tools for success under the framework of the QPP, launched by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”) in response to the passage of the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (“MACRA”). As healthcare providers and payers continue to migrate from volume-based to value-based care delivery and also weigh compliance with the newly finalized information blocking and interoperability regulations from the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (“ONC”) and CMS, solutions that are connected to the consumer marketplace are the key to market leadership in the new healthcare reality. Additionally, there is a small but growing portion of the market interested in payment models not reliant on insurance, such as the direct primary care model, where doctors and other healthcare professionals understand the clinical value of the interoperable EHR separate and apart from payment mechanisms established by public or commercial payers or associated reporting requirements.
We believe our solutions are delivering value to our clients by providing them with powerful connectivity, as well as increasingly robust patient engagement and care coordination tools, enabling users to successfully participate in alternative payment models that reward high value care delivery. Population health management is commonly viewed as one of the critical next frontiers in healthcare delivery, and we expect this evolving area to be a key driver of our future growth, both domestically and globally.
Recent advances in molecular science and computer technology are creating opportunities for the delivery of personalized medicine solutions. We believe these solutions will transform the coordination and delivery of health care, ultimately improving patient outcomes.
Specific to the United States, the healthcare IT industry in which we operate continues to experience a period of change, primarily due to new laws and regulations, as well as modifications to industry standards. Various incentives that exist today (including alternative payment models that reward high value care delivery) have been rapidly moving health care toward a time where EHRs are as common as practice management or other financial systems in all provider offices. As a result, we believe that legislation, such as the aforementioned MACRA, as well as other government-driven initiatives (including at the state level), will continue to affect healthcare IT adoption and expansion, including products and solutions like ours. We also believe that we are well-positioned in the market to take advantage of the ongoing opportunity presented by these changes.
The recently finalized ONC regulation on interoperability, information blocking and certification is the most recent major government action that will affect the health IT industry. The rule requires that we evaluate changes to business processes related to requests for the access, exchange or use of Electronic Health Information, as defined in the ONC regulation. The rule, which involves complex and specific requirements, will necessitate adjustments in our interactions with the market, but we also believe it may lead healthcare organizations to further invest in technologies, such as those sold by Allscripts, that facilitate the exchange of health data and support patients’ access to their information. Given Allscripts’ OPEN strategy, the Company’s application programming interface-based approach to connectivity launched more than a decade ago that exemplified for policy makers the potential benefits of APIs, we expect that Allscripts may be better positioned to adjust more quickly than some other companies in our sector to the requirement to remove barriers to information exchange.
In addition, given that CMS annually proposes new and revised regulations, including payment rules for upcoming years, which require the use of EHRs and other health information technology even as we comply with previously published rules, Allscripts continues to prepare on an ongoing basis for additional areas in which we must execute compliance. Similarly, our ability to achieve newly expanded applicable product certification requirements resulting from changing strategies at the ONC and the scope of related development and other efforts required to meet regulatory standards could both materially impact our capacity to maximize the market opportunity. All of our market-facing EHR solutions and several other relevant products have successfully completed the testing process and are certified as 2015 Edition-compliant by an ONC-Authorized Certification Body (the most recent edition), and we remain committed to satisfying the new certification requirements and meeting the 2015 Edition conditions of certification that were finalized in March 2020 by the ONC.
The MACRA encouraged the adoption of health IT necessary to satisfy new requirements more closely associating the report of quality measurements to Medicare payments. Following the finalization of the Physician Fee Schedule rule each year, providers accepting payment from Medicare must select one of two payment models: the Merit-based Incentive Payment System (“MIPS”) or an Advanced Alternative Payment Model (“APM”). Both of these approaches require substantive reporting on quality measures. Additionally, the MIPS consolidated several preexisting incentive programs, including Medicare Meaningful Use and Physician Quality Reporting System, under one umbrella, as required by statute. We believe this law, coupled with other pay for value programs, continues to drive additional interest in our products among providers who were not eligible for or chose not to participate in the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (“HITECH”) incentive program but now need EHR and other health IT solutions and among those looking to purchase more robust systems to comply with increasingly complex MACRA requirements. Additional regulations continue to be released annually, clarifying requirements related to reporting and quality measures, which will enable physician populations and healthcare organizations to make strategic decisions about the purchase of analytic software or other solutions important to comply with the new law and associated regulations.
Given the ongoing expansion of payment models requiring analytics, reporting and greater data connectivity, we believe large physician groups will continue to purchase and enhance their use of EHR technology; while the number of very large practices with over 100 physicians that have not yet acquired such technology is insignificant, the number of those considering replacement purchases is increasing. Such practices may choose to replace older EHR technology in the future as regulatory requirements (such as those related to Advanced APMs) and business realities dictate the need for updates and upgrades, as well as additional features and functionality. As incentive payment strategies shift again through policies released by the new Biden Administration in the United States (including the anticipated growth in Medicaid payment models) and the role of commercial payers and their continued expansion of alternative payment models and interest in attaining larger volumes of clinical data, we expect that there will be additional incentives for purchase and expansion of EHR technology.
We also continue to see activity in local community-based buying, whereby individual hospitals, health systems and integrated delivery networks subsidize the purchase of EHR licenses or related services for local, affiliated physicians and physicians across their employed physician base in order to leverage buying power and to help those practices take advantage of payment reform opportunities. This activity has also resulted in a pull-through effect where smaller practices affiliated with a community hospital are motivated to participate in a variety of incentive programs, while the subsidizing health system expands connectivity within the local provider community. We believe that the rules related to exceptions to the Stark Law and Anti-Kickback Statute, which were revised to continue to allow hospitals and other organizations to subsidize the purchase of EHRs, will possibly further contribute to the growth of this market dynamic. We expect that these regulatory revisions from HHS will further support value-based payment models and their associated purchasing arrangements between hospitals and physician practices, including allowing subsidization of replacement EHRs and not just initial purchases. The associated challenge we face is to successfully position, sell, implement and support our products sold to hospitals, health systems or integrated delivery networks that subsidize their affiliated physicians. We believe the community programs we have in place will help us penetrate these markets.
We believe we have taken and continue to take the proper steps to maximize the opportunity presented by the QPP and other new payment programs. However, given the effects the laws are having on our clients, there can be no assurance that they will result in significant new orders for us in the near term, and if they do, that we will have the capacity to meet the additional market demand in a timely fashion.
Additionally, other public laws to reform the United States healthcare system contain various provisions that may impact us and our clients. The previous Trump Administration and several state governments took steps to alter aspects of the PPACA, including through litigation being reviewed by the United States Supreme Court, which continues to create uncertainty for us and for our clients. We expect that the new Biden Administration will take a different approach to the PPACA, including attempting to expand the number of citizens covered by health insurance, which would be favorable for our clients. Some laws currently in place may have a positive impact by requiring the expanded use of EHRs, quality measurement, prescription drug monitoring and analytics tools to participate in certain federal, state or private sector programs. Others, such as laws or regulations mandating reductions in reimbursement for certain types of providers, restrictions on “surprise billing” for certain services and by certain provider types, or increasing regulatory oversight of our products or our business practices, may have a negative impact by reducing the resources available to purchase our products. Increases in fraud and abuse enforcement and payment adjustments for non-participation in certain programs or overpayment of certain incentive payments may also adversely affect participants in the healthcare sector, including us.
Allscripts continues to see increased opportunities stemming from the large stores of patient data accumulated from our industry-leading client base and partnerships with other EHR companies, including NextGen Healthcare Inc., a leading provider of ambulatory-focused healthcare technology solutions. Through collaboration with researchers and life sciences companies, we believe Allscripts may play a role in the study of real-world evidence as it relates to post-market surveillance of new medicines or the study of therapeutics related to COVID-19, as examples. We continue to closely monitor regulations and/or guidance from HHS, the CDC and the FDA, as well as any new laws that take shape in Congress that may touch third-party uses of patient data and/or any related privacy implications for patient consent.
Congressional focus on addressing the opioid epidemic in part through technological applications and reducing clinician burden is likely to continue. Further, CMS has finalized changes to the Evaluation & Management coding structure that ties closely to our clients’ requirements to document the care they are delivering prior to payment. We expect these changes may have a positive effect on clinician satisfaction with our EHRs, though the fundamentals of payment will remain in transition to value-based payment models.
New payment and delivery system reform programs, including those modeled after those of the Medicare program, are increasingly being rolled out at the state level through Medicaid administrators, as well as through the private sector, presenting additional opportunities for us to provide software and services to our clients who participate. We also must take steps to comply with state-specific laws and regulations governing companies in the health information technology space.
Impacts of COVID-19
The global outbreak of COVID-19 has severely restricted the level of economic activity around the world and the degrees of any economic recovery in various jurisdictions have not been linear. We have been carefully monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our global operations and the demand for our products. We are conducting business with certain modifications to employee travel, employee work locations, and cost reduction initiatives, among other modifications. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners and stockholders.
Allscripts, as is true of other health IT vendors, has been asked by the White House, HHS, the CDC, and state and local governments to support public health efforts to contain the pandemic by expanding COVID-19 reporting options available to our clients. Our technology has been instrumental to the provision of high-quality care, aiding not only public health surveillance, including tracking which patients have received a vaccine, but also in clinical decision support interventions to aid in triage, diagnosis and treatment; information exchange as patients are moved from site to site; predictive analytics based on local data for surge anticipation; and patient transitions as they leave the acute care environment for post-acute rehabilitative care.
The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as we saw delays in deals with upfront software revenue and professional services implementations across our inpatient and outpatient base. We also experienced lower revenue from our clients as patient volumes were lower for most of our clients. During 2020, we implemented cost reduction actions across all functional disciplines of the Company, including headcount reductions and temporary salary measures. We believe our cost reduction actions and current liquidity provide us with operating and financial flexibility to assist us in navigating through this uncertain environment.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact the Company’s results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. Future developments include new information that may emerge concerning the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, resurgences or additional “waves” of outbreaks of COVID-19 in various jurisdictions (including new strains or mutations of the virus), the impact of COVID-19 on economic activity, the actions taken by health authorities and policy makers to contain its impacts on public health and the global economy and the availability and effectiveness of vaccines. See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, for an additional discussion of risks related to COVID-19.
Summary of Results
During 2020, we continued to make progress on our key strategic, financial and operational imperatives aimed at driving higher client satisfaction, improving our competitive positioning by expanding the depth and breadth of our products and, ultimately, positioning the Company for sustainable long-term growth both domestically and globally. In that regard, we had success across the below key areas:
•
U.S. Core Solutions and Services: During 2020, we extended our engagement with our largest customer, Northwell Health, along with PIH Health Inc., Medway NHS Foundation Trust, Hospital Corporation of America and others. We also extended our long-standing strategic alliance with Microsoft to enable the expanded development and delivery of cloud-based health IT solutions. The five-year extension with Microsoft will support our cloud-based SunriseTM electronic health record, making Microsoft the cloud provider for the solution and opening up co-innovation opportunities to help transform healthcare with smarter, more scalable technology.
•
Value-based Care: During 2020, we introduced innovative solutions to our clients to help them manage through the COVID-19 pandemic. Our innovative solutions consisted of the rapid deployment of FollowMyHealth telehealth, COVID-19 specific workflows for our SunriseTM solution, capacity surveillance, regulatory reporting and vaccine administration tasks within our EHRs and IT services staffing to supplement our client teams.
•
Capital Deployment and Operational Efficiency: During 2020, we significantly improved our leverage profile by divesting two businesses, CarePort and EPSi, for $1.35 billion and $365.0 million, respectively. The net proceeds from these divestitures will allow us to reduce debt, invest in growth for our solutions and support significant share repurchases. During 2020, we also implemented cost reduction initiatives across all functional disciplines of the Company to reduce low-value operating costs, align our cost base with the COVID-19 impact on revenues and improve our margins.
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.5 billion, a decrease of 8% compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. Software delivery, support and maintenance revenue totaled $915 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 9% compared to the prior year. Client services revenue totaled $588 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 6% compared to the prior year.
Gross profit decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a decrease in revenues and higher amortization of software development costs. The decrease was partially offset by the impact of the cost reduction initiatives. Gross margin slightly increased by 0.2% to 37.6% compared with the prior year period gross margin of 37.4%, primarily due to the previously mentioned cost reduction initiatives.
Our contract backlog as of both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was $4.1 billion, respectively.
Revenues and Expenses
Revenues are derived primarily from sales of our proprietary software (either under a perpetual or term license delivery model), subscription-based software sales, post-contract client support and maintenance services, and managed services solutions, such as outsourcing, private cloud hosting and revenue cycle management.
Cost of revenue consists primarily of salaries, incentive compensation and benefits for our billable professionals, third-party software costs, third-party transaction processing and consultant costs, amortization of acquired proprietary technology and capitalized software development costs, depreciation and other direct engagement costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, incentive compensation and benefits for management and administrative personnel, sales commissions and marketing expenses, facilities costs, depreciation and amortization and other general operating expenses.
Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries, incentive compensation and benefits for our development personnel, third-party contractor costs and other costs directly or indirectly related to development of new products and upgrading and enhancing existing products.
Asset impairment charges consist primarily of non-cash charges related to the retirement of hosting assets, the abandonment of a lease, our decision to discontinue several software development projects and the impairment of several intangible assets.
Goodwill impairment charges incurred related to our Hospital and Health System business and to the acquisition of the patient/provider engagement solutions business from NantHealth during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Amortization of intangible and acquisition-related assets consists of amortization of customer relationships, tradenames and other intangibles acquired through business combinations recorded under the purchase method of accounting.
Interest expense consists primarily of interest on the 0.875% Convertible Senior Notes (the “0.875% Notes”), on the 1.25% Cash Convertible Senior Notes (the “1.25% Notes”) and on the outstanding debt under our senior secured credit facility, including the amortization of debt discounts and debt issuance costs. On July 1, 2020, the 1.25% Notes matured and were paid in full.
Other income (loss), net included a settlement with the Department of Justice related to our Practice Fusion business.
Gain on sale of businesses, net consists of net gains from the divestitures during 2018 of the OneContent and Strategic Sourcing businesses, both of which had been acquired in the fourth quarter of 2017 with the EIS Business.
Impairment of long-term investments primarily consists of other-than-temporary and realized losses associated with our available for sale marketable securities.
Equity in net income of unconsolidated investments represents our share of the equity earnings of our investments in third parties accounted for under the equity method, including a gain on the sale of a third-party equity-method investment and the amortization of cost basis adjustments.
Income from discontinued operations during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 includes activity associated with CarePort and EPSi. Income from discontinued operations during the year ended December 31, 2018 includes activity associated with Netsmart LLC (“Netsmart”) and of two solutions acquired with the EIS Business, which were sunset in 2018.
Gain on sale of discontinued operations consists of net gains from the divestitures of EPSi and CarePort during 2020 and our investment in Netsmart during 2018.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported and disclosed in our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes. The accounting policies and estimates discussed in this section are those that we consider to be particularly critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements because their application involves significant judgment regarding the effect of inherently uncertain matters on our financial results. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
Refer to Note 2, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K for a detailed discussion about our revenue recognition accounting policies.
Credit Loss for Contracts Assets
Refer to Note 2, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K for a detailed discussion about our credit loss accounting policy related to contract assets.
Credit Loss for Trade Accounts Receivable
Refer to Note 3, “Accounts Receivable” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K for a detailed discussion about our credit loss accounting policy related to trade accounts receivable.
Business Combinations
Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While we use our best estimates and assumptions as a part of the purchase price allocation process to accurately value assets acquired, including intangible assets, and the liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed, with a corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or the liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are reflected in our consolidated statement of operations.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill and intangible assets acquired in a business combination and determined to have an indefinite useful life are not amortized but are tested for impairment annually or between annual tests when an impairment indicator exists. If an optional qualitative goodwill impairment assessment is not performed, we are required to determine the fair value of each reporting unit. If a reporting unit’s fair value is lower than its carrying value, an impairment loss equal to the excess will be recorded not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill assigned to the reporting unit. The recoverability of indefinite-lived intangible assets is assessed by comparison of the carrying value of an asset to its estimated fair value. If we determine that the carrying value of an asset exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment loss equal to the excess will be recorded.
The determination of the fair value of our reporting units is based on a combination of a market approach, which considers benchmark company market multiples, and an income approach, which utilizes discounted cash flows for each reporting unit and other Level 3 inputs. Under the income approach, we determine fair value based on the present value of the most recent cash flow projections for each reporting unit as of the date of the analysis, and calculate a terminal value utilizing a terminal growth rate. The significant assumptions under this approach include, among others: income projections, which are dependent on sales to new and existing clients, new product introductions, client behavior, competitor pricing, operating expenses, the discount rate and the terminal growth rate. The cash flows used to determine fair value are dependent on a number of significant management assumptions such as our expectations of future performance and the expected economic environment, which are partly based on our historical experience. Our estimates are subject to change given the inherent uncertainty in predicting future results. Additionally, the discount rate and the terminal growth rate are based on our judgment of the rates that would be utilized by a hypothetical market participant. As part of the goodwill impairment testing, we also consider our market capitalization in assessing the reasonableness of the fair values estimated for our reporting units.
During 2020, we made organizational changes that affected our reportable segments. Refer to Note 19, “Business Segments” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K for detailed discussion about these changes.
We performed our 2020 goodwill impairment test as of October 1, 2020. The fair value of each of our reporting units substantially exceeded its carrying value and no indicators of impairment were identified as a result of the annual impairment test. If future anticipated cash flows from our reporting units are significantly lower or materialize at a later time than projected, our goodwill could be impaired, which could result in significant charges to earnings.
We performed our 2019 goodwill impairment test as of October 1, 2019. As a result of this test, we concluded that the carrying value of the Hospitals and Health Systems (“HHS”) reporting unit, which is now reported within the Core Clinical and Financial Solutions reporting unit, exceeded its fair value. As a result, we recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $25.7 million. This goodwill impairment charge is reflected on the “Goodwill impairment charge” line in our consolidated statements of operations. The fair values of all other reporting units substantially exceeded their carrying values. As of December 31, 2019, the goodwill allocated to the HHS reporting unit was $485.5 million.
We performed our 2018 goodwill impairment test as of October 1, 2018. We concluded that the carrying value of the NantHealth reporting unit exceeded its fair value as a result of this test. Our latest available financial forecasts at the time of the annual goodwill impairment test reflected that projected future operating costs exceeded projected revenues resulting in negative operating margins for the NantHealth reporting unit. As a result, we recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $13.5 million, representing the entire goodwill balance assigned to the NantHealth reporting unit.
In accordance with GAAP, definite-lived intangible assets are required to be amortized over their respective estimated useful lives and reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amounts may not be recoverable. We estimate the useful lives of our intangible assets and ratably amortize the value over the estimated useful lives of those assets. If the estimates of the useful lives should change, we will amortize the remaining book value over the remaining useful lives or, if an asset is deemed to be impaired, a write-down of the value of the asset may be required at such time.
Software Development Costs
We capitalize purchased software upon acquisition if it is accounted for as internal-use or if it meets the future alternative use criteria. For software to be sold, we capitalize incurred labor costs for software development from the time technological feasibility of the software is established, or when the preliminary project phase is completed in the case of internal use software, until the software is available for general release. Research and development costs and other computer software maintenance costs related to software development are expensed as incurred. We estimate the useful life of our capitalized software and amortize its value over that estimated life. If the actual useful life is shorter than our estimated useful life, we will amortize the remaining book value over the remaining useful life or the asset may be deemed to be impaired and, accordingly, a write-down of the value of the asset may be recorded as a charge to earnings.
The carrying value of capitalized software is dependent on the ability to recover its value through future revenue from the sale of the software. At each balance sheet date, the unamortized capitalized costs of a software product are compared with the net realizable value of that product. The net realizable value is the estimated future gross revenues from that product reduced by the estimated future costs of completing and disposing of that product, including the costs of performing maintenance and client support required to satisfy our responsibility at the time of sale. The amount by which the unamortized capitalized costs of a software product exceed the net realizable value of that asset is written off. If we determine that the value of the capitalized software could not be recovered, a write-down of the value of the capitalized software to its recoverable value is recorded as a charge to earnings.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets or liabilities for the tax-effected temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of our assets and liabilities and for net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. The objectives of accounting for income taxes are to recognize the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in an entity’s financial statements or tax returns. Judgment is required in addressing the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements or tax returns. The deferred tax assets are recorded net of a valuation allowance when, based on the weight of available evidence, we believe it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the recorded deferred tax assets will not be realized in future periods. We consider many factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of our deferred tax assets, including recent cumulative earnings experience, expectations of future taxable income, the ability to carryback losses and other relevant factors.
In addition, we are subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. A change in the assessment of the outcomes of such matters could materially impact our consolidated financial statements.
The calculation of tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations. We recognize liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes may be required. If we ultimately determine that payment of these amounts is unnecessary, then we reverse the liability and recognize a tax benefit during the period in which we determine that the liability is no longer necessary. We also recognize tax benefits to the extent that it is more likely than not that our positions will be sustained if challenged by the taxing authorities. To the extent we prevail in matters for which liabilities have been established, or are required to pay amounts in excess of our liabilities, our effective tax rate in a given period may be materially affected. An unfavorable tax settlement would require cash payments and may result in an increase in our effective tax rate in the year of resolution. A favorable tax settlement would be recognized as a reduction in our effective tax rate in the year of resolution. We report interest and penalties related to uncertain income tax positions in the income tax (provision) benefit line of our consolidated statements of operations.
We file income tax returns in the United States federal jurisdiction, numerous states in the United States and multiple countries outside of the United States.
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value measurements are based upon observable and unobservable inputs. Observable inputs reflect market data obtained from independent sources, while unobservable inputs reflect our view of market participant assumptions in the absence of observable market information. We utilize valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. The fair values of assets and liabilities required to be measured at fair value are categorized based upon the level of judgment associated with the inputs used to measure their value in one of three categories (Levels 1 to 3). The values of assets and liabilities assigned to Level 3 require the most judgement and are based unobservable inputs or prices for which little or no market data exists. Therefore, Level 3 values can be susceptible to significant fluctuations, both positive and negative, from changes in the underlying assumption used by management. Refer to Note 6, “Fair Value Measurements and Other Investments” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K for detailed information about financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information with respect to recent accounting pronouncements and the impact of these pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements, refer to Note 1, “Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K.
Overview of Consolidated Results
NM-We define “NM” as not meaningful for increases or decreases greater than 200%.
Revenue
Recurring revenue consists of subscription-based software sales, support and maintenance revenue, recurring transactions revenue and recurring revenue from managed services solutions, such as outsourcing, private cloud hosting and revenue cycle management. Non-recurring revenue consists of perpetual software licenses sales, hardware resale and non-recurring transactions revenue, and project-based client services revenue.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Recurring revenue decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to prior year due to attrition. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in subscription revenue. Non-recurring revenue decreased due to lower upfront software revenues and project delays that impacted client services revenue. The decrease was partially offset by new deals in upfront software revenue.
The percentage of recurring and non-recurring revenue of our total revenue was 81% and 19%, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 78% and 22%, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Recurring revenue decreased during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to prior year due to attrition within the EIS and other businesses partially offset with growth in subscription revenue. The sale of the OneContent business on April 2, 2018 also contributed to the decline in recurring revenue. The OneContent business was acquired as part of the EIS Business acquisition on October 2, 2017, and it contributed $13 million of recurring revenue during the first quarter of 2018, including $1 million of amortization of acquisition-related deferred revenue adjustments. Non-recurring revenue increased due to higher sales of perpetual software licenses for our acute solutions and hardware in 2019 compared to 2018, partially offset by lower client services revenue related to the timing of software activations.
The percentage of recurring and non-recurring revenue of our total revenue was 78% and 22%, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared with 81% and 19%, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2018.
Gross Profit
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Gross profit decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to prior year primarily due to attrition, revenue mix, project delays and higher amortization of software development costs. The decrease was partially offset by new business in software subscription revenues and cost reduction initiatives.
Gross margin slightly increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to prior year primarily due to cost reduction initiatives.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Gross profit and margin decreased during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to prior year primarily due to an increase in hosting migration costs, higher amortization of software development, recognition of previously deferred costs and the sale of the OneContent business on April 2, 2018, which carried a higher gross margin compared with our other businesses. These were partially offset with an increase in organic sales for VeradigmTM and our acute solutions in 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the prior year, primarily due to the impact of cost reduction initiatives.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with the prior year, primarily due to headcount reduction actions taken during 2018 as part of the integration of EIS, Practice Fusion and Health Grid acquisitions. The sale of OneContent in 2018 also contributed to the decrease because there were one-time incentive compensation expenses. These decreases were partially offset with an increase in legal costs.
Research and Development
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Research and development expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the prior year, primarily due to the impact of cost reduction initiatives.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Research and development expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with prior year. This decrease was primarily due to the sale of OneContent on April 2, 2018, as there were $10 million of one-time incentive compensation costs recorded within Research and development expense as a result of the sale.
Asset Impairment Charges
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Asset impairment charges increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the prior year. We recorded a non-cash asset impairment charge of $23.1 million related to the write-off of the remaining Health Grid acquired customer relationship intangible balance. This was partially offset by the write-off of $13.9 million related to the Health Grid contingent consideration accrual. We recorded $31.2 million of non-cash asset impairment charges related to the write-off of capitalized software due to the asset values exceeding the product’s net realizable value. The write-off was primarily related to one product in which we determined it would no longer be placed into service. We also recorded a $34.3 million non-cash asset impairment charge due to the write-off of deferred costs related to our private cloud hosting operations. The write-off was driven by the expectation of improved efficiencies in the utilization of our contract compared with historical deferred costs, which was identified through our broader cost reduction initiatives. Asset impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2019 were primarily the result of impairing the remaining NantHealth acquired customer relationship intangible balance of $8.1 million. We also recognized non-cash impairment charges of $2.7 million on the retirement of certain hosting assets due to data center migrations.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Asset impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2019 were primarily the result of impairing the remaining NantHealth acquired customer relationship intangible balance of $8.1 million. We also recognized non-cash impairment charges of $2.7 million on the retirement of certain hosting assets due to data center migrations. We incurred non-cash asset impairment charges during the year ended December 31, 2018 of $33.2 million related to the write-off of capitalized software as a result of our decision to discontinue several software development projects. We also recognized $22.9 million of non-cash asset impairment charges in 2018 related to our acquisition of the patient/provider engagement solutions business from NantHealth in 2017, which included the write-downs of $2.2 million of acquired technology and $20.7 million, representing the unamortized value assigned to the modification of our existing commercial agreement with NantHealth, as we no longer expect to recover the value assigned to these assets. The remaining $2.1 million of non-cash asset impairment charges recorded during the year ended December 31, 2018 relate to the disposal of fixed assets as a result of relocating and consolidating business functions and locations from recent acquisitions.
Goodwill Impairment Charge
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
We recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $25.7 million related to our Hospitals and Health Systems reporting unit during the year ended December 31, 2019. We impaired all of the goodwill previously recognized as part of the acquisition of NantHealth’s patient/provider engagement solutions business following the completion of our annual goodwill impairment during the year ended December 31, 2018. Refer to Note 8, “Goodwill and Intangible Assets” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K for further information regarding these impairments.
Amortization of Intangible and Acquisition-Related Assets
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The decrease in amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the prior year was due to normal amortization expense in 2020 and certain intangible assets being fully amortized in 2019.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
The slight increase in amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with the prior year was due to incremental amortization expense associated with intangible assets as part of business combinations completed during 2018.
Interest Expense
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The decrease in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the prior year was primarily due to a decline in the effective interest rates on outstanding debt, along with allocating a portion of interest expense to discontinued operations related to the required paydown of outstanding debt as a result of sale of CarePort and EPSi. The decrease was partially offset by the increase in debt discounts and issuance cost amortization related to the early retirement of the senior secured term loan.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased compared to the prior year due to lower average outstanding borrowings partially offset by higher interest rates.
Other income (loss), net
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Other income (loss), net for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of a $145 million settlement with the DOJ related to the Company’s civil and criminal investigations of Practice Fusion. Refer to Note 22, “Contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K for further information regarding the investigations. This was partially offset by a $5 million reversal of an earnout related to a prior acquisition. Other income (loss), net also consists of a combination of interest income and miscellaneous receipts and expenses.
Gain on Sale of Businesses, Net
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Gain on sale of businesses, net for the year ended December 31, 2018 consists of a gain of $177.9 million and a loss of $5.6 million from the divestitures of the OneContent and Strategic Sourcing businesses, respectively, both of which were acquired as part of the EIS Business acquisition during the fourth quarter of 2017.
Impairment of Long-term Investments
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Impairment of long-term investments during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $1.6 million, which included $1.0 million related to one of our cost-method investments and $0.6 million related to one of our third-party equity-method investments. Impairment of long-term investments during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of an impairment of $1.7 million associated with one of our long-term equity investments. The impairment was partially offset with a $1.0 million recovery of a long-term equity investment that had previously been impaired. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized non-cash charges on two of our cost-method equity investments and a related note receivable. These charges equaled the cost bases of the investments and the related note receivable prior to the impairment.
Equity in Net Income of Unconsolidated Investments
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Equity in net income of unconsolidated investments represents our share of the equity earnings (losses) of our investments in third parties accounted for under the equity method of accounting based on one quarter lag. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $16.8 million gain from the sale of a third-party equity-method investment.
Income Tax Benefit
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Our provision for income taxes differs from the tax computed at the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate due primarily to valuation allowance, permanent differences, income attributable to foreign jurisdictions taxed at rates different from the United States federal statutory income tax rate, state taxes, tax credits and certain discrete items. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with the prior year, differs primarily due to the non-deductible portion of the Department of Justice settlement recorded in the year ended December 31, 2019 and the valuation allowance of $16.9 million recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the $0.9 million valuation allowance recorded in the year ended December 31, 2019. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets within the jurisdictions from which they arise, we consider all available evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. In evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide, we consider three years of cumulative operating income (loss). In the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $16.9 million of valuation allowance, primarily against foreign deferred tax assets.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
The United States Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”) was enacted on December 22, 2017 and introduced significant changes to the income tax law in the United States. Effective in 2018, the Tax Act reduced the United States statutory tax rate from 35% to 21% and created new taxes on certain foreign-sourced earnings and certain related-party payments, which are referred to as the Global Intangible Low-taxed Income ("GILTI") tax and Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax (“BEAT”) rules, respectively. In addition, in 2017 we were subject to a one-time transition tax on accumulated foreign subsidiary earnings not previously subject to income tax in the United States.
Our provision for income taxes differs from the tax computed at the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate due primarily to valuation allowance, permanent differences, income attributable to foreign jurisdictions taxed at rates different from the United States federal statutory income tax rate, state taxes, tax credits and certain discrete items. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared with the prior year, differs primarily due to the fact that the permanent items, credits and the impact of foreign earnings had a greater impact on the pre-tax income of $13.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2018, compared to the impacts of these items on a pre-tax loss of $206.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets within the jurisdictions from which they arise, we consider all available evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. In evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide, we consider three years of cumulative operating income (loss). In the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded $0.9 million of valuation allowance, mostly against foreign deferred tax assets.
Discontinued Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
During 2020, we implemented a strategic initiative to sell two of our businesses, EPSi and CarePort. Since both businesses were part of the same strategic initiative and were sold within the same period, the combined sale of EPSi and CarePort represents a strategic shift that had a major effect on our operations and financial results. These businesses are now reported together as discontinued operations for all periods presented. On October 15, 2020, we completed the sale of the EPSi business. Prior to the sale, EPSi was part of the Unallocated category as it did not meet the requirements to be a reportable segment nor the criteria to be aggregated into our two reportable segments. On its own, the divestiture of the EPSi business did not represent a strategic shift that had a major effect on our operations and financial results. However, the combined sale of EPSi and CarePort represented a strategic shift that had a major effect on our operations and financial results. Therefore, EPSi is treated as a discontinued operation. On December 31, 2020, we completed the sale of the CarePort business. Prior to the sale, CarePort was part of the Data, Analytics and Care Coordination reportable segment. On its own, the divestiture of the CarePort business represents a strategic shift that had a major effect on our operations and financial results. Refer to Note 18, “Discontinued Operations” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding discontinued operations.
On December 31, 2018, we sold all of the Class A Common Units of Netsmart owned by the Company. Prior to the sale, Netsmart comprised a separate reportable segment, which due to its significance to our historical consolidated financial statements and results of operations, is now reported as a discontinued operation as a result of the sale for all periods presented. The loss from discontinued operations represents the net of losses incurred by Netsmart for the year ended December 31, 2018 partly offset by earnings attributable to two solutions acquired during the fourth quarter of 2017 as part of the EIS Business that we no longer support effective as of March 31, 2018. Refer to Note 18, “Discontinued Operations” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding discontinued operations.
Non-Controlling Interests
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The net loss attributable to non-controlling interest represents the share of earnings of consolidated affiliates that is attributable to the affiliates’ common stock that is not owned by us for each of the periods presented. The remaining minority interest of Pulse8 was purchased during the first quarter of 2019. We have no remaining non-controlling interest activities to report. The accretion of redemption preference on redeemable convertible non-controlling interest represents the accretion of liquidation preference at 11% per annum to the value of the preferred units of Netsmart, prior to the sale of our investment in Netsmart on December 31, 2018.
Segment Operations
Overview of Segment Results
The results for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 have been recast to conform to the current year presentation, which reflects several changes made to our organizational and reporting structure during the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 19, “Business Segments” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K for detailed discussion about these changes to our segments.
Core Clinical and Financial Solutions
Our Core Clinical and Financial Solutions segment derives its revenue from the sale of software applications for patient engagement, integrated clinical and financial management solutions, which primarily include EHR-related software, financial and practice management software, related installation, support and maintenance, outsourcing, private cloud hosting, and revenue cycle management.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Core Clinical and Financial Solutions revenue decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with the prior year due to attrition, lower upfront software revenues and project delays that impacted client services revenue. The decrease was partly offset by an increase in hardware revenues. In 2019, hardware revenues were included within “Unallocated Amounts”, but in 2020 we began to allocate hardware revenues between the operating segments.
Gross profit decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the prior year primarily due to the previously mentioned attrition, revenue profile and project delays. The decrease was partially offset by cost reduction initiatives. Gross margin increased slightly during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the prior year primarily due to cost reduction initiatives.
Loss from operations increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the prior year due to a decline in gross profit. The decrease was partially offset by cost reduction initiatives.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Core Clinical and Financial Solutions revenue decreased during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared with the prior year due to attrition within the EIS and other businesses and the sale of the OneContent and Strategic Sourcing businesses on March 15, 2018 and on April 2, 2018, respectively. These businesses were acquired as part of the EIS business acquisition on October 2, 2017 and contributed $16 million of revenue during the first quarter of 2018, including $1 million of amortization of acquisition-related deferred revenue adjustments. These decreases were partly offset by higher sales of perpetual software licenses for our acute solutions in 2019 compared to 2018 and additional revenue from the 2018 acquisition of Health Grid.
Gross profit and margin decreased during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with the prior year primarily due to the previously mentioned attrition and increased hosting migration costs. These were partially offset with lower costs due to the decline in sales. The sale of OneContent, which had higher overall profitability, compared with our other Core Clinical and Financials Solutions businesses, contributed to the decline of gross profit and margin.
Loss from operations decreased during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with prior year, primarily due to the result of (i) lower asset impairment and goodwill charges, (ii) lower net transaction-related severance and (iii) lower personnel costs from the headcount reduction actions taken along with the one-time incentive compensation expenses related to the One-Content sale in 2018. Operating margin increased during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with prior year, as the decline in gross profit was offset by the previously mentioned items that attributed to the decline in loss from operations.
Data, Analytics and Care Coordination
Our Data, Analytics and Care Coordination segment derives its revenue from the sale of practice reimbursement and payer and life sciences solutions, which are mainly targeted at physician practices, payers, life sciences companies and other key healthcare stakeholders. These solutions enable clients to transition, analyze, coordinate care and improve the quality, efficiency and value of healthcare delivery across the entire care community.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Data, Analytics and Care Coordination revenue decreased slightly during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the prior year, primarily due to decreases in outsourcing and transaction-related revenues. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in subscription revenue.
Gross profit and margin decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the prior year, primarily due to the previously mentioned decreases in revenue and an increase in transfer pricing costs.
Loss from operations decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the prior year, primarily due to lower selling, general and administrative, and research and development expenses driven by cost reduction initiatives. Operating margin increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the prior year, as the decline in gross profit was offset by cost reduction initiatives.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Data, Analytics and Care Coordination revenue increased during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with the prior year due to an increase in organic sales. Gross profit increased during the year ended December 31, 2019 due to an increase in organic sales and cost reductions partially offset with headcount growth and hosting migration costs. The acquisition of Practice Fusion during the first quarter of 2018 also contributed to the increases.
Gross margin and operating margin decreased during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared with the prior year, primarily due to (i) an increase in hosting migration costs, (ii) costs associated with recent acquisitions, (iii) headcount growth and (iv) partially offset with other cost reductions.
Unallocated Amounts
The EPSi operating segment was included in the “Unallocated Amounts” category until it was sold on October 15, 2020. Prior to the sale, EPSi did not meet the requirements to be a reportable segment nor the criteria to be aggregated into the two reportable segments. Following the sale of EPSi, the “Unallocated Amounts” category consists of transfer pricing revenues.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year due to an increase in transfer pricing revenues.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Revenue increased during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year due to a decrease in transfer pricing revenues.
Contract Backlog
Contract backlog represents the value of bookings and support and maintenance contracts that have not yet been recognized as revenue. A summary of contract backlog by revenue category is as follows:
Total contract backlog as of December 31, 2020 increased compared with December 31, 2019. Total contract backlog can fluctuate between periods based on the level of revenue and bookings as well as the timing and mix of renewal activity and periodic revalidations.
We estimate that the aggregate contract backlog as of December 31, 2020 will be recognized as revenue in future years as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The primary factors that influence our liquidity include, but are not limited to, the amount and timing of our revenues, cash collections from our clients, capital expenditures and investments in research and development efforts, including investments in or acquisitions of third parties, and divestitures. Our liquidity was influenced by the COVID-19 pandemic during the year ended December 31, 2020. We increased cash on hand through additional credit facility borrowings to provide financial flexibility and enhance our ability to address potential future uncertainties regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity consisted of cash and cash equivalents of $538 million and available borrowing capacity of $899 million under our senior secured revolving facility (“Revolving Facility”). The change in our cash and cash equivalents balance is reflective of the following:
Operating Cash Flow Activities
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities - continuing operations increased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with the prior year. The decrease in loss from operations and the increase from non-cash adjustments to net income in 2020 is partially related to the absence of a goodwill impairment charge. The increase in non-cash adjustments to net income in 2020 is primarily related to an increase in asset impairment charges and an increase in deferred taxes, which were partially offset by lower depreciation and the amortization of right-of-use assets, the sale of a third-party equity-method investment and a decrease in stock-based compensation expenses. The net income and the cash impact of changes in operating assets and liabilities during 2020 reflects $147 million of payments and interests related to the settlement with the DOJ in connection with the Practice Fusion investigations.
Net cash used in operating activities - discontinued operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects transaction expenses and the additional tax provision related to the gain from the sales of EPSi and CarePort on October 15, 2020 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we had net cash provided by operating activities - continuing operations compared to net use of cash from operating activities - continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in loss from operations and in non-cash adjustments to net loss in 2019 partially related to the absence in the gains on sale of divestitures, such as OneContent in 2018. The increase in non-cash adjustments to net loss in 2019 also related to higher depreciation and the amortization of right-of-use assets. The net loss and the cash impact of changes in operating assets and liabilities during 2019 reflects the $145 million settlement with the DOJ in connection with the Practice Fusion investigations.
Net cash provided by operating activities - discontinued operations decreased during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year, primarily due to the advance income tax payment related to the gain realized on the sale of our investment in Netsmart on December 31, 2018.
Investing Cash Flow Activities
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net cash provided by investing activities - continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from the cash received from the sales of EPSi and CarePort on October 15, 2020 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Net cash used in investing activities - discontinuing operations decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year, primarily due to a decrease in capitalized software costs for EPSi and CarePort.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Net cash used in investing activities - continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted from the absence of the sale of businesses compared to prior year. The sale of Netsmart and OneContent produced significant investing cash inflows during 2018, which was partially offset with cash paid for the acquisitions of Practice Fusion and Health Grid. Capital expenditures also decreased in 2019 compared with prior year.
Net cash used in investing activities - discontinued operations decreased during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year, primarily due to the sale of our investment in Netsmart on December 31, 2018.
Financing Cash Flow Activities
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net cash used in financing activities - continuing operations increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to (i) the repayment of debt under our senior secured credit facility, (ii) the absence of issuance of new debt, (iii) the repayment of certain convertible senior notes and (iv) the payment made to the accelerated share purchase program. This was partially offset by credit facility borrowings in 2020 and the absence of purchasing the remaining minority interest in Pulse8.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Net cash provided by financing activities - continuing operations increased during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to inflows resulting from (i) the issuance of the 0.875% Convertible Senior Notes, (ii) lower credit facility payments, which were partially offset by less credit facility borrowings, and (iii) a decrease in the repurchase of common stock. The inflows were partially offset by the purchase of the remaining minority interest in Pulse8 during 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities - discontinued operations during the year ended December 31, 2018 resulted from borrowings by Netsmart used to finance business acquisitions.
Future Capital Requirements
The following table summarizes future payments under our 0.875% Convertible Senior Notes and Revolving Facility as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Amount represents the face value of the 0.875% Convertible Senior Notes, which includes both the liability and equity portions.
(2)
Assumes no additional borrowings after December 31, 2020 and that all drawn amounts are repaid upon maturity. However, amounts represent unused fees related to the available borrowing capacity on the Revolving Facility.
Revolving Credit Facilities
We have a $900 million Revolving Facility that expires on February 15, 2023. A total of up to $50 million of the Revolving Facility is available for the issuance of letters of credit, up to $10 million of the Revolving Facility is available for swingline loans, and up to $100 million of the Revolving Facility could be borrowed under certain foreign currencies. We had no borrowings and $1.1 million of letters of credit outstanding under the Revolving Facility as of December 31, 2020. We had $899 million available, net of outstanding letters of credit, under the Revolving Facility as of December 31, 2020. There can be no assurance that we will be able to draw on the full available balance of the Revolving Facility if the financial institutions that have extended such credit commitments become unwilling or unable to fund such borrowings. Refer to Note 10, “Debt” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K for further information.
Other Matters Affecting Future Capital Requirements
Our total investment in research and development efforts during 2020 decreased compared to 2019, as the Company implemented cost reduction initiatives. Our total spending consists of research and development costs directly recorded to expense, which are offset by the capitalization of eligible development costs.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents of $538 million as of December 31, 2020, our future cash flows, our borrowing capacity under our Revolving Facility and access to capital markets, taken together, provide adequate resources to meet future operating needs as well as scheduled payments of short and long-term debt. We cannot provide assurance that our actual cash requirements will not be greater than we expect as of the date of this Form 10-K. We will, from time to time, consider the acquisition of, or investment in, complementary businesses, products, services and technologies, and the repurchase of our common stock under our stock repurchase program, each of which might impact our liquidity requirements or cause us to borrow under our Revolving Facility or issue additional equity or debt securities.
If sources of liquidity are not available or if we cannot generate sufficient cash flow from operations during the next twelve months, we might be required to obtain additional sources of funds through additional operating improvements, capital market transactions, asset sales or financing from third parties, a combination thereof or otherwise. We cannot provide assurance that these additional sources of funds will be available or, if available, would have reasonable terms.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We enter into obligations with third parties in the ordinary course of business. The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash in future periods, assuming all obligations reach maturity. We do not believe that our cash flow requirements can be assessed based upon this analysis of these obligations as the funding of these future cash obligations will be from future cash flows from the sale of our products and services that are not reflected in the following table.
(1)
Our liability for uncertain tax positions was $29 million as of December 31, 2020. Liabilities that may result from this exposure have been excluded from the table above since we cannot predict, with reasonable reliability, the outcome of discussions with the respective taxing jurisdictions, which may or may not result in cash settlements. We have also excluded net deferred tax liabilities of $12 million from the amounts presented in the table as the future amounts that will be settled in cash are uncertain.
(2)
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303 of Regulation S-K as of December 31, 2020. We have obligations to pay contingent consideration associated with acquisitions of $1.0 million as of December 31, 2020. Such contingent consideration obligations are excluded from the above table since their payment is based on future financial objectives, the achievement of which we cannot predict.
(3)
Purchase obligations consist of minimum purchase commitments for telecommunication services, computer equipment, maintenance, consulting and other commitments.