ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes to those statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, these forward-looking statements involve many risks and uncertainties including those referred to herein. Our actual results could differ materially from those indicated in such forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, such as those set forth herein under “Risk Factors”. We are under no duty to update any of the forward-looking statements after the date of this registration statement to conform these statements to actual results.
Overview
We were formed on October 31, 2003 for the primary purpose of becoming a financial services company. We operate our business primarily through three subsidiaries, American Life, 1505 Capital, and Seneca Re. American Life is licensed to sell, underwrite, and market life insurance and annuity products in 21 states and the District of Columbia and has pending applications in additional states. We also provide insurance company administrative services through a division known as “m.pas” that was formed in 2019. 1505 Capital provides investment advisory and related asset management services. Seneca Re reinsures various types of the life insurance risks through one or more single purposes entities or “cells.”
In 2018, we began implementation of a new business plan with the purpose of leveraging technology and reinsurance to distribute insurance products through IMOs as described elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
American Life’s sales force continues to grow, with eight third-party IMOs presently offering our products. American Life obtained an A.M. Best Rating of B++ in December 2018 that was affirmed in 2020. A. M. Best also upgraded American Life's long-term issuer credit rating to bbb+ from bbb in December 2020.
Beginning in mid-2019, American Life began ceding portions of its MYGA and FIA annuity business to third-party insurance companies and Seneca Re that we refer to us as “quota shares.” For detailed information see “Note 8 - Reinsurance” to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Effective March 12, 2020, we formed Seneca Re for the purpose of reinsuring various types of risks through one or more single purpose entitles, or “protected cells.” On March 30, 2020, Seneca Re received its certificate of authority to transact business as a captive insurance company. On May 12, 2020, we contributed $300,000 to Seneca Re for a 100% ownership interest. Seneca Re has one protected cell, cell 2020-01 (“SRC1”) as of December 31, 2020. We contributed a total of $15.0 million through December 31, 2020 to capitalize SRC1, which is consolidated in our financial statements.
Effective on April 24, 2020, we raised capital of $5,227,000 from various third-party investors and issued 231,655 shares of voting common stock at $22.50 per share. Also, on April 24, 2020, we signed a securities purchase agreement with Crestline for additional capital of $10.0 million and issued 444,444 shares of our voting common stock to Crestline at $22.50 per share.
On August 10, 2020, Midwest filed Articles of Amendment of Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation (“Amendment”) that changed the total number of shares that it is authorized to issue to 22,000,000 shares of common stock, of which 20,000,000 were designated as voting common stock with a par value of $0.001 per share and 2,000,000 shares were designated as non-voting common stock with a par value of $0.001 per share. The Amendment also provides for 2,000,000 shares of authorized preferred stock with a par value of $0.001 per share. The Amendment provided that upon effectiveness, each 500 shares of common stock either issued or outstanding would be converted into one share of voting common stock through a reverse stock split. The Amendment was effective as of August 27, 2020. Fractional shares were not issued in connection with the reverse stock split but were paid in cash. The Company paid approximately $175,000 for those fractional shares and is now holding treasury stock represented by that amount. Outstanding shares as of December 31, 2020 were 3,737,564 and as restated for December 31, 2019 were 2,042,670. All prior periods disclosed in this 10-Q have been restated to reflect the reverse stock split per share amounts.
On December 21, 2020, Midwest completed a public offering of 1,000,000 shares of its voting common stock offered by the Company at a price to the public of $70.00 per share. On December 17, 2020, Midwest voting common stock was listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the ticker symbol “MDWT.” The aggregate net proceeds to the Company were approximately $65.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions.
Midwest used the net proceeds of the offering to support the growth of its insurance subsidiaries, American Life with a capital contribution of $50.0 million and Seneca Re with a capital contribution of $7.5 million.
COVID-19
We continue to closely monitor developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic to assess any potential adverse impact on our business. Due to the evolving and highly uncertain nature of this pandemic, it currently is not possible to provide a longer-term estimate of potential insurance or reinsurance exposure or the indirect effects the pandemic may have on our results of operations, financial condition or liquidity. Management implemented the Company’s business continuity plan in early March 2020 and operated through July 2020 with the majority of employees working remotely. Operations continued as normal despite a sharp increase in sales during the period. We continue to monitor the Center for Disease Control and Prevention and State of Nebraska guidelines regarding employee safety.
Our management will continue to monitor our investments and cash flows to evaluate the impact as this pandemic evolves.
Unrealized Losses; Embedded Derivatives
American Life has agreements with several third-party reinsurers that have funds withheld (“FW”) and modified coinsurance (“Modco”) coinsurance provisions under which the assets related to the reinsured business are maintained by American Life as collateral; however, ownership of the assets and the total return on the asset portfolios belong to the third-party reinsurers. Under GAAP, this arrangement is considered an embedded derivative as discussed in “Note 5 - Derivative Instruments” to our Consolidated Financial Statements. As a result of price increases in 2020, assets carried as investments on American Life’s financial statements for the third-party reinsurers contained unrealized gains of approximately $2.9 million as of December 31, 2020. The terms of the contracts with the third-party reinsurers provide that unrealized gains on the portfolios accrue to the third-party reinsurers. We account for these unrealized gains by recording equivalent realized losses on our income statement. Accordingly, the unrealized gains on the assets held by American Life on behalf of the third-party reinsurers were offset by recording an embedded derivative loss of $2.9 million. If prices of investments recover, the unrealized losses of the third-party reinsurers may be reduced; therefore, the associated embedded derivative gain recognized by us for 2020, would be reduced accordingly.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our accounting and reporting policies are in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”). Preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. The following is a summary of our significant accounting policies and estimates. These accounting policies inherently require significant judgment and assumptions, and actual operating results could differ significantly from management’s estimates determined using these policies. We believe the following accounting policies, judgments and estimates are the most critical to the understanding of our results of operations and financial position. For further discussion of our accounting policies and estimates see “Note 1 - Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Valuation of Investments
The type and amount of investments that can be made by a life insurance company are specifically controlled by applicable state statutes and rules and regulations of the respective state departments of insurance. American Life has adopted investment policies in compliance with the insurance laws of the State of Nebraska. We have a significant amount of investments on our balance sheets that are held as collateral for our reinsurers.
American Life has a long-term investment policy aimed at protecting capital and earning attractive risk adjusted returns while maintaining compliance with Nebraska’s insurance investment laws. Our investments are managed by our senior management team, who have many years of asset management experience, along with the advice of 1505 Capital, which was established in 2018 to provide financial and investment advisory and management services to clients and related investment, trading and financial activities, including American Life.
Our investment portfolio expanded in 2019 to include a broader class of fixed maturities (including collateralized loan obligations, corporate, asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities), mortgage loans, derivatives and other investments including assets we hold as collateral for reinsurance entitles. Fixed maturities, which are classified as available-for-sale, are carried at their fair value in the consolidated balance sheets, with unrealized gains or losses recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). Mortgage loans are carried at unpaid principle which is also used for their fair value in the consolidated balance sheets. Derivatives are carried at fair market value with the realized gains or losses recorded in realized gains (losses) on the comprehensive income statement. We utilize external independent third-party pricing services to determine the fair values on investment securities available-for-sale. We have processes and controls in place to review prices received from service providers and unusual fluctuations in prices. In the event that a price is not available from a third-party pricing service, we pursue external pricing from brokers. Generally, we pursue and utilize only one broker quote per security. In doing so, we solicit only brokers that have previously demonstrated knowledge and experience of the subject security. Trades are cleared through independent brokers after competitive prices are solicited.
We frequently review our investment portfolio for declines in fair value. Our process for identifying declines in the fair value of investments that are other-than-temporary involves consideration of several factors including (a) the time or period and extent to which the fair value has been less than the amortized cost basis, (b) adverse conditions specifically related to a security, industry or geographic area, (c) the historical and implied volatility of the fair value of a security, (d) payment structure of a security, (e) failure of issuer of a security to make interest payments, (f) changes to the rating of a security, and (g) possible recoveries or additional declines in the fair value after the balance sheet date. The recognition of other-than-temporary impairment losses on debt securities is dependent on the facts and circumstances related to a specific security. If we intend to sell a security or it is more likely than not that we would be required to sell a security prior to recovery of the amortized cost, the difference between amortized cost and fair value is recognized in the income statement as an other-than-temporary impairment. As it relates to debt securities, if we do not expect to recover the amortized basis, do not plan to sell the security and if it is not more likely than not that we would be required to sell a security before the recovery of its amortized cost, the recognition of the other-than-temporary impairment is bifurcated. We recognize the credit loss portion through earnings in the income statement and the noncredit loss portion in accumulated other comprehensive loss. The credit component of an other-than-temporary impairment is determined by comparing the net present value of projected cash flows with the amortized cost basis of the debt security. The net present value is calculated by discounting our best estimate of projected future cash flows at the effective interest rate implicit in the fixed income security at the date of acquisition. Cash flow estimates are derived using assumptions regarding probability of default, including changes in credit ratings, and estimates regarding timing and amount of recoveries associated with a default.
Intangibles
We assess the recoverability of indefinite-lived intangible assets at least annually or whenever events or circumstances suggest that the carrying value of an identifiable indefinite-lived intangible asset may exceed the sum of the future discounted cash flows expected to result from its use and eventual disposition. If the asset is considered to be impaired, the amount of any impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the impaired asset.
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of American Life’s state licenses. We compared the carrying value to the current costs of obtaining licenses in those states. As of December 31, 2020, the sum of the fair value of those licenses exceeded the carrying value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets.
Reinsurance
We expect to reinsure most of the risks associated with our issued annuities. Our reinsurers may be domestic, foreign or capital markets investors seeking to assume U.S. insurance business. In most reinsurance transactions, American Life will remain exposed to the credit risk of reinsurers, or the risk that one or more reinsurers may become insolvent or otherwise unable or unwilling to pay for policyholder claims. We seek to mitigate the credit risk relating to reinsurers by generally either requiring that the reinsurer post substantial collateral or make other financial commitments as a security for the reinsured risks. Under these reinsurance agreements, there typically is a monthly or quarterly settlement of premiums, claims, surrenders, collateral, and other administration fees.
In a typical reinsurance transaction, we receive a ceding commission and reimbursement of certain expenses at the time liabilities are reinsured, plus ongoing fees for the administration of the business ceded. Our reinsurers are typically not “accredited” or qualified as reinsurers under Nebraska law. In order to receive credit for reinsurance for transactions with these reinsurers and to reduce potential credit risk, we usually hold collateral from the reinsurer on a funds withheld basis or require the reinsurer to maintain a trust that holds assets backing up its obligation to pay claims on the business it assumes. In some cases, the reinsurer may appoint an investment manager to manage these assets pursuant to guidelines approved by us that are consistent with state investment statutes and regulations relating to reinsurance. Our investment advisor subsidiary, 1505 Capital, is appointed to manage these assets and we receive additional ongoing asset management fees via 1505 Capital.
Future Policy Benefits
We establish liabilities for amounts payable under our policies, including annuities. Generally, amounts are payable over an extended period of time. Under GAAP, our annuities are treated as deposit liabilities, where we use account value in lieu of future policy reserves. Our FIA reserves are calculated by an independent consulting actuary and our MYGA reserves equal the account value from our policy administration system. We currently do not offer traditional life insurance products
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets are recorded based on the differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities at the applicable tax rates. The principal assets and liabilities giving rise to such differences are investments, insurance reserves, and deferred acquisition costs. A deferred tax asset valuation allowance is established when there is uncertainty that such tax assets would be realized. We have no uncertain tax positions that we believe are more-likely-than not that the benefit will not be realized.
Recognition of Revenues
Amounts received as payment for annuities are recognized as deposits to policyholder account balances and included in future insurance policy benefits. Annuity premiums are shown as a financing activity in the consolidated statement of cash flows. Revenues from these contracts are comprised of fees earned for administrative and policyholder services, which are recognized over the period of the annuity contracts and included in other revenue. Through our reinsurance contracts, revenues are earned through ceding commissions, which are capitalized, and our independent consulting actuary determines the amounts to be recognized as income over the period of the annuity contracts. Deferred coinsurance ceding commissions are shown as an operating activity in the consolidated statement of cash flows. Revenues from asset management services are recognized as earned.
Derivative Instruments
Derivatives are used to hedge the risks experienced in our ongoing operations, such as equity, interest rate and cash flow risks, or for other risk management purposes, which primarily involve managing liability risks associated with our FIA product and reinsurance agreements. Derivatives are financial instruments whose values are derived from interest rates, foreign exchange rates, financial indices, or other underlying notional amounts. Derivative assets and liabilities are carried at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets.
To qualify for hedge accounting, at the inception of the hedging relationship, we formally document our designation of the hedge as a cash flow or fair value hedge and our risk management objective and strategy for undertaking the hedging transaction identifying how the hedging instrument is expected to hedge the designated risks related to the hedged item, the method to retrospectively and prospectively assess the hedging instrument’s effectiveness and the method to be used to measure ineffectiveness. A derivative designated as a hedging instrument must be assessed as being highly effective in offsetting the designated risk of the hedged item. Hedge effectiveness is also assessed periodically throughout the life of the designated hedging relationship.
In the late 2019, we began investing in options to hedge our interest rate risks on our FIA product. Options typically do not qualify for hedge accounting; therefore, we chose not to use hedge accounting for the related options that we currently have. We value our derivatives at fair market value with the offset being recorded on our income statement as a realized gain or (loss).
Additionally, reinsurance agreements written on a funds withheld basis contain embedded derivatives on our FIA product. Gains or (losses) associated with the performance of assets maintained in the relevant deposit and funds withheld accounts are reflected as realized gains or (losses) in the income statement.
Net Loss
Net loss increased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the following:
Increases to Net Loss:
1. Our salaries increased approximately $3.6 million due to the increase in personnel during 2020 to support our new business growth.
2. Other operating expenses increased by $4.2 million due to:
a. The FIA product has embedded derivatives included in the account value that are market driven. Our third-party reinsurers of our FIA products pay American Life an option allowance to purchase derivatives. As of December 31, 2020, the mark-to-market on those embedded derivatives was in a positive position. Due to the terms of the agreement with the third-party reinsurers, American Life has to mark the option allowance paid by the reinsurers to market to cover their obligations to the policyholders. The mark-up of those options resulted in a $2.3 million expense on American Life’s books and payable to the reinsurers.
b. The remaining increase in other operating expenses of $1.3 million included legal and stock related fees related to the reverse stock split, the formation of the Vermont captive Seneca Re, and incurred audit and consultant fees.
3. On November 30, 2018, American Life entered into an Assumption and Indemnity Reinsurance Agreement with Unified Life Insurance Company (“Unified”), a Texas domiciled stock insurance company. The Reinsurance Agreement provided that American Life cede and Unified agreed to reinsure, on an indemnity reinsurance basis, 100% of the liabilities and obligations under substantially all of American Life’s life, annuity and health policies. The increase in the net loss year over year was due to the indemnity coinsurance converting to assumptive for approximately of 11%, or $305,600, compared to 79% or $2.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This is recorded as amortization of deferred gain on reinsurance.
Decreases to Net Loss:
4. Net investment income increased to $4.0 million due to the growth of our investment portfolio and the increased retention of our business.
5. Service fee revenue, net of expenses increased by approximately $1.7 million due to Midwest purchasing the remaining 49% interest in June of 2020. This increase is also due to the increased size of the investment portfolio that they are managing for third-parties.
6. The net realized gains on investments increased to $2.6 million over prior year due to sale of securities for profit and yield pick-ups. Gross gain retained by American Life was $5.1 million which was offset by the unrealized gains on our investment portfolio held for the reinsurer of $2.9 million. The terms of the contracts with the third-party reinsurers provide that unrealized gains on the portfolios accrue to the third-party reinsurers. We account for these unrealized gains by recording equivalent realized losses in the net realized gains on investments. Accordingly, the unrealized gains on the assets held by American Life on behalf of the third-party reinsurers were offset by recording an embedded derivative loss of $2.9 million in net realized gains on investments. If prices of investments recover, the unrealized losses of the third-party reinsurers may be reduced; therefore, the associated embedded derivative gain recognized by us, would be reduced accordingly.
Consolidated Results of Operations - Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
The following summarizes the sources of our revenue:
Premium revenue: The introduction of our MYGA and FIA products discussed above generated a large volume of new business; however, these products are defined as investment contracts and U.S. GAAP requires that premiums be deferred as deposit-type liabilities on our balance sheet. American Life expects to introduce additional versions of these products in 2021 primarily in the annuity business. The table below shows premium issued under statutory accounting principles (“SAP”) on our two annuity products:
(1) Under SAP, the MYGA and FIA premiums are treated as premium revenue. Under GAAP these products are defined as deposit-type contracts; therefore, the premium revenue that is recognized under SAP is accounted for under GAAP as deposit-type liabilities on our balance sheet and is not recognized on our income statement.
(2) We began selling the FIA product in November 2019.
Investment income, net of expenses: The components of net investment income for 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
The increase in investment income for 2020 over 2019 was due to the investment income earned on the bonds and mortgage loans purchased with the sales of our MYGA and FIA products that were not ceded to reinsurers during the period. Our investment portfolio grew to $518,194,579 as of December 31, 2020 compared to $138,602,143 as of December 31, 2019, as a result proceeds from our MYGA and FIA product sales. American Life ceded $228.1 million of premiums to reinsurers and transferred approximately $7.7 million of investment income related to the ceded premiums as required by the terms of its reinsurance agreements.
Net realized gains on investments: The net realized gains on investments for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2,550,396 and included a loss of $2,910,608 from an embedded derivative and $3,466,272 of net realized gains related to derivatives utilized to hedge the obligations to FIA policyholders; the net realized gains related to derivatives utilized to hedge the obligations to FIA policyholders is offset by expenses, including interest credited expenses and other operating expenses The increase in net realized gains on investments was primarily due to favorable trading activity.
The embedded derivative is a total return swap related to coinsurance agreements with our reinsurers. American Life has treaties with several reinsurers that have funds withheld coinsurance provisions, under which the assets backing the treaties are maintained by American Life as collateral but the assets and total return on the asset portfolios belong to the reinsurers. Under GAAP this arrangement is considered an embedded derivative as discussed in Note 5 - Derivative Instruments to our Consolidated Financial Statements. The total return swap is included in net realized gains on investments. As a result of price increases in 2020, assets carried as investments on American Life’s financial statements for the third party reinsurers contained unrealized gains of approximately $2.9 million as of December 31, 2020. The terms of the contracts with the third party reinsurers provide that unrealized gains or losses on the portfolios accrue to the third party reinsurers. We account for these unrealized gains by recording equivalent realized losses on our income statement. Accordingly, the unrealized gains on the assets held by American Life on behalf of the third party reinsurers were offset by recording an embedded derivative loss of $2.9 million.
Amortization of deferred gain on reinsurance: The decrease was due to the indemnity coinsurance converted by a third-party reinsurer to assumptive reinsurance of approximately $305,600 and approximately $2.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Under assumptive reinsurance we no longer have a legal obligation for policies subject to such agreement that became assumptive with the reinsurer. This decrease was offset by the amortization of the ceding commission deferred from the reinsurance agreements with other reinsurers which were not in effect in 2019.
Service fee revenue, net of expenses: For financial statement purposes, 1505 Capital, our investment adviser subsidiary became consolidated into Midwest as of April 2, 2019. The increase in 2020 was due primarily to the increase in services provided to our third-party reinsurers and purchasing the remaining 49% interest in 1505 Capital in June of 2020.
Other revenue: The increase in third-party administration (“TPA”) fees earned was due to us providing other administrative services to clients.
Expenses
Our expenses for the periods indicated are summarized in the table below:
Interest credited: The increase was due to the increase in the retention on the sales of the new MYGA and FIA products during the year of 2020 compared to the 5% retention on the FIA product only in 2019 that was classified as deposit-type funds. The increase is also due to the consolidation of the SRC1 entity which includes the interest credited for the deposit-type contracts held on its books.
Death and other benefits: Death benefits decreased due to the reduction of the amount of our estimate during 2020 related to the escheatment of aged death claims.
Increase in benefit reserves: The change in benefit reserves was due to the annuity products that were classified on the balance sheet under deposit-type contracts.
Amortization of deferred acquisition costs: The increase was due to the deferred acquisition costs (”DAC”) deferred on the sale of American Life’s MYGA and FIA products retained that were not ceded to third-party reinsurers.
Salaries and benefits: The increase was due to the addition of personnel to service our new business growth. We are hiring more in-house expertise to service our growth initiatives.
Other operating expenses: Other operating expenses were approximately $4.2 million higher than prior year. The primary items of this increase are:
Increases:
● Our FIA product has embedded derivatives included in the account value. Those derivatives are market driven. The reinsurers that reinsure the FIA products pay an option allowance to American Life to purchase derivatives. As of December 31, 2020, the mark-to-market on those allowances were in a positive position so American Life incurred a $2.3 million expense and payable to the reinsurers for that mark-up.
● Due to the valuation completed on the preferred stock on Midwest’s investment in Ironbound Reinsurance Company Limited, an unaffiliated reinsurance company organized under the laws of Barbados (“Ironbound”), it was determined that a impairment should be recorded for the full value of the preferred stock with by setting up an expense impairment of $500,000.
● Other expenses increased related to stock and legal fee increases of approximately $520,000 due to our reverse stock split and the formation of the Seneca Re captive in Vermont; audit and actuarial of $481,000 due to the increased audit costs associate with our growing business; consultants to assist with the growth of the business of $434,000; and investment fees of $384,000 related to our derivative administration.
Decreases:
● Midwest had non-recurring expenses related to the Xenith note that was converted to common stock in 2019 of $1.0 million.
● Travel decreased by approximately $125,000 primarily due to impact of COVID-19.
Investments
Most investments on our balance sheets are held on behalf of our reinsurers as collateral under our reinsurance agreements. As a result, our investment allocations are largely a function of our collective reinsurer investment allocations. While the reinsurers own the investment risk on these assets, we typically restrict their investment allocations via control over the selection of the asset manager as well as asset restrictions set forth in investment guidelines. Additionally, in many of our reinsurance agreements, our affiliate investment manager, 1505 Capital, is selected as the asset manager.
The investment guidelines typically include U.S. government bonds, corporate bonds, commercial mortgages, asset backed securities, municipal bonds, and collateral loans. The duration of our investments is 5 to 10 years in line with that of our liabilities. We do allow non-U.S. dollar denominated investments where the foreign exchange risk is hedged back to U.S. dollars.
The following table shows the carrying value of our investments by investment category and cash and cash equivalents, and the percentage of each to total invested assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Increases in fixed maturity securities primarily resulted from the sale of our new MYGA and FIA products during 2020. Most of the investments as of December 31, 2020 are held as collateral for our reinsurers.
The following table shows the distribution of the credit ratings of our portfolio of fixed maturity securities by carrying value as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Reflecting the quality of securities maintained by us, 81.1% and 96.7% of all fixed maturity securities were investment grade as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We expect that our MYGA and FIA products sales will cause an increase in investable assets in future periods.
Market Risks of Financial Instruments
The primary market risks affecting the investment portfolio are interest rate risk, credit risk and liquidity risk. With respect to investments that we hold on our balance sheet as collateral, our reinsurers bear the market risks related to these investments, while we bear the market risks on any net retained investments.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk arises from the price sensitivity of investments to changes in interest rates. Interest and dividend income represent the greatest portion of an investment’s return for most fixed maturity securities in stable interest rate environments. The changes in the fair value of such investments are inversely related to changes in market interest rates. As interest rates fall, the interest and dividend streams of existing fixed-rate investments become more valuable and fair values rise. As interest rates rise, the opposite effect occurs. Our liabilities also have interest rate risk though GAAP does not require our liabilities to be marked to market. We mitigate interest rate risk by monitoring and matching the duration of assets compared to the duration of liabilities.
Credit Risk
We are exposed to credit risk through counterparties and within the investment portfolio. Credit risk relates to the uncertainty associated with an obligor’s ability to make timely payments of principal and interest in accordance with the contractual terms of an instrument or contract. We manage our credit risk through diversification of investments amongst many corporations and numerous industries. Additionally, our investment policy limits the size of holding in any particular issuer.
Liquidity Risk
We are exposed to liquidity risk when liabilities come due. In order to pay a policyholder, we may need to liquidate assets. If our assets are illiquid assets, we might be unable to convert an asset into cash without giving up capital and income due to a lack of buyers or an inefficient market. We seek to mitigate this risk by keeping a portion of our investment portfolio in liquid investments.
Statutory Accounting and Regulations
Our primary insurance subsidiary, American Life, is required to prepare statutory financial statements in accordance with SAP prescribed by the NDOI. SAP primarily differs from GAAP by charging policy acquisition costs to expense as incurred, establishing future benefit liabilities using actuarial assumptions as well as valuing investments and certain assets and accounting for deferred taxes on a different basis. For further discussion regarding SAP as well as net income (loss) of American Life under SAP, see Note 16 to our
Consolidated Financial Statements. American Life maintains sufficient capital and surplus to comply with regulatory requirements as of December 31, 2020.
State insurance laws and regulations govern the operations of all insurers and reinsurers such as our insurance and reinsurance company subsidiaries. These various laws and regulations require that insurance companies maintain minimum amounts of statutory surplus as regards policyholders and risk-based capital and determine the dividends that insurers can pay without prior approval from regulators. The statutory net income of American Life is one of the primary sources of additions to our statutory surplus as regards policyholders, in addition to capital contributions from us.
We have reported our insurance subsidiaries’ assets, liabilities and results of operations in accordance with GAAP, which varies from SAP. The following items are principal differences between SAP and GAAP:
• requires that we exclude certain assets, called non-admitted assets, from the balance sheet.
• requires us to expense policy acquisition costs when incurred, while GAAP allows us to defer and amortize policy acquisition costs over the estimated life of the policies.
• dictates how much of a deferred income tax asset that we can admit on a statutory balance sheet.
• requires that we record certain investments at cost or amortized cost, while we record other investments at fair value; however, GAAP requires that we record all investments at fair value.
• allows bonds to be carried at amortized cost or fair value based on the rating received from the Securities Valuation Office of the NAIC, while they are recorded at fair value for GAAP.
• allows ceding commission income to be recognized when written if the cost of acquiring and renewing the associated business exceeds the ceding commissions, but under GAAP such income is deferred and recognized over the coverage period.
• requires that unearned premiums and loss reserves are presented net of related reinsurance rather than on a gross basis under GAAP.
• requires that we record reserves liabilities and expense, while we record all transactions related to the annuity products under GAAP as a deposit-type contract liability.
• requires a provision for reinsurance liability be established for reinsurance recoverable on paid losses aged over 90 days and for unsecured amounts recoverable from unauthorized reinsurers. Under GAAP there is no charge for uncollateralized amounts ceded to a company not licensed in the insurance affiliate’s domiciliary state and a reserve for uncollectable reinsurance is charged through earnings rather than surplus or equity.
• requires an additional admissibility test outlined in Statements on Statutory Accounting Principles, No. 101 and the change in deferred income tax is reported directly in capital and surplus, rather than being reported as a component of income tax expense under GAAP. Our insurance subsidiaries must file with the insurance regulatory authorities an “Annual Statement” which reports, among other items, net income (loss) and surplus as regards policyholders, which is called stockholders’ equity under GAAP.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We discuss below certain non-GAAP financial measures that our management uses, in conjunction with GAAP financial measures, as an integral part of managing our business and to, among other things:
• monitor and evaluate the performance of our business operations and financial performance;
• facilitate internal comparisons of the historical operating performance of our business operations;
• review and assess the operating performance of our management team;
• analyze and evaluate financial and strategic planning decisions regarding future operations; and
• plan for and prepare future annual operating budgets and determine appropriate levels of operating investments.
Non-GAAP financial measures used by us may be calculated differently from, and therefore may not be comparable to, similarly titled measures used by other companies. These non-GAAP financial measures should be considered along with, but not as alternatives to, our operating performance measures as prescribed by GAAP.
Annuity Premiums
Annuity premiums, also referred to as sales or direct written premiums, do not correspond to revenues under GAAP, but are relevant metrics to understand our business performance. Under statutory accounting practices or SAP, our annuity premiums received are treated as premium revenue. Our premium metrics include all sums paid into an individual annuity in a given period. We typically transfer all or a substantial portion of the premium and policy obligations to reinsurers. Ceded premium represents the premium we transfer to reinsurers in a given period. Retained premium represents the portion of premium received a given period that was not ceded to reinsurers and will either be reinsured in a subsequent period or retained by us. We typically retain premiums prior to transferring them to reinsurers to facilitate block and other reinsurance transactions involving portfolios of annuity premiums.
The following table sets forth premiums received under SAP. Under GAAP these products are defined as deposit-type contracts; therefore, the premium revenue is accounted under GAAP as deposit-type liabilities on our balance sheet and is not recognized in our income statement.
Adjusted Revenue
Our adjusted revenue represents the revenue we receive and retain taking into account the reinsurance transactions we complete. We define adjusted revenue as revenue including the impact of reinsurance transactions completed during the relevant period and excluding the total return on the asset portfolios that are owned by reinsurers but held by us, which in the table below is the net realized (gains) losses on investments. We hold these assets primarily to reduce potential credit risk of the reinsurers. Under our agreements with reinsurers, the assets backing the reinsurance agreements are typically maintained by us as collateral but the assets and the total return on the asset portfolios are received by the reinsurers. We receive ceding commissions from reinsurers based on ceded premium in a given period, the products reinsured and the terms of the reinsurance agreements. The revenue we receive from ceding commissions is recognized and earned immediately under SAP upon the completion of a reinsurance transaction in which we have ceded premiums to reinsurers. There is no collectability risk as the commissions are paid to us in full in cash when the policies are written and there are no further expenses associated with the collected premiums. The adjustment for deferred coinsurance ceding commission is a line item entry derived directly from our GAAP consolidated statements of cash flows in our Consolidated Financial Statements. Our management uses adjusted revenue as an internal measure of our underlying business performance and it provides useful insights into our results of operations.
Under GAAP, ceding commissions are deferred on our balance sheet as a deferred gain on coinsurance transactions and are subsequently amortized through amortization of deferred gain on reinsurance on the income statement over the period of the policy contracts.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of total revenue to adjusted revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively:
Adjusted Net Income (Loss)
Adjusted net income (loss) is management’s evaluation of the impact of revenue we receive and retain taking into account the reinsurance transactions we complete. Under these provisions with third party reinsurers, the assets backing the treaties are maintained by American Life as collateral and are carried on the balance sheet for American Life, but the assets are owned by the third party reinsurer; thus, the total return on the asset portfolio belongs to the third party reinsurers. Under GAAP this is considered an embedded derivative but is not designated as a hedge. We make an income statement adjustment for net realized losses on investments related to the embedded derivative. The net realized losses on investments related to the embedded derivative is included in GAAP net loss but is reversed dollar for dollar in the calculation of GAAP other comprehensive income through a reclassification adjustment for net realized gains on investments. We define adjusted net income (loss) as net income (loss) including the impact of reinsurance transactions completed during the period and excluding the total return on the asset portfolios that are owned by reinsurers and held by us. These items have no direct expense and the tax effect of these adjustments is already included in our tax basis, which is similar to our Adjusted Net Income. Our management uses adjusted net income (loss) as an internal measure of our underlying business performance and because it provides useful insights into our results of operations.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net loss to adjusted net income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively:
(1) All adjustments above do not have any tax impact.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents totaling $151,679,274. Approximately $15,227,000 of the increase in cash was due to the completion of private sales of our voting common stock in April 2020 and approximately $65,000,000 was due to the completion of a public offering completed on December 21, 2020. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our anticipated operating expenses and capital transaction expenditures for the foreseeable future.
The NAIC has established minimum capital requirements in the form of RBC that factors the type of business written by an insurance company, the quality of its assets and various other aspects of its business to develop a minimum level of capital known as “authorized control level risk-based capital” and compares this level to adjusted statutory capital that includes capital and surplus as reported under SAP, plus certain investment reserves. Should the ratio of adjusted statutory capital to control level RBC fall below 200%, a series of remedial actions by the affected company would be required. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, the RBC ratio of American Life was 1,092,205% and 840%, respectively.
American Life had a legacy block of business that was ceded off to a third-party reinsurer on July 1, 2018 through an indemnity reinsurance agreement that transferred 90% to assumptive reinsurer, resulting in American Life transferring all the risk and financial obligations of those policyholders to the third-party reinsurer.
Comparative Cash Flows
Cash flow is an important component of our business model because we receive annuity premiums and invest them upon receipt for our reinsurers and us and for the benefit of our policyholders.
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operational, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated. See the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flow in our Consolidated Financial Statements for more detailed information.
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used for operating activities was $16,243,887 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was comprised primarily of an increase in deferred coinsurance ceding commission due to a third-party reinsurance transaction of $10,620,562, an increase in policy liabilities of $10,042,046 primarily due to the increase in deposit type contracts ceded to reinsurers, an increase in our other assets and liabilities due to a payable for securities of $1,525,320. These were offset by capitalized deferred acquisition costs of $13,974,666, accrued investment income of $5,295,636, and the amounts recoverable from reinsurers of $4,477,126.
Cash Used in by Investing Activities
Net cash used for investing activities for 2020 was $367,481,662. The primary source of cash used was from our purchase of investments from sales of the MYGA and FIA products of $530,786,864. Offsetting this use of cash was our sale of investments of $163,314,094.
Cash Flow Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $491,688,618. The primary source of cash was net receipts on the MYGA and FIA products of $413,052,257 and capital raises, net of related expenses, of $79,311,805.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.