ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of the Company and its subsidiaries. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Overview
MediXall is a technology and innovation-driven organization that is developing a new generation healthcare marketplace platform to address the growing need of self-pay and high deductible consumers for greater transparency and price competition in their healthcare costs. The cloud-based MediXall.com platform connects patients with high-quality healthcare providers and wellness services. The Company’s targeted marketplace is Florida, with plans for a nationwide roll-out.
MediXall seeks to revolutionize the medical industry by improving communication; providing better technology and support services; and enabling more efficient, cost-effective healthcare for the consumer. By approaching the healthcare ecosystem as a whole, MediXall seeks to create, invest and incubate companies that embody its mission statement.
Going Concern
We have incurred net losses of $19.6 million since inception through December 31, 2020. The report of our independent registered public accounting firm on our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 contains an explanatory paragraph regarding our ability to continue as a going concern based upon the fact that we are dependent upon our ability to increase revenues along with raising additional external capital as needed. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. There are no assurances we will be successful in our efforts to generate revenues or report profitable operations or to continue as a going concern, in which event investors would lose their entire investment in our company.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
We generated $0 in revenues during 2020 and $2,685 during 2019.
Operating Expenses
A summary of our operating expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 follows:
Operating expenses increased $2,508,396 or 73% to $5,932,032 in 2020 compared to $3,423,636 in 2019. The increase in total operating expenses is primarily due to:
1. An increase in professional fees of $589,632 and personnel related expenses of $1,156,529 which primarily resulted from the Company issuing 6,344,375 shares of its restricted common stock for consulting and employee services. The restricted common stock had an aggregate fair market value of $1,663,909.
2. An increase in professional fees - related party of $133,675 which resulted from increased accounting fees charged by R3 Accounting, LLC (“R3”). The increased fees were due to the increased amount of work being provided as the Company continues to grow.
3. An increase in provision for uncollectible accounts receivable - related party of $623,580. During 2020, the Company disbursed cash advances to TBG totaling $623,580. There were no such disbursements during 2019. The advances are due on demand, are unsecured, and do not bear any interest. As of December 31, 2020, the Company determined these advances to be uncollectible. As such, during 2020 the Company recorded a provision for uncollectible related party accounts receivable totaling $623,580. There was no such provision recorded during 2019.
Liquidity and capital resources
We have an accumulated deficit of $19,581,816 through December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $12,553. Additionally, due to the “start-up” nature of our business, we expect to incur losses as we continue development of our business plan.
These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Management recognizes that in order for us to meet our capital requirements, and continue to operate, additional financing will be necessary. We expect to raise additional funds through private or public equity investment in order to maintain and/or expand the range and scope of our business operations; however, there is no assurance that such additional funds will be available for us on acceptable terms, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when needed or generate positive cash flow, it is unlikely that we will be able to continue as a going concern. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Net cash used in operating activities was $3,503,289 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2,342,044 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net cash used in investing activities was $715,154 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $15,745 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $4,417,986 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $2,602,499 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other Contractual Obligations
None.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. The term "off-balance sheet arrangement" generally means any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement to which an entity unconsolidated with us is a party, under which we have any obligation arising under a guarantee contract, derivative instrument or variable interest or a retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to such entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support for such assets.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our audited and unaudited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We continually evaluate our estimates, including those related to income taxes, and the valuation of equity transactions. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Any future changes to these estimates and assumptions could cause a material change to our reported amounts of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the unaudited consolidated financial statements.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries. All significant intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. The accounting and reporting practices of the Company conform to GAAP. The following summarizes the more significant of these policies and practices.
Use of Estimates
In preparing consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting year. Actual results could differ from those estimates. A material estimate that is particularly susceptible to significant change in the near-term relate to the determination of the impairment of website and development cost. The Company uses various assumptions and actuarial data it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances to make this estimate. Although considerable variability is likely to be inherent in this estimate, management believes that the amount provided is reasonable. This estimate is continually reviewed and adjusted if necessary. Such adjustment are reflected in operations.
Risks and Uncertainties
The Company's operations are subject to significant risks and uncertainties including financial, operational and regulatory risks, including the potential risk of business failure. Additionally, the Company faces significant risk and uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Fair Value Measurement
The Company measures fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in an orderly transaction between market participants at the reporting date. The Company utilizes a three-tier hierarchy which prioritizes the inputs used in the valuation methodologies in measuring fair value as follows:
Level 1. Valuations based on quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that an entity has the ability to access. The Company has no assets or liabilities valued with Level 1 inputs.
Level 2. Valuations based on quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities, quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities. The Company has no assets or liabilities valued with Level 2 inputs.
Level 3. Valuations based on inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to the fair value of the assets or liabilities. The Company’s website and development costs are the only assets or liabilities valued with Level 3 inputs.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The carrying value of cash, accounts receivable - related party, accounts payable and accrued expenses, accounts payable and accrued expenses - related party, and note payable approximates its fair value because of the short-term nature of these instruments and their liquidity. Management is of the opinion that the Company is not exposed to significant interest or credit risks arising from these financial instruments.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the liability method prescribed by ASC 740, "Income Taxes". Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates that will be in effect in the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The Company records a valuation allowance to offset deferred tax assets if based on the weight of available evidence, it is more-likely-than-not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The effect on deferred taxes of a change in tax rates is recognized as income or loss in the year that includes the enactment date.
Pursuant to accounting standards related to the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, the evaluation of a tax position is a two-step process. The first step is to determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of any related appeals or litigation based on the technical merits of that position. The second step is to measure a tax position that meets the more- likely-than-not threshold to determine the amount of benefit to be recognized in the financial statements. A tax position is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Tax positions that previously failed to meet the more-likely-than -not recognition threshold should be recognized in the first subsequent period in which the threshold is met. Previously recognized tax positions that no longer meet the more-likely-than-not criteria should be de- recognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which the threshold is no longer met. The accounting standard also provides guidance on de- recognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosures, and transition.
The Company assessed its earnings history, trends, and estimates of future earnings, and determined that the deferred tax asset could not be realized as of December 31, 2020. Accordingly, a valuation allowance was recorded against the net deferred tax asset.
Revenue Recognition
The Company has adopted Accounting Standards Updated ("ASU") ASU 2014-09 Revenue from Contracts with Customers and all subsequent amendments to the ASU (collectively, "ASC 606"). The adoption had no impact to the reported results. The Company had no revenues in 2020 and nominal revenue in 2019. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC 606, the core principle of which is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this core principle, five basic criteria must be met before revenue can be recognized: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when or as the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
Share Based Payment Arrangements
The Company applies the fair value method in accounting for its stock based compensation. This standard states that compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the value of the award and is recognized over the service period, which is usually the vesting period. The Company values the stock based compensation at the fair value of the Company's stock as of the date of issuance.
Recoverability of Long-Lived Assets
The Company assesses the recoverability of long-lived assets annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that expected future undiscounted cash flows might not be sufficient to support the carrying amount of an asset. The Company deems an asset to be impaired if a forecast of undiscounted future operating cash flows is less than the carrying amount. If an asset is determined to be impaired, the loss is measured as the amount by which the carrying value of the asset exceeds its fair value. Based on impairment tests performed there was no write-down of long-lived assets required during 2020 and 2019. There can be no assurances that future impairment tests will not result in further charge to operations.
Website and Development Costs
Internal and external costs incurred to develop, the internal-use computer software during the application and development stage shall be capitalized subsequent to the preliminary project stage and when it is probable that the project will be completed. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company’s costs related to the development of the Medixall website platform had met the capitalization requirements. The Company engaged an appraiser to perform an impairment analysis of the capitalized website and development costs as of December 31, 2020. The impairment analysis was performed based upon a cost approach, specifically the cost to recreate or reproduce the asset using actual historical cost incurred, adjusted by consumer price index and taxes. The analysis resulted in an impairment loss of $0 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts Receivable
An allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable is recorded when management believes the uncollectability of the accounts receivable is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. The allowance is determined based on management’s review of the debtor’s ability to repay and repayment history, aging history, and estimated value of collateral, if any.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for more information regarding recent accounting pronouncements and their impact to our consolidated results of operations and financial position.