Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to assist in the understanding and assessing the trends and significant changes in our results of operations and financial condition. Historical results may not be indicative of future performance. This discussion includes forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Such statements involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In this discussion, we use certain financial measures that are not prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). Explanation of these non-GAAP financial measures and reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures are included in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Investors should not consider non-GAAP financial measures in isolation or as substitutes for financial information presented in compliance with GAAP.
All amounts are presented in thousands except share amounts, per share data, years and ratios.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Critical accounting policies are those policies that, in management’s view, are most important in the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations. The notes to the consolidated financial statements include full disclosure of significant accounting policies. The methods, estimates and judgments that we use in applying our accounting policies have a significant impact on the results that we report in our financial statements. These critical accounting policies require us to make difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates regarding matters that are inherently uncertain. Those critical accounting policies and estimates that require the most significant judgment are discussed further below. See Note 1 - Nature of business and summary of significant accounting policies, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more specifics.
Goodwill, Other Intangibles and Other Long-Lived Assets
Our long-lived assets consist primarily of property, equipment, purchased intangible assets and goodwill. The valuation and the impairment testing of these long-lived assets involve significant judgments and assumptions, particularly as they relate to the identification of reporting units, asset groups and the determination of fair market value.
We test our tangible and intangible long-lived assets subject to amortization for impairment whenever facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. We test goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets for impairment annually, or more frequently if triggering events occur indicating that there may be impairment.
We have recorded goodwill and perform testing for potential goodwill impairment at a reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment, or a business unit one level below an operating segment for which discrete financial information is available, and for which management regularly reviews the operating results. Additionally, components within an operating segment can be aggregated as a single reporting unit if they have similar economic characteristics. We have performed testing on our one reporting unit.
We determine the fair value of our reporting units using multiple valuation methodologies, relying largely on an income approach but also incorporating value indicators from a market approach. Under the income approach, we calculate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. The income approach is dependent on several key management assumptions, including estimates of future sales, gross margins, operating costs, interest expense, income tax rates, capital expenditures, changes in working capital requirements and the weighted average cost of capital or the discount rate. Discount rate assumptions include an assessment of the risk inherent in the future cash flows of the reporting unit. Expected cash flows used under the income approach are developed in conjunction with our budgeting and forecasting process. Under the market approach, we estimate fair value of the reporting units using EBITDA multiples. The multiples are derived from comparable publicly traded companies with similar operating and investment characteristics as the respective reporting units.
We test our goodwill for impairment on an annual basis in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, and more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that it might be impaired. Due to the economic conditions during the second quarter of 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we determined that an impairment triggering event occurred, which required an interim quantitative impairment assessment of goodwill. Based on our interim quantitative assessments, the fair value of our reporting unit exceeded our related carrying value by more than 50%, thus no impairment of goodwill was indicated. We also performed our annual qualitative goodwill impairment test during the fourth quarter of fiscal years 2020 and 2019, which did not indicate an impairment existed.
Changes to management assumptions and estimates utilized in the income and market approaches could negatively impact the fair value conclusions for our reporting unit resulting in goodwill impairment. All key assumptions and valuations are determined by
and are the responsibility of management. The factors used in the impairment analysis are inherently subject to uncertainty. We believe that the estimates and assumptions are reasonable to determine the fair value of our reporting unit, however, if actual results are not consistent with these estimates and assumptions, goodwill and other intangible assets may be overstated which could trigger an impairment charge.
For impairment testing of long-lived assets, we identify asset groups at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets and liabilities. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flow expected to be generated by the assets. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the estimated fair value of the asset. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no events or changes in circumstances that would indicate a material impairment of our long-lived assets.
Determining the useful life of an intangible asset also requires judgment. Certain intangible assets are expected to have indefinite lives based on their history and our plans to continue to support and build the acquired brands. Other acquired intangible assets such as customer relationships, trade names, and non-compete agreements are expected to have determinable useful lives. The costs of determinable-lived intangibles are amortized to expense over their estimated lives.
Income Taxes
The provision for, or benefit from, income taxes includes deferred taxes resulting from temporary differences in income for financial and tax purposes using the liability method. Such temporary differences result primarily from differences in the carrying value of assets and liabilities. Future realization of deferred income tax assets requires sufficient taxable income within the carryback and/or carryforward period available under tax law.
The Company evaluates on a quarterly basis whether, based on all available evidence, it is probable that the deferred income tax assets are realizable. Valuation allowances are established when it is estimated that it is more likely than not that the tax benefit of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. The evaluation includes the consideration of all available evidence, both positive and negative, regarding the estimated future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, estimated future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards, historical taxable income in prior carryback periods if carryback is permitted, and potential tax planning strategies which may be employed to prevent an operating loss or tax credit carryforward from expiring unused. The verifiable evidence such as future reversals of existing temporary differences and the ability to carryback are considered before the subjective sources such as estimate future taxable income exclusive of temporary differences and tax planning strategies. Additionally, we record uncertain tax positions at their net recognizable amount, based on the amount that management deems is more likely than not to be sustained upon ultimate settlement with the tax authorities in jurisdictions in which we operate.
Revenue recognition
The Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification 606 January 1, 2019, where the Company recognizes revenue for the transfer of goods or services to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration it expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. When goods are shipped, the customer takes ownership at shipment, and this is when control transfers. Sales are supported by documentation such as supply agreements and purchase order, which specify certain terms and conditions including product specifications, quantities, fixed prices, delivery dates and payments terms. Revenue related to services is recognized in the period services are performed, thus the Company recognizes revenue at a point in time.
There are many customers where the Company designs, engineers and builds production tooling, which is purchased by the customer. Most of the tooling revenue is complete at the point the customer signs off on the product through the Product Part Approval Process (PPAP) and the tool is placed into service. Revenue is recognized when control of the tooling promised under a contract is transferred to the customer either at a point in time or over a period of time in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for the goods or services.
The Company offers certain customers discounts for early payments. These discounts are recorded against net sales in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income (Loss) and accounts receivable in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The Company does not offer any other customer incentives, rebates or allowances.
ESOP
Under the Mayville Engineering Company, Inc. Employee Stock Ownership Plan (the ESOP), the Company can make annual contributions to the trust for the benefit of eligible employees in the form of cash or shares of common stock of the Company. Prior to December 31, 2019, the annual contribution was discretionary except that it must have been at least 3% of the compensation for all safe harbor participants for the plan year. Beginning on January 1, 2020, all contributions are discretionary. The stock in the ESOP is held in trust for the sole benefit of the participants. Shares allocated to a participant’s account are fully vested.
Upon retirement, death, termination of employment or exercise of diversification rights, the eligible portion of a participant’s ESOP account is redeemable annually at the current price per share of the stock. Under the terms of the ESOP prior to the IPO, we
were obligated to redeem eligible participant account balances for cash (in accordance with the redemption schedule and subject to the limitations set forth in the ESOP). Following the IPO, (i) we no longer redeem participants’ ESOP interests, as distributions from the ESOP made to a participant following retirement, death or termination of employment, or the exercise of diversification rights under the Traditional ESOP, will be made in our common stock, and upon receiving a distribution of our common stock from the ESOP a participant will be able to sell such shares of common stock in the market, subject to any requirements of federal securities law; and (ii) with respect to any participant who exercises statutory diversification rights under the ESOP, the ESOP Trustee will sell, on behalf of the participant, the shares that the participant has elected to diversify and reinvest the sale proceeds in an alternate investment option as directed by the participant.
Emerging Growth Company
The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” like us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We are choosing to use this provision and, as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards as required for private companies.
Internal Controls and Procedures
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting for our company. Internal control over financial reporting is a process to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of our financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with GAAP. Internal control over financial reporting includes maintaining records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect our transactions; providing reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary for preparation of our financial statements; providing reasonable assurance that receipts and expenditures of our assets are made in accordance with management’s authorization; and providing reasonable assurance that unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of our assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements would be prevented or detected on a timely basis. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting is not intended to provide absolute assurance that a misstatement of our financial statements would be prevented or detected. Furthermore, our controls and procedures can be circumvented by the individual acts of some persons, by collusion of two or more people or by management override of the control, and misstatements due to error or fraud may occur and not be detected on a timely basis.
While preparing for the IPO in 2019 and as of December 31, 2019, we identified material weaknesses in the design and operation of our internal control over financial reporting that have been remediated as of December 31, 2020. In 2019 and 2020, we have taken numerous steps to enhance our internal control environment and remediate the prior material weaknesses. Despite these actions, we may identify additional material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting in the future.
If we identify future material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting or if we are unable to comply with the demands that are placed upon us as a public company, including the current and future requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, in a timely manner, we may be unable to accurately report our financial results, or report them within the timeframes required by the SEC. In addition, if we are unable to assert that our internal control over financial reporting is effective in future years, or if our independent registered public accounting firm is unable to express an opinion as to the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting when required, investors may lose confidence in the accuracy and completeness of our financial reports, we may face restricted access to the capital markets and our stock price may be adversely affected.
Overview
MEC is a leading U.S.-based value-added manufacturing partner that provides a broad range of prototyping and tooling, production fabrication, coating, assembly and aftermarket components. Our customers operate in diverse end markets, including heavy- and medium-duty commercial vehicles, construction & access equipment, powersports, agriculture, military and other end markets. We have developed long-standing relationships with our blue-chip customers based upon a high level of experience, trust and confidence.
Our one operating segment focuses on producing metal components that are used in a broad range of heavy- and medium-duty commercial vehicles, construction & access equipment, powersports, agricultural, military and other products.
In May 2019, we completed our IPO. In conjunction with the IPO, the Company’s legacy business converted from an S Corporation to a C Corporation. As a result, the consolidated business is subject to paying federal and state corporate income taxes on its taxable income from May 9, 2019 forward.
COVID-19 Impact
COVID-19 has had and will continue to have a negative impact on our business, financial condition, cash flows, results of operations and supply chain, although the full extent is still uncertain.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, net sales reflected the significant disruption we encountered primarily due to COVID-19 with customer shutdowns, demand changes, and continued destocking, which were most apparent in the commercial vehicle, agriculture and construction & access equipment end markets served. Despite MEC and its customer base carrying the essential business designation, customer production facilities shut down 5 - 6 weeks on average during the second quarter of 2020 due to COVID-19. As a direct result of the customer shutdowns, MEC temporarily halted production at some of its facilities during the second quarter. Customer manufacturing facilities gradually reopened toward the end of the second quarter, but MEC production volumes remained below pre-pandemic levels through the remainder of the year with all MEC facilities open. Despite the decline in volumes for the second, third and fourth quarters due to COVID-19, all pre-existing customer relationships and manufacturing programs remain intact. While end markets have started to stabilize, we have improved our near- and long-term cost structure through facility and process optimization and are actively working with our customers to grow our partnerships while pursuing incremental sales through a wide range of new customer and market opportunities.
The future financial effects of COVID-19 are unknown due to many factors. These factors include uncertainty of the effectiveness of governmental actions to address COVID-19, including health, monetary and fiscal policies, the effect of elevated levels of sovereign and state debt, capital market disruptions, changes in demand and pricing, trade agreements, other geopolitical events, and the availability and volatility in the price of raw materials and other commodities. As a result, predicting the Company’s forecasted financial performance is difficult and subject to many assumptions.
The Company’s first priority has been to safeguard the health and well-being of its employees while fulfilling its obligations as an essential business serving its customer base. This proactive approach has kept employees safe and production facilities operational based on customer demand. Our goal is to continue to successfully manage through the effects of COVID-19 and strengthen our position serving customers in the future.
How We Assess Performance
Net Sales. Net sales reflect sales of our components and products net of allowances for returns and discounts. Several factors affect our net sales in any given period, including general economic conditions, weather, timing of acquisitions and the production schedules of our customers. Net sales are recognized at the time of shipment to the customer.
Manufacturing Margins. Manufacturing margins represents net sales less cost of sales. Cost of sales consists of all direct and indirect costs used in the manufacturing process, including raw materials, labor, equipment costs, depreciation, lease expenses, subcontract costs and other directly related overhead costs. Our cost of sales is directly affected by the fluctuations in commodity prices, primarily sheet steel and aluminum, but these changes are largely mitigated by contractual agreements with our customers that allow us to pass through these price changes based upon certain market indexes.
Depreciation and Amortization. We carry property, plant and equipment on our balance sheet at cost, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization. Depreciation on property, plant and equipment is computed on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the asset. Amortization expense is the periodic expense related to leasehold improvements and intangible assets. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the lesser of the life of the underlying asset or the remaining lease term. Our intangible assets were recognized as a result of certain acquisitions and are generally amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
Other Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses. Other selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel costs for our sales and marketing, finance, human resources, information systems, administration and certain other managerial employees and certain corporate level administrative expenses such as incentive compensation, audit, accounting, legal and other consulting and professional services, travel, and insurance.
Other Key Performance Indicators
EBITDA, EBITDA Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
EBITDA represents net income before interest expense, provision (benefit) for income taxes, depreciation and amortization. EBITDA Margin represents EBITDA as a percentage of net sales for each period.
Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA before transaction fees incurred in connection with the DMP acquisition and the IPO, the loss on debt extinguishment relating to our December 2018 credit agreement, non-cash purchase accounting charges including
costs recognized on the step-up of acquired inventory and contingent consideration fair value adjustments, one-time increases in deferred compensation and long term incentive plan expenses related to the IPO, stock-based compensation, and restructuring expenses related to the closure of the Greenwood facility. Adjusted EBITDA Margin represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net sales for each period. These metrics are supplemental measures of our operating performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. These measures should not be considered as an alternative to net income or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP as an indicator of our operating performance. We present Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin as management uses these measures as key performance indicators, and we believe they are measures frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other parties to evaluate companies in our industry. These measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
Starting in the first quarter of 2020, we excluded stock-based compensation expense from Adjusted EBITDA. Management excludes this charge when evaluating the performance of the business because it is a non-cash charge, and the Company is able to fund vesting obligations through its Omnibus Incentive Plan. Further, the exclusion of these charges aligns with the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA for purposes of our covenant calculations under the Credit Agreement. And finally, revaluations of grant date fair values can vary significantly with the passage of time without any accounting impact. For example, the fair value of the stock-based compensation awards granted in May 2019 would have been approximately one-third of that value had they been granted at the same time during 2020.
Our calculation of EBITDA, EBITDA Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin may not be comparable to the similarly named measures reported by other companies. Potential differences between our measures of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA compared to other similar companies’ measures of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may include differences in capital structure and tax positions.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss), the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, and the calculation of EBITDA Margin and Adjusted EBITDA Margin for each of the periods presented.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2019
Net Sales. Net sales were $357,606 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $519,704 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 for a decrease of $162,098, or 31.2%, which was driven by volume reductions across nearly all end markets served due to COVID-19, along with continued market demand changes and customer destocking activities which were most apparent in the commercial vehicle, agriculture and construction & access equipment end markets served. Despite MEC and its customer base carrying the essential business designation, customer production facilities shut down 5 - 6 weeks on average during the second quarter of 2020 due to COVID-19. As a direct result of the customer shutdowns, MEC temporarily halted production at some of its facilities during this time period. Customer manufacturing facilities gradually reopened, but MEC production volumes remained below pre-pandemic levels through the remainder of the year. Despite these volume declines, all pre-existing customer relationships and manufacturing programs remain intact.
Manufacturing Margins. Manufacturing margins were $31,501 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $58,718 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $27,217, or 46.4%. The decline was mainly driven by the aforementioned volume reductions driven by COVID-19 along with the continued impact of market demand changes and destocking activities resulting in higher under-absorbed manufacturing costs, and $2,524 of restructuring costs related to the Greenwood facility consolidation, the details of which are outlined in Note 22 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, cost of sales includes approximately $775 of inventory obsolescence and health care charges specific to the estimated potential impacts of COVID-19.
Our traditional methods of determining inventory obsolescence and health care accruals significantly rely upon historical data. When estimating the approximately $775 of COVID-19 reserves during the current year, we had neither historical information, nor much other data from which to compute an estimated impact for this type of event. Nevertheless, the Company believes the obvious risk posed by the pandemic may have a financial impact in these areas. This charge for these COVID-19 specific accruals represents our best good faith estimate of the potential financial impact to the Company based on information available to us. Due to the continued risk posed by COVID-19, these reserves have remained mostly unchanged since establishment during the first quarter of the current year. We will continue to evaluate and report on our position with respect to these reserves as we work through the pandemic and monitor the effectiveness of vaccines.
Manufacturing margin percentages were 8.8% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 11.3% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, a decline of 250 basis points. This decline was mostly attributable to the aforementioned impacts of COVID-19, market demand changes and destocking activities resulting in under-absorbed fixed overhead costs along with Greenwood facility restructuring costs and COVID-19 specific reserves. Based on the cost reduction initiatives enacted, the Company believes manufacturing margin percentages should improve beyond historical percentages when volumes return to historical levels.
Amortization of Intangibles Expense. Amortization of intangibles expense was $10,706 for both the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Profit Sharing, Bonuses and Deferred Compensation Expenses. Profit sharing, bonuses and deferred compensation expenses were $8,250 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $25,105 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The prior year included $20,080 of one-time IPO expenses, including $10,159 for deferred compensation and $9,921 for long-term incentive plan. Excluding these items from the prior year, these expenses increased $3,225. The increase is primarily due to increased stock-based compensation expense during 2020 because of the timing of awards.
Employee Stock Ownership Plan Expense. Employee stock ownership plan expense was zero for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $5,453 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $5,453, or 100.0%. Prior to December 31, 2019, the annual ESOP contribution was discretionary except that it must have been at least 3% of the compensation for all safe harbor participants for the plan year. Beginning in 2020, all contributions are discretionary. The change is due to the decision to eliminate this particular discretionary gain sharing contribution for the fiscal year 2020 as a result of lower financial performance due to the adverse impacts of COVID-19.
Other Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Other selling, general and administrative expenses were $19,043 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $25,466 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The prior year includes $5,744 of one-time other IPO and DMP acquisition related expenses. Excluding these one-time charges, these expenses decreased $679. The decrease was driven by synergies achieved through the integration of DMP, lower travel and entertainment expenses in the current period due to COVID-19 restrictions, and other cost saving initiatives initiated in the current year, slightly offset by an increase in costs associated with being a publicly traded company.
Contingent Consideration Revaluation. The DMP purchase agreement provided for a payout to the previous shareholders of DMP of $7,500, but not more than $10,000 if a certain level of EBITDA was generated during the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2019. We estimated the fair value of the contingent consideration payable balance of $6,076 as of the acquisition date of December 14, 2018. We then remeasured the fair value each quarter through September 30, 2019, with the change recorded as a contingent consideration revaluation adjustment. Based on our calculations in accordance with the purchase agreement, and as agreed to by DMP’s former shareholders, it was determined DMP’s EBITDA fell short of the payout threshold and as a result, the contingent consideration payable balance was adjusted to zero in the third quarter of 2019, resulting in income of $6,054 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Expense. Interest expense was $2,668 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $6,728 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $4,060, or 60.3%. The change is due to lower borrowings during the current period as compared to the same prior year period along with lower interest rates attributable to the more favorable terms afforded under our amended and restated Credit Agreement.
Benefit for Income Taxes. Income tax benefits were $2,074 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $4,088 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is due to a less pretax loss in the current period. Please reference Note 9 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for more specifics. As of December 31, 2020, our federal net operating loss (NOL) carryforward was $11,833 driven by the pretax losses incurred during the current year and the entirety of the prior year. The NOL does not expire and will be used to offset future pretax income. We expect our long-term effective tax rate to be 26%, based on current tax regulations.
Net Loss and Comprehensive Loss. Net loss and comprehensive loss was $7,092 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $4,753 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $2,339 was due to the previously discussed items.
EBITDA and EBITDA Margin. EBITDA and EBITDA Margin were $25,591 and 7.2%, respectively, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $30,890 and 5.9%, respectively, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The $5,299 decline in EBITDA was due to the reduction in sales volumes driven by COVID-19, the decline in market demand, destocking activities, and the Greenwood facility closure costs in the current period.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin were $32,847 and 9.2%, respectively, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $54,696 and 10.5%, respectively, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA of $21,849 was primarily due to the reduction in sales volumes in the current period driven by COVID-19, the decline in market demand, and destocking activities.
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2018
Net Sales. Net sales were $519,704 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $354,526 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018 for an increase of $165,178, or 46.6%, which was driven by approximately $189,000 of net contributions from the former DMP locations slightly offset by modest declines within our legacy business. Both the legacy MEC and former DMP businesses were adversely impacted by sudden declines in market demand that began late in the third quarter and continued through the fourth quarter, particularly in the commercial vehicle (CV), agricultural and construction & access equipment end markets served. These market demand changes drove destocking activities which had a more pronounced impact on the legacy MEC business, especially in the fourth quarter. Destocking stems from lower retail sales resulting in customer decisions to reduce dealer inventory levels by reducing and curtailing near-term production schedules. In addition, several key customers in the CV market experienced labor union issues in the third and fourth quarters of 2019, which negatively impacted production schedules for both the legacy MEC and former DMP businesses.
Manufacturing Margins. Manufacturing margins were $58,718 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $50,578 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $8,141, or 16.1%. The increase was driven by approximately $21,000 of contributions from the former DMP locations slightly offset by modest declines at the legacy MEC locations. The declines in market demand, destocking, and impact of customer labor issues adversely impacted volumes and the labor absorption associated with it. These circumstances, along with the costs associated with working through the consolidation of the Company’s Virginia facilities, shift consolidations across multiple facilities and increased healthcare costs, coupled with fewer working days in the fourth quarter, negatively impacted our costs. These conditions collectively produced an unusual amount of under-absorbed manufacturing expenses and lower manufacturing margins in the third quarter and especially in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Amortization of Intangibles. Amortization of intangibles expense was $10,706 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $4,096 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $6,610, or 161.4%, was solely due to the amortization expense associated with the identifiable intangible assets from the DMP acquisition.
Profit Sharing, Bonuses and Deferred Compensation. Profit sharing, bonuses, and deferred compensation expenses were $25,105 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $8,058 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $17,047 was primarily driven by a one-time increase of $10,159 in deferred compensation plan expense and a one-time increase of $9,921 in long term incentive plan (LTIP) expense, both related to the IPO, offset by approximately a $2,600 reduction in annual incentive-based bonus expense.
Employee Stock Ownership Plan Expense. Employee stock ownership plan expense was $5,453 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $4,000 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $1,453, or 36.3%, was primarily due to the addition of plan participants as a result of the DMP acquisition.
Other Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Other selling, general and administrative expenses were $25,466 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $12,276 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018. The increase of
$13,190, or 107.5%, was driven by $5,744 of one-time IPO and DMP acquisition expenses, approximately $5,300 from the former DMP acquired entities, and additional costs associated with being a publicly traded company.
Contingent Consideration Revaluation. The DMP purchase agreement provided for a payout to the previous shareholders of DMP of $7,500, but not more than $10,000 if a certain level of EBITDA was generated during the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2019. We estimated the fair value of the contingent consideration payable balance of $6,076 as of the acquisition date. We then remeasured the fair value each quarter through September 30, 2019, with the change recorded as a contingent consideration revaluation adjustment. Based on our calculations in accordance with the purchase agreement, and as agreed to by DMP’s former shareholders, it was determined DMP’s EBITDA fell short of the payout threshold and as a result, the contingent consideration payable balance was adjusted to zero in the third quarter of 2019, resulting in income of $6,054 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Expense. Interest expense was $6,728 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $3,879 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $2,849, or 73.5%, was due to additional debt used to fund the DMP acquisition, slightly offset by the partial paydown of our debt with the IPO proceeds in May and net positive cash flows generated by the business.
Benefit for Income Taxes. Income tax benefits were $4,088 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $459 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018. The current period benefit is the result of the Company’s legacy business converting to a C Corporation in May 2019 and the one-time IPO expenses incurred which are deductible, causing the benefit. Prior to the IPO, the Company’s legacy business was a S Corporation, where substantially all taxes were passed to the shareholders and the Company did not pay federal or state corporate income taxes on its taxable income. The DMP entities have been taxable under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code and certain state statutes since being acquired. The consolidated business has been subject to paying federal and state corporate income taxes on its taxable income since May 9, 2019.
Net Income (Loss) and Comprehensive Income (Loss). Net loss and comprehensive loss was $4,753 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 as compared to net income and comprehensive income of $17,935 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018. The decrease of $22,688 was due to the previously discussed expense increases, most notably the one-time LTIP and deferred compensation plan expenses related to the IPO, and other one-time IPO and DMP acquisition related expenses, slightly offset by the contingent consideration fair value revaluation adjustment and net income generated by DMP.
EBITDA and EBITDA Margin. EBITDA and EBITDA Margin were $30,890 and 5.9%, respectively, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $41,823 and 11.8%, respectively, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018. The $10,933 decline in EBITDA was due to the previously mentioned increase in LTIP and deferred compensation plan expenses related to the IPO, and other one-time IPO and DMP acquisition related expenses. These one-time expenses and charges were slightly offset by the gain recorded for the DMP contingent consideration fair value revaluation adjustment and the addition of DMP.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin were $54,696 and 10.5%, respectively, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $43,694 and 12.3%, respectively, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA of $11,002 was primarily driven by the acquisition of DMP.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows Analysis Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2019
Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $36,523 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $33,402 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The $3,121 increase in operating cash flows was primarily due to a greater reduction in inventory, prepaids and other assets, along with beneficial changes in a variety of other operating assets and liability categories in the current year as compared to the same prior year period. Changes to pricing, payment terms and credit terms did not have a significant impact on changes to working capital items, or any other element of the operating cash flow activities for the periods presented.
Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities was $5,774 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $28,090 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The $22,316, or 79.4%, decrease in cash used in investing activities was driven by our capital spend changing from a focus on investments in new technology and automation in 2019, to leveraging those investments and preserving cash in 2020. In addition, due to the Greenwood facility closure, the Company generated more proceeds for the sale of equipment in the current period as compared to the same prior year period.
Financing Activities. Cash used by financing activities was $30,629 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to cash used in financing activities of $8,400 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The $22,229 change was driven by the use of operating cash flow in the current period to pay down debt as compared to net cash used in the prior year driven by IPO proceeds used to pay down debt.
Cash Flows Analysis Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2018
Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $33,402 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $36,715 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018. The $3,313, or 9.0% decline in operating cash flows was primarily driven by the LTIP payout of approximately $10,600 in the second quarter of 2019 and approximately $5,000 of payments made in 2019 specific to the IPO, offset by additional cash flow generated by the consolidated business during 2019. Changes to pricing, payment terms and credit terms did not have a significant impact on changes to working capital items, or any other element of the operating cash flow activities, for the periods presented.
Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities was $28,090 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $132,569 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018. The $104,479, or 78.8%, decrease in cash used in investing activities was predominantly driven by cash utilized to acquire DMP in 2018, slightly offset by greater capital expenditures in 2019.
Financing Activities. Cash used by financing activities was $8,400 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, as compared to cash provided in financing activities of $98,867 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018. The $107,267 change was primarily due to $101,763 of net IPO proceeds received in May 2019, net of debt repayments.
Amended and Restated Credit Agreement
On September 26, 2019, and as last amended as of June 30, 2020, we entered into the Credit Agreement with certain lenders and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent (the Agent). The Credit Agreement provides for a $200,000 Revolving Loan, with a letter of credit sub-facility in an aggregate amount not to exceed $5,000, and a swingline facility in an aggregate amount of $20,000. The Credit Agreement also provides for an additional $100,000 of capacity through an accordion feature. All amounts borrowed under the Credit Agreement mature on September 26, 2024.
Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by first priority security interests in substantially all of our personal property and guaranteed by, and secured by first priority security interests in, substantially all of the personal property of, our direct and indirect subsidiaries: Center Manufacturing, Inc., Center Manufacturing Holdings, Inc., Center-Moeller Products LLC, Defiance Metal Products Co., Defiance Metal Products of Arkansas, Inc., Defiance Metal Products of PA., Inc. and Defiance Metal Products of WI, Inc.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest at a fluctuating London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) (which may be adjusted for certain reserve requirements), plus 1.00-2.00% depending on the current Consolidated Total Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement). Under certain circumstances, we may not be able to pay interest based on LIBOR. If that happens, we will be required to pay interest at the Base Rate, which is the sum of (a) the higher of (i) the Prime Rate (as publicly announced by the Agent from time to time) and (ii) the Federal Funds Rate plus 0.50%, plus (b) 0.00% to 1.00%, depending on the current Total Consolidated Leverage Ratio. The Credit Agreement also includes provisions for determining a replacement rate when LIBOR is no longer available.
At December 31, 2020, the interest rate on outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Loan was 2.50%. At December 31, 2020, we had availability of $154,743 under the Revolving Loan.
We must pay a commitment fee at a rate of 0.20% per annum on the average daily unused portion of the aggregate unused revolving commitments under the Credit Agreement. We must also pay fees as specified in the Fee Letter (as defined in the Credit Agreement) and with respect to any letters of credit issued under the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement contains usual and customary negative covenants for agreements of this type, including, but not limited to, restrictions on our ability to, subject to certain exceptions, create, incur or assume indebtedness, create or incur liens, make certain investments, merge or consolidate with another entity, make certain asset dispositions, pay dividends or other distributions to shareholders, enter into transactions with affiliates, enter into sale leaseback transactions or make capital expenditures. The Credit Agreement also requires us to satisfy certain financial covenants, including a minimum interest coverage ratio of 3.00 to 1.00. At December 31, 2020, our interest coverage ratio was 9.07 to 1.00. The Credit Agreement also requires us to maintain a consolidated total leverage ratio not to exceed 3.25 to 1.00, although such leverage ratio can be increased in connection with certain acquisitions. This ratio was increased through the Second Amendment to the Credit Agreement to 4.25 to 1.00 for this quarter, as discussed in more detail below. At December 31, 2020, our consolidated total leverage ratio was 1.46 to 1.00.
The Credit Agreement includes customary events of default, including, among other things, payment default, covenant default, breach of representation or warranty, bankruptcy, cross-default, material ERISA events, material money judgments, and failure to maintain subsidiary guarantees. If an event of default occurs, the Agent will be entitled to take various actions, including the acceleration of amounts due under the Credit Agreement, termination of the credit facility, and all other actions permitted to be taken by a secured creditor.
Second Amendment to the Credit Agreement
On June 30, 2020, the Company entered into an amendment (Second Amendment) to the Credit Agreement. The Second Amendment provides the Company with temporary relief regarding a financial covenant (the consolidated total leverage ratio) for the period from June 30, 2020, through December 31, 2021, or such earlier date as the Company may elect (Covenant Relief Period), in return for certain increases in interest rates and fees and restrictions on certain activities of the Company, including capital expenditures, acquisitions, dividends and share repurchases. New pricing, which takes effect for the quarters ended on and after September 30, 2020, includes interest at a fluctuating LIBOR (at a floor of 75 basis points), plus 1.00% to 2.75%, along with the commitment fee ranging from 20 to 50 basis points.
During the Covenant Relief Period, the required ceiling on the Company’s consolidated total leverage ratio will be 4.25 to 1.00 for quarters ending June 30, 2020 through and including December 31, 2020 and will decline in quarterly increments to 3.25 to 1.00 for the quarter ending December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2020, our consolidated total leverage ratio was 1.46 to 1.00 in accordance with the Second Amendment of the Credit Agreement.
At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Agreement and Second Amendment.
Capital Requirements and Sources of Liquidity
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our capital expenditures were $7,794 and $25,797, respectively. The decrease of $18,003 was driven by shifts in focuses from investments in new technology and automation in 2019 to leveraging those investments and controlling spend in 2020.
We have historically relied upon cash available through credit facilities, in addition to cash from operations, to finance our working capital requirements and to support our growth. At December 31, 2020, we had immediate availability of $154,743 through our Revolving Loan and another $100,000 through an accordion feature under our Credit Agreement, subject to covenants under the Credit Agreement and Second Amendment. We regularly monitor potential capital sources, including equity and debt financings, in an effort to meet our planned capital expenditures and liquidity requirements. Our future success will be highly dependent on our ability to access outside sources of capital. We will continue to have access to the availability currently provided under the Credit Agreement as long as we remain compliant with the financial covenants. Based on our estimates of the impact of COVID-19 at this time, we expect to be in compliance with these financial covenants through 2021 and the foreseeable future.
We believe that our operating cash flow and available borrowings under the Credit Agreement are sufficient to fund our operations for 2021 when taking into consideration the estimated impacts of COVID-19 based on the information we have available at this time. However, future cash flows are subject to a number of variables, and additional capital expenditures will be required to conduct our operations. There can be no assurance that operations and other capital resources will provide cash in sufficient amounts to maintain planned or future levels of capital expenditures. In the event we make one or more acquisitions and the amount of capital required is greater than the amount we have available for acquisitions at that time, we could be required to reduce the expected level of
capital expenditures and/or seek additional capital. If we seek additional capital, we may do so through borrowings under the Credit Agreement, joint ventures, asset sales, offerings of debt or equity securities or other means. We cannot guarantee that this additional capital will be available on acceptable terms or at all. If we are unable to obtain the funds we need, we may not be able to complete acquisitions that may be favorable to us or finance the capital expenditures necessary to conduct our operations.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our obligations and commitments to make future payments under contracts and contingent commitments at December 31, 2020:
(1)
The long-term amounts in the table include principal payments under the Company’s Credit Agreement, which expires in 2024.
(2)
Forecasted interest on debt obligations are based on the debt balance, interest rate, and unused fee as of December 31, 2020