ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (the “MD&A”) is provided in addition to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. MD&A is organized as follows:
● Results of Operations. An analysis of our financial results comparing the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
● Liquidity and Capital Resources. An analysis of changes in our balance sheets and cash flows and discussion of our financial condition.
● Critical Accounting Policies. Accounting estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results and forecasts.
Results of Operations
The following discussion of the Company’s historical performance and financial condition should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data” of this Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based on the views and beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions and estimates made by our management. See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information” above. These statements by their nature are subject to risks and uncertainties and are influenced by various factors. As a consequence, actual results may differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this report for the discussion of risk factors. For all periods presented, the consolidated statements of income and consolidated balance sheet data have been adjusted for the reclassification of discontinued operations information, unless otherwise noted. All references to years relate to the calendar year ended December 31 of the particular year.
Plan of Operations
We had working capital of $8,379,060 as of December 31, 2020. With our current cash on hand, expected revenues, and based on our current average monthly expenses, we do not anticipate the need for additional funding in order to continue our operations at their current levels, and to pay the costs associated with being a public company, for the next 12 months. We may require additional funding in the future to expand or complete acquisitions. The sources of this capital are expected to be equity investments and notes payable. Our plan for the next twelve months is to continue development of the IT used in the Company subsidiaries, which it is anticipated that current cash on hand is able to fund and continue providing a quality product with excellent customer service while also seeking to expand our operations organically or through acquisitions as funding and opportunities arise. As our business continues to grow, customer feedback will be integral in making small adjustments to improve the product and overall customer experience. In the event we require additional funding, we plan to raise that through the sale of debt or equity, which may not be available on favorable terms, if at all, and may, if sold, cause significant dilution to existing stockholders. If we are unable to access additional capital moving forward, it may hurt our ability to grow and to generate future revenues.
Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19)
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, which causes the infectious disease known as COVID-19, was reported in Wuhan, China. The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern” on January 30, 2020 and a global pandemic on March 11, 2020. In March and April, many U.S. states and local jurisdictions began issuing ‘stay-at-home’ orders. For example, the state of Florida, where the Company’s principal business operations are, issued a ‘stay-at-home’ order effective on April 1, 2020, which remained in place, subject to certain exceptions, through June 2020, when the order was gradually lifted until September 2020, when the order was completely lifted. The U.S. in general and Florida specifically, has recently seen decreases in total new COVID-19 infections, however, it is unknown whether such decreases will continue, new strains of the virus will cause numbers to increase and/or whether the state of Florida, or other jurisdictions in which we operate, will issue new or expanded ‘stay-at-home’ orders, or how those orders, or others, may affect our operations.
To date, we have been deemed an essential healthcare technology provider under applicable governmental orders based on the critical nature of the products we offer and the community we serve. As such, our business operations were not materially impacted by the prior restrictions put in place by the State of Florida to slow the spread of COVID-19, which have since expired. Additionally, as shown in our results of operations below, we have to date, not experienced any significant material negative impact to our operations, revenues or gross profit due to COVID-19. We have however been adversely affected by reductions to, and interruptions in, the delivery of supply chain pharmaceuticals that have had a negative impact on our wholesalers and certain technology outsourcing in India and the Philippines due to the pandemic, which may become more frequent or material in the future. We are carefully managing our inventory supply network while we work to overcome these hopefully temporary challenges. As a result of the above and other unknown issues associated with the pandemic, our sales and operating results may be adversely impacted in the coming months. The full extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our business and operations currently cannot be estimated and will depend on a number of factors including the scope and duration of the global pandemic.
Since the start of the pandemic, we have taken steps to prioritize the health and safety of our employees. The Company’s employees started working remotely around March 17, 2020, and our corporate office is currently planned to be closed through June 30, 2021, unless the current situation improves.
Currently we believe that we have sufficient cash on hand and will generate sufficient cash through operations to support our operations for the foreseeable future; however, we will continue to evaluate our business operations based on new information as it becomes available and will make changes that we consider necessary in light of any new developments regarding the ongoing pandemic.
Although COVID-19 has had a major impact on businesses around the world, to date, the pandemic has not had a significant negative impact on our business. However, the future impact of COVID-19 on our business and operations is currently unknown. The pandemic is developing rapidly and the full extent to which COVID-19 will ultimately impact us depends on future unknowable developments, including the duration and spread of the virus, the efficacy, availability and willingness of individuals to take vaccines, as well as potential new seasonal outbreaks.
Sources of Revenue
We currently have three main revenue streams:
(1) Trxade, Inc., our wholly-owned subsidiary, provides an online web-based buying and selling platform for licensed pharmaceutical wholesalers (“Suppliers”) to sell products and services to licensed pharmacies (“Customers”). The Company charges Suppliers a transaction fee, a percentage of the purchase price of the prescription drugs and other products sold through its website service. The Company holds no inventory and assumes no responsibility for the shipment or delivery of any products or services from our website. The Company considers itself an agent for this revenue stream and as such, reports revenue as net.
(2) Integra Pharma Solutions, LLC, our wholly-owned subsidiary, is a licensed wholesaler of brand, generic and non-drug products to Customers. The Company takes orders for products, creates invoices for each order and recognizes revenue at the time the Customer receives the product. Customer returns, to date, have not been material.
(3) Community Specialty Pharmacy, LLC, our wholly-owned subsidiary, is a licensed retail pharmacy. The Company fills prescriptions for drugs written by a doctor and recognizes revenue at the time the patient confirms delivery of the prescription. Customer returns, to date, have not been material.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Results of Operations
The following selected consolidated financial data should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to these statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data” of this Report. For all years presented, the consolidated statements of income and consolidated balance sheet data set forth in this Form 10-K have been adjusted for the reclassification of discontinued operations information, unless otherwise noted.
Continuing Operations
Our revenues during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were from the Trxade platform, Community Specialty Pharmacy and Integra Pharma Solutions. Revenues increased by $9,686,256 for the 2020 year, compared to the prior year’s period. In Trxade, Inc., revenue increased by $1,019,006, which is attributable to our sales department continuing to add customers throughout 2019 and into 2020, through direct marketing and customer training and the availability of items from suppliers. Integra Pharma Solutions increased revenue to $9,877,067 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1,020,438 in the same period of 2019. The increase was mainly a result of sourcing items - N95 masks, sanitizers and gloves - i.e., PPE items that were needed in large quantities. The Trxade Platform revenue increased 23% to $5,546,746, compared to $4,527,740, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in revenue was a result of more product transactions through the platform and an increase of average monthly unique users.
Cost of Sales and gross profit were $11,415,198 and $5,707,322, for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $2,565,500 and $4,870,764, for the year ended December 31, 2019. As sales for PPE increased in 2020, the cost of sales increased.
Gross profit as a percentage of sales was 33% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 66% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The reason for the decrease in gross profit as a percentage of sales was a result of the orders of PPE related product during the year ended December 31, 2020, which include a relatively high cost of sales. In 2019, a larger percentage of our revenue was from the Trxade Platform, which carries no cost of sales. PPE sales increased due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We had $368,520 of loss on write off of software for the year ended December 31, 2019 in connection with our Bonum Health asset acquisition, as the software did not have the needed capabilities.
Direct Technology expenditures increased to $662,726 for 2020, compared to $647,140 for 2019, as the Company continued to develop apps for customers.
We had $725,973 of loss on impairment of goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2020, in connection with Community Specialty Pharmacy, LLC, compared to no loss on impairment of goodwill in the prior period.
General and administrative expenses (less stock-based compensation expense and technology) increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $4,962,237, compared to $3,448,052 for the comparable period in 2019. The increase was mainly due to increases in employee compensation, legal expenses, filing fees and marketing expenses as a result of expanding and developing the newer business units.
Total stock-based compensation expense increased by 561.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year’s period due to the value of warrants granted to consultants, 2019 bonus shares issued to executives, shares issued to directors, 2020 bonus accruals and employee option grants, as described in greater detail under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data”- “Note 4 - Stockholders’ Equity” .
We had no other income for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to other income of $72,075 for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was from the recovery of disputed charges and local economic incentives.
We had $250,000 of investment loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 in connection with the SyncHealth, LLC joint venture, which was terminated effective as of January 31, 2020.
We had $178,500 of loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2019, in connection with the October 2019 conversion of $175,000 of convertible debt and notes payable, which was not represented in the year ended December 31, 2020.
We had interest expense of $29,389 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to interest expense of $53,227 for the year ended December 31, 2019, which decreased due to decreases in the amount of outstanding debt the Company had from $300,000 to $225,000 at the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively.
Net loss increased by $2,251,623, to a net loss of $2,536,051 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net loss of $284,428 for the year ended December 31, 2019, mainly due to the increase in general and administrative expenses associated with the value of the 2019 bonus stock award grants issued to management, as described in greater detail under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data”- “Note 4 - Stockholders’ Equity”, offset partially by the increase in gross profit.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents were $5,919,578 at December 31, 2020. We expect that our future available capital resources will consist primarily of cash generated from operations, remaining cash balances, borrowings, and any additional funds raised through sales of debt and/or equity.
Liquidity
Cash and cash equivalents, current assets, current liabilities, short term debt and working capital at the end of each period were as follows:
* Short term notes payable - related parties.
Our principal sources of liquidity during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 have been cash provided by operations, equity capital and borrowings under various debt arrangements. Our principal uses of cash have been for operating expenses and acquisitions. We anticipate these uses will continue to be our principal uses of cash in the future.
The increase in cash and cash equivalents from 2019 was primarily due to equity capital raised in connection with the underwritten offering discussed below. The increase in our current assets was primarily due to higher cash. Cash and other current assets increased by $3,047,885 and $2,370,457, respectively.
The increase in current assets (excluding cash) by $2,370,457 from 2019 was primarily due to increases in inventory purchases of PPE items and inventory deposits.
The increase in current liabilities from 2019 is primarily due to an increase in accrued liabilities from franchise tax and professional fees. Current liabilities increased by $96,422.
On February 18, 2020, we sold 806,452 shares of common stock in a firm commitment underwritten offering and on February 21, 2020, we sold an additional 115,767 shares of common stock in the offering in connection with the exercise of an overallotment option. The shares were sold at a public offering price of $6.50 per share. The Company paid the underwriters a cash fee equal to 8% of the aggregate gross proceeds received by the Company in connection with the offering and reimbursed certain expenses. The Company received net proceeds of approximately $5.3 million from the offering. The Company used the net proceeds from the offering for working capital and general corporate purposes with approximately $3.4 million remaining in cash.
We had $225,000 of amounts owed to related parties as of December 31, 2020, which represented amounts owed to Nikul Panchal, a non-executive officer of the Company, accruing simple interest at the rate of 10% per annum, payable annually, and having a maturity date in October 15, 2021.
Liquidity Outlook cash explanation.
Cash Requirements
Our primary objectives for 2021 are to continue the development of the Trxade Platform, DelivMeds and Bonum Health and increase our client base and operational revenue. As a result of our cash generated through operations and the cash raised in the 2020 offering discussed above, we believe we have sufficient cash to support our operations for the foreseeable future. There can be no assurance that our operations will generate significant positive cash flow, or that additional funds will be available to us, through borrowings or otherwise, on favorable terms if required in the future, or at all.
We estimate our operating expenses and working capital requirements for the next 12 months to be approximately as follows:
(1) Includes wages and payroll, legal and accounting, marketing, rent and web development.
Since inception, we have funded our operations primarily through debt and equity capital raises and operational revenue. In 2019, common stock was sold for approximately $2,455,000. In 2020, common stock was sold for net proceeds of $5,262,068.
We may require additional funding in the future to expand or complete acquisitions. The sources of this capital are expected to be equity investments and notes payable. Our plan for the next twelve months is to continue using the same marketing and management strategies and continue providing a quality product with excellent customer service while also seeking to expand our operations organically or through acquisitions, as funding and opportunities arise. As our business continues to grow, customer feedback will be integral in making small adjustments to improve our products and overall customer experience. In the event we require additional funding, we plan to raise that through the sale of debt or equity, which may not be available on favorable terms, if at all, and may, if sold, cause significant dilution to existing stockholders. If we are unable to access additional capital moving forward, it may hurt our ability to grow and to generate future revenues.
We believe that we have adequate cash to implement our plan to operate a business-to-business web-based marketplace focused on the United States pharmaceutical industry. Our core service is designed to bring the nation’s independent pharmacies and accredited national suppliers of pharmaceuticals together to provide efficient and transparent buying and selling opportunities.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Cash used by operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 was $2,214,786. This compared to $141,775 of cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal year ended 2019. The increase was primarily due to inventory purchases of PPE items and inventory deposits, and the inventory write-down of $1,218,020.
Investing activities used cash of $37,505 and $332,252 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2019, the amount included cash used to purchase fixed assets associated with Bonum Health, LLC hub kiosks, totalling $164,981 ($82,252 in cash and $82,729 in accounts payable), and the investment in connection with the joint venture with SyncHealth, LLC, totalling $250,000, which was fully written off during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash provided by financing activities for 2019 included the repayment of short-term debt of $262,552 and $2,455,000 in common stock proceeds from the sale of stock. Cash provided by financing activities for 2020, included the sale of common stock in the February 2020 underwritten offering which generated $5,994,424 of proceeds and $5,300,175 in cash to the Company after expenses, as described in greater detail above, and the exercise of warrants and options which generated cash of $38,107.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments.
In addition to our long-term debt obligations to our various lenders, we have certain other contractual working capital obligations, including contractual purchase obligations related to various supply contracts.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no outstanding off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of net sales and expenses for each period. The following represents a summary of our critical accounting policies, defined as those policies that we believe are the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition
In general, the Company accounts for revenue recognition in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers.”
The Company, through its wholly-owned subsidiary, Trxade, Inc., provides an online website service, a buying and selling marketplace for licensed Pharmaceutical Wholesalers to sell products and services to licensed Pharmacies. The Company charges Suppliers a transaction fee, a percentage of the purchase price of the Prescription Drugs and other products sold through its website service. The fulfillment of confirmed orders, including delivery and shipment of Prescription Drugs and other products, is the responsibility of the Supplier and not of the Company. The Company holds no inventory and assumes no responsibility for the shipment or delivery of any products or services from our website. The Company considers itself an agent for this revenue stream and as such, reports revenue as net. Step One: Identify the contract with the customer - the Company’s Terms and Use Agreement is acknowledged between the Wholesaler and the Company which outlines the terms and conditions. The collection is probable based on the credit evaluation of the Wholesaler. Step Two: Identify the performance obligations in the contract - The Company provides to the Supplier access to the online website, uploading of catalogs of products and Dashboard access to review status of inventory posted and processed orders. The Agreement requires the supplier to provide a catalog of pharmaceuticals for posting on the platform, deliver the pharmaceuticals and upon shipment remit the stated platform fee. Step Three: Determine the transaction price - The Fee Agreement outlines the fee based on the type of product, generic, brand or non-drug. There are no discounts for volume of transactions or early payment of invoices. Step Four: Allocate the transaction price - The Fee Agreement outlines the fee. There is no difference between contract price and “stand-alone selling price”. Step Five: Recognize revenue when or as the entity satisfies a performance obligation - Revenue is recognized the day the order has been processed by the Supplier.
Integra Pharma Solutions, LLC, the Company’s wholly-owned subsidiary, is a licensed wholesaler and sells to licensed pharmacies brand, generic and non-drug products. The Company takes orders for product and creates invoices for each order and recognizes revenue at the time the Customer receives the product. Customer returns are not material. Step One: Identify the contract with the customer - The Company requires that an application and a credit card for payment is completed by the Customer prior to the first order. Each transaction is evidenced by an order form sent by the customer and an invoice for the product is sent by the Company. The collection is probable based on the application and credit card information provided prior to the first order. Step Two: Identify the performance obligations in the contract - Each order is distinct and evidenced by the shipping order and invoice. Step Three: Determine the transaction price - The consideration is variable if product is returned. The variability is determined based on the return policy of the product manufacturer. There are no sales or volume discounts. The transaction price is determined at the time of the order evidenced by the invoice. Step Four: Allocate the transaction price - There is no difference between contract price and “stand-alone selling price”. Step Five: Recognize revenue when or as the entity satisfies a performance obligation - The Revenue is recognized when the Customer receives the product.
Community Specialty Pharmacy, LLC, the Company’s wholly-owned subsidiary, is in the retail pharmacy business. The Company fills prescriptions for drugs written by a doctor and recognizes revenue at the time the patient confirms delivery of the prescription. Customer returns are not material. Step One: Identify the contract with the customer - The prescription is written by a doctor for a Customer and delivered to the Company. The prescription identifies the performance obligations in the contract. The Company fills the prescription and delivers to the Customer the prescription, fulfilling the contract. The collection is probable because there is confirmation that the customer has insurance for the reimbursement to the Company prior to filling of the prescription. Step Two: Identify the performance obligations in the contract - Each prescription is distinct to the Customer. Step Three: Determine the transaction price - The consideration is not variable. The transaction price is determined to be the price of prescription at the time of delivery which considers the expected reimbursements from third party payors (e.g., pharmacy benefit managers, insurance companies and government agencies). Step Four: Allocate the transaction price - The price of the prescription invoiced represents the expected amount of reimbursement from third party payors. There is no difference between contract price and “stand-alone selling price”. Step Five: Recognize revenue when or as the entity satisfies a performance obligation - Revenue is recognized upon the delivery of the prescription.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation to employees in accordance with ASC 718, “Compensation-Stock Compensation”. ASC 718 requires companies to measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments, including stock options, based on the grant date fair value of the award and to recognize it as compensation expense over the period the employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award, usually the vesting period. Stock option forfeitures are recognized at the date of employee termination. Effective January 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASU 2018-07 for the accounting of share-based payments granted to non-employees for goods and services.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
For more information on recently issued accounting standards, see “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data”.