Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations also contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements because of a variety of factors, including those set forth under Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report. We undertake no duty to update any such forward-looking statements to conform to actual results or changes in our expectations.
Overview
We are a leading global supplier of custom engineered solutions with sales, engineering and manufacturing locations in North America, Europe, Middle East and Asia. We design, engineer and produce mechatronic products for OEMs utilizing our broad range of technologies for user interface, LED lighting system, power distribution and sensor applications.
Our solutions are found in the end markets of transportation (including automotive, commercial vehicle, e-bike, aerospace, bus and rail), cloud computing infrastructure, construction equipment, consumer appliance and medical devices. Our business is managed on a segment basis, with those segments being Automotive, Industrial, Interface and Medical. For more information regarding the business and products of these segments, see “Item 1. Business” of this Annual Report.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic and the ongoing measures to reduce its spread have negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted consumer and customer demand and global supply chains, and resulted in manufacturing efficiencies and increased freight costs due to global capacity constraints. We expect that the global health crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to negatively impact our business and results of operations for the foreseeable future. The extent of the impact will depend on a number of evolving and uncertain factors, including the duration and spread of COVID-19 (and its variants), the rate of vaccinations, actions taken by governmental authorities to further restrict business operations and social activity and impose travel restrictions, shifting consumer demand, the ability of our supply chain to deliver in a timely and cost-effective manner, the ability of our employees and manufacturing facilities to operate efficiently and effectively, the continued viability and financial stability of our customers and suppliers and future access to capital.
Restructuring actions
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we initiated certain restructuring actions in fiscal 2021 to rationalize our operations, lower our costs and improve financial performance and long-term cash flow generation. These actions included plant consolidations and workforce reductions in the Automotive, Industrial and Interface segments. In fiscal 2021, we recognized $8.2 million of restructuring costs. We may take additional restructuring actions in future periods based upon market conditions and industry trends.
Results of Operations
We maintain our financial records on the basis of a 52- or 53-week fiscal year ending on the Saturday closest to April 30. For fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2019, our accounting period included 52 weeks and ended on May 1, 2021 and April 27, 2019, respectively. For fiscal 2020, our accounting period included 53 weeks and ended on May 2, 2020. The following discussions of comparative results among periods should be reviewed in this context.
A detailed comparison of our results of operations between fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 can be found in Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our fiscal 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on June 30, 2020.
The table below compares our results of operations between fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020:
Net sales. Net sales increased by $64.1 million, or 6.3%, to $1,088.0 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $1,023.9 million in fiscal 2020. The impact of foreign currency translation, primarily the euro and Chinese renminbi, increased net sales by $26.7 million. Excluding foreign currency translation, net sales increased by $37.4 million, primarily due to higher sales in the Automotive and Industrial segments.
Cost of products sold. Cost of products sold increased by $72.9 million, or 9.8%, to $813.9 million (74.8% of sales) in fiscal 2021, compared to $741.0 million (72.4% of sales) in fiscal 2020. The impact of foreign currency translation increased cost of products sold by $18.9 million. Excluding foreign currency translation, cost of products sold increased by $54.0 million, primarily due to higher material and operating costs and restructuring costs, partially offset by lower labor costs. Supply chain shortages and disruptions led to higher material and logistic costs. Material costs were also impacted by product sales mix. In fiscal 2021, we recognized $4.8 million of restructuring costs, compared to $0.6 million in fiscal 2020. Labor costs were lower as a result of actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross profit. Gross profit decreased by $8.8 million, or 3.1%, to $274.1 million (25.2% of sales) in fiscal 2021, compared to $282.9 million (27.6% of sales) in fiscal 2020. The impact of foreign currency translation increased gross profit by $7.8 million. Excluding foreign currency translation, gross profit decreased by $16.6 million. The decrease in gross profit margin was primarily due to higher material costs, product sales mix and restructuring costs, partially offset by lower labor costs.
Selling and administrative expenses. Selling and administrative expenses increased by $10.1 million, or 8.6%, to $126.9 million (11.7% of sales) in fiscal 2021, compared to $116.8 million (11.4% of sales) in fiscal 2020. The impact of foreign currency translation increased selling and administrative expenses by $1.7 million. Excluding foreign currency translation, selling and administrative expenses increased by $8.4 million. The increase was primarily due to higher stock-based and cash incentive compensation expenses and restructuring costs, partially offset by lower salary expense and travel expense. Cash incentive compensation expense increased by $7.1 million due to the increase in the amounts earned under our annual performance-based bonus program compared to fiscal 2020. Stock-based compensation expense increased by $6.5 million as fiscal 2020 included a $5.2 million reversal of stock-based compensation expense. For further information, see Note 13, “Shareholders Equity,” to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. In fiscal 2021, we recognized $3.4 million of restructuring costs, compared to $1.2 million in fiscal 2020. Salary expense was lower in fiscal 2021 as a result of the actions we took in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. As noted above, we implemented temporary salary reductions and four-day work weeks (which ended in the second quarter of fiscal 2021) and eliminated most business travel.
Amortization of intangibles. Amortization of intangibles increased by $0.3 million, or 1.6%, to $19.3 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $19.0 million in fiscal 2020.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net was $5.2 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $10.1 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease was due to a lower effective interest rate on outstanding borrowings, partially offset by higher average borrowings. Average borrowings were higher due to the precautionary $100.0 million draw-down under our revolving credit facility in March 2020, which was fully repaid in the third quarter of fiscal 2021.
Other income, net. Other income, net increased by $0.5 million to $12.2 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $11.7 million in fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2021, we received $11.1 million of government assistance at certain of our international locations with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic. In fiscal 2020, we received $11.6 million of international government assistance, of which approximately $1.7 million related to assistance provided with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic. The remaining $9.9 million of international government grants in fiscal 2020 related to maintaining certain employment levels. In fiscal 2020, we sold assets related to a previously closed business and recognized a gain on sale of $0.5 million. In addition, net foreign exchange losses were $0.3 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $3.1 million in fiscal 2020.
Income tax expense. Income tax expense decreased by $12.7 million, or 50.2%, to $12.6 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $25.3 million in fiscal 2020. Our effective tax rate decreased to 9.3% in fiscal 2021, compared to 17.0% in fiscal 2020. The lower effective tax rate in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to discrete tax benefits recorded of $10.4 million. These discrete tax benefits included tax credits earned and research deductions claimed in foreign jurisdictions. The discrete tax benefits were partially offset by discrete tax expense of $1.6 million, resulting in a net discrete tax benefit of $8.8 million. Excluding the net discrete tax benefits, the effective tax rate would have been 15.9%. In fiscal 2020, income tax expense included discrete tax expenses of $1.5 million. Excluding the discrete tax expense, the effective tax rate would have been 15.5%.
Net income. Net income decreased by $1.1 million, or 0.9%, to $122.3 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $123.4 million in fiscal 2020. The impact of foreign currency translation increased net income by $5.4 million. Excluding foreign currency translation, net income decreased by $6.5 million as a result of the reasons described above.
Operating Segments
Automotive
Net sales. Automotive segment net sales increased by $43.6 million, or 6.1%, to $755.7 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $712.1 million in fiscal 2020. The impact of foreign currency translation increased net sales by $20.7 million. Excluding foreign currency translation, net sales increased by $22.9 million. Net sales decreased in North America by $29.2 million, or 6.7%, to $406.4 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $435.6 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease was due to lower electric vehicle product sales which shifted from North America to Asia and lower lighting product sales volumes. Net sales in fiscal 2020 were negatively impacted by $28.7 million due to the UAW labor strike at GM. Net sales in Europe increased by $10.2 million, or 5.0%, to $212.3 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $202.1 million in fiscal 2020. The stronger euro, relative to the U.S. dollar, increased net sales in Europe by $14.0 million. Excluding the impact of foreign currency translation, net sales in Europe decreased by $3.8 million due to lower sales volumes, primarily in the first quarter of fiscal 2021, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Net sales in Asia increased by $62.6 million, or 84.1%, to $137.0 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $74.4 million in fiscal 2020. The stronger Chinese renminbi, relative to the U.S. dollar, increased net sales in Asia by $6.7 million. Excluding foreign currency translation, net sales in Asia increased by $55.9 million primarily due to higher electric vehicle product sales volumes which were transferred from North America, and higher lead frame and touchscreen sales volumes.
Gross profit. Automotive segment gross profit decreased by $14.8 million, or 8.3%, to $163.4 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $178.2 million in fiscal 2020. The impact of foreign currency translation increased gross profit by $5.2 million. Excluding foreign currency translation, gross profit decreased by $20.0 million. Gross profit margin decreased to 21.6% in fiscal 2021, from 25.0% in fiscal 2020. The decrease in gross profit margin was primarily due to higher material costs and restructuring actions taken in fiscal 2021. In fiscal 2021, we recognized $4.9 million of restructuring costs, compared to $0.6 million in fiscal 2020.
Income from operations. Automotive segment income from operations decreased by $16.8 million, or 13.5%, to $107.6 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $124.4 million in fiscal 2020. The impact of foreign currency translation increased automotive segment income from operations by $3.6 million. Excluding foreign currency translation, automotive segment income from operations decreased by $20.4 million, primarily due to lower gross profit.
Industrial
Net sales. Industrial segment net sales increased by $16.5 million, or 6.6%, to $267.9 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $251.4 million in fiscal 2020. The impact of foreign currency translation increased net sales by $6.0 million. Excluding foreign currency translation, net sales increased by $10.5 million. The increase was primarily due to higher sales volumes of electric vehicle busbar products, partially offset by lower sales volumes of commercial vehicle lighting solutions which were adversely impacted from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross profit. Industrial segment gross profit increased by $3.1 million, or 3.3%, to $98.1 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $95.0 million in fiscal 2020. The majority of the increase was due to favorable foreign currency translation. Gross profit margin decreased to 36.6% in fiscal 2021, from 37.8% in fiscal 2020. The decrease in gross profit margin was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on commercial vehicle lighting solutions product sales. This was partially offset by higher gross profit margins from electric vehicle busbar products.
Income from operations. Industrial segment income from operations increased by $4.9 million, or 8.2%, to $64.3 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $59.4 million in fiscal 2020. The impact of foreign currency translation increased income from operations by $2.4 million. Excluding foreign currency translation, income from operations increased by $2.5 million. The increase was primarily due to lower selling and administrative costs which benefited from actions to reduce headcount and related costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. This was partially offset by the recognition of $1.0 million of restructuring costs in fiscal 2021.
Interface
Net sales. Interface segment net sales increased by $2.8 million, or 4.8%, to $61.6 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $58.8 million in fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher sales volumes of appliance products, partially offset by lower sales volumes of legacy data solutions products.
Gross profit. Interface segment gross profit increased by $2.3 million, or 23.0%, to $12.3 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $10.0 million in fiscal 2020. Gross profit margin increased to 20.0% in fiscal 2021, from 17.0% in fiscal 2020. The increase relates to higher sales volumes of appliance products and lower operational costs.
Income from operations. Interface segment income from operations increased by $3.3 million, or 58.9%, to $8.9 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $5.6 million in fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher gross profit and lower selling and administrative expenses, partially offset by $0.7 million of restructuring costs recognized in the first quarter of fiscal 2021. Selling and administrative expenses in fiscal 2021 benefitted from restructuring actions taken in the first quarter of fiscal 2021.
Medical
Net sales. The Medical segment had $2.8 million of net sales in fiscal 2021, compared to $1.6 million of net sales in fiscal 2020. Net sales increased due to higher product demand.
Gross profit. Medical segment gross profit was a loss of $0.3 million in fiscal 2021, compared to a loss of $1.5 million in fiscal 2020. The improvement was due to higher net sales.
Loss from operations. Medical segment loss from operations decreased by $1.4 million to $4.6 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $6.0 million in fiscal 2020. The improvement was due to higher net sales and lower selling and administrative costs.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity requirements are primarily to fund our business operations, including capital expenditures and working capital requirements, as well as to fund debt service requirements, dividends and stock repurchases. Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations, existing cash balances and borrowings under our senior unsecured credit agreement. We believe our liquidity position will be sufficient to fund our existing operations and current commitments for at least the next twelve months. However, if economic conditions remain impacted for longer than we expect due to the COVID-19 pandemic, our liquidity position could be severely impacted.
At May 1, 2021, we had $233.2 million of cash and cash equivalents, of which $92.2 million was held in subsidiaries outside the U.S. Cash held by these subsidiaries is used to fund operational activities and can be repatriated, primarily through the payment of dividends and the repayment of intercompany loans, without creating material additional income tax expense.
Stock Repurchase Program
On March 31, 2021, the Board of Directors authorized the purchase of up to $100.0 million of our common stock. Such purchases may be made on the open market, in private transactions or pursuant to purchase plans designed to comply with Rule 10b5-1 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. As of May 1, 2021, we purchased and retired 167,949 shares of our common stock for $7.5 million.
Credit Agreement
Our senior unsecured credit agreement provides for a $200.0 million revolving credit facility and a $250.0 million term loan. In March 2020, as a precautionary measure in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we drew down $100.0 million under our revolving credit facility, which we repaid in the third quarter of fiscal 2021. As of May 1, 2021, $9.9 million in principal was outstanding under the revolving credit facility and we have $190.1 million of availability under the revolving credit facility. As of May 1, 2021, $218.7 million in principal was outstanding under the term loan. The term loan matures in September 2023 and requires quarterly principal payments of $3.1 million over the five-year term, with the remaining balance due upon maturity. We were in compliance with all covenants under the senior unsecured credit agreement as of May 1, 2021. For further information, see Note 10, “Debt” to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Borrowings under our senior unsecured credit agreement bear interest at rates equal to LIBOR plus an applicable margin. LIBOR is expected to be phased out by the end of 2021, which is before the maturity of our senior unsecured credit agreement. At this time, there is no definitive information regarding the future utilization of LIBOR or of any particular replacement rate; however, we continue to monitor the efforts of various parties, including government agencies, seeking to identify an alternative rate to replace LIBOR. The consequences of the discontinuance of LIBOR cannot be entirely predicted but could result in an increase in our interest expense.
Our senior unsecured credit agreement provides an option to increase the size of our revolving credit facility and term loan by an additional $200.0 million, subject to customary conditions and approval of the lenders providing the new commitments. There can be no assurance that lenders will approve additional commitments under current circumstances. As a result of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, we may be required to raise additional capital and our access to, and cost of, financing will depend on, among other things, global economic conditions, conditions in the global financing markets, the availability of sufficient amounts of financing, and our future prospects.
Cash Flows
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $39.2 million to $179.8 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $140.6 million in fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to cash generated from working capital. The changes in working capital was primarily due to lower inventories, prepaid expenses and other assets and higher accounts payable and other liabilities, partially offset by higher accounts receivable.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $24.8 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $44.5 million in fiscal 2020. The activity primarily represents capital expenditures in both fiscal years.
Financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $142.9 million in fiscal 2021, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $41.7 million in fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2021, we had net repayments on our borrowings of $115.2 million, which included the repayment of the $100.0 million precautionary draw-down on our revolving credit facility in March 2020. In fiscal 2020, we had net borrowings of $59.1 million. In fiscal 2021, we paid dividends of $17.4 million, compared to $16.3 million in fiscal 2020. We also initiated a stock repurchase program in fiscal 2021 and spent $6.7 million of cash for the purchase of shares.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of May 1, 2021:
(1)
Assumes the outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility will be repaid upon maturity of the credit agreement in September 2023.
(2)
Based on interest rates in effect as of May 1, 2021 (including the impact of interest rate swaps).
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC rules.
Legal Matters
For several years, Hetronic Germany-GmbH and Hydronic-Steuersysteme-GmbH (the “Fuchs companies”) served as our distributors for Germany, Austria and other central and eastern European countries pursuant to their respective intellectual property licenses and distribution and assembly agreements. We became aware that the Fuchs companies and their managing director, Albert Fuchs, had materially violated those agreements. As a result, we terminated all of our agreements with the Fuchs companies. On June 20, 2014, we filed a lawsuit against the Fuchs companies in the Federal District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma alleging material breaches of the distribution and assembly agreements and seeking damages, as well as various forms of injunctive relief. The defendants filed counterclaims alleging breach of contract, interference with business relations and business slander. On April 2, 2015, we amended our complaint against the Fuchs companies to add additional unfair competition and Lanham Act claims and to add additional affiliated parties.
A trial with respect to the matter began in February 2020. During the trial, the defendants dismissed their one remaining counterclaim with prejudice. On March 2, 2020, the jury returned a verdict in our favor. The verdict included approximately $102 million in compensatory damages and $11 million in punitive damages. On April 22, 2020, the Court entered a permanent injunction barring defendants from selling infringing products and ordering them to return Hetronic’s confidential information. Defendants appealed entry of the permanent injunction. On May 29, 2020, the Court held defendants in contempt for violating the permanent injunction and entered the final judgment. Defendants appealed entry of the final monetary judgment as well. The appeal of the permanent injunction and the appeal of the final judgment have been consolidated into a single appeal. That appeal is fully briefed and was argued on March 8, 2021. There is no deadline for the Court to issue a decision. Like any judgment, particularly any judgment involving defendants outside of the United States, there is no guarantee that we will be able to collect the judgment.
We incurred legal fees of $5.7 million, $5.4 million and $3.5 million in fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively, related to the lawsuits. These amounts are included in the selling and administrative expenses and as part of the Industrial segment.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires that we make estimates and assumptions that can affect amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and notes. In preparing our consolidated financial statements, we have made our best estimates and judgments of certain amounts included in the consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. To the extent that there are differences between these estimates and actual results, our consolidated financial statements may be materially affected. Below are the estimates that we believe are critical to the understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. Other accounting policies are described in Note 1, “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is unknown and cannot be reasonably estimated for these key estimates and assumptions. However, we made appropriate accounting estimates based on the facts and circumstances available as of the reporting date.
Revenue recognition. Most of our revenue is recognized at a point in time. We have determined that the most definitive demonstration that control has transferred to a customer is physical shipment or delivery, depending on the contractual shipping terms, except for consignment transactions. Consignment transactions are arrangements where we transfer products to a customer location but retain ownership and control of such product until it is used by the customer. Revenue for consignment arrangements is recognized upon the customer’s usage.
Revenue associated with products which we believe have no alternative use, and where we have an enforceable right to payment, are recognized on an over time basis. Revenue is recognized based on progress to date, which is typically even over the production process through transfer of control to the customer.
In addition, customers typically negotiate annual price downs. Management has evaluated these price downs and determined that in some instances, these price downs give rise to a material right. In instances that a material right exists, a portion of the transaction price is allocated to the material right and recognized over the life of the contract.
Allowance for excess and obsolete inventory. Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value and have been reduced by allowances for excess and obsolete inventories. The estimated allowances are based on our review of inventories on hand compared to estimated future usage and sales, using assumptions about future product life cycles, product demand and market conditions. If actual product life cycles, product demand and market conditions are less favorable than those projected by us, inventory write-downs may be required.
Goodwill. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment on at least an annual basis. Goodwill is evaluated at the reporting unit level by comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount including goodwill. An impairment of goodwill exists if the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value. The impairment loss is the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In performing the goodwill impairment test, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount.
Qualitative factors include, but are not limited to, the results of prior year fair value calculations, the movement of our share price and market capitalization, the reporting unit and overall financial performance, and macroeconomic and industry conditions. We consider the qualitative factors and weight of the evidence obtained to determine if it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than the carrying amount. If, after assessing the qualitative factors, we were to determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then a quantitative assessment is performed. We may also elect to proceed directly to the quantitative assessment without considering such qualitative factors.
For the quantitative assessment, we utilize a combination of the income approach and market approach to estimate the fair value of the reporting unit. The income approach uses a discounted cash flow method and the market approach uses appropriate valuation multiples observed for the reporting unit’s guideline public companies. The determination of discounted cash flows is based on our long-range forecasts and requires assumptions related to revenue and operating income growth, asset-related expenditures, working capital levels, and other market participant assumptions. The revenue growth rates included in the forecasts are our best estimates based on current and anticipated market conditions, and the profitability assumptions are projected based on current and anticipated cost structures. Long-range forecasting involves uncertainty which increases with each successive period. Key assumptions, such as revenue growth rates and profitability, especially in the outer years, involve a greater degree of uncertainty.
Impairment of long-lived assets. We evaluate whether events and circumstances have occurred which indicate that the remaining estimated useful lives of our intangible assets, excluding goodwill, and other long-lived assets, may warrant revision or that the remaining balance of such assets may not be recoverable. If impairment indicators exist, we perform an impairment analysis by comparing the undiscounted cash flows resulting from the use of the asset group to the carrying amount. If the carrying amount exceeds the undiscounted cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized based on the excess of the asset’s carrying amount over its fair value.
Income taxes. Our income tax expense and deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect management’s best assessment of estimated current and future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the consolidated income tax provision and in evaluating income tax uncertainties.
The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to ongoing audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. Our estimate of the potential outcome of any uncertain tax issue is subject to management’s assessment of relevant risks, facts, and circumstances existing at that time. We use a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We record a liability for the difference between the benefit recognized and measured and tax position taken or expected to be taken on our tax return. To the extent that our assessment of such tax positions changes, the change in estimate is recorded in the period in which the determination is made. We report tax-related interest and penalties as a component of income tax expense.
Our deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect temporary differences between the amount of assets and liabilities for financial and tax reporting purposes. We adjust these amounts to reflect changes in tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. We evaluate our ability to realize the tax benefits associated with deferred tax assets by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable income, including the reversal of existing temporary differences, historical and projected operating results, and the availability of prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. The realization of tax benefits is evaluated by jurisdiction and the realizability of these assets can vary based on the character of the tax attribute and the carryforward periods specific to each jurisdiction. In the event we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of its net recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would decrease income tax expense in the period a determination was made. Likewise, should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax asset in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would be recorded to income tax expense in the period such determination was made.
We provide for taxes that may be payable if undistributed earnings of overseas subsidiaries were to be remitted to the U.S., except for those earnings that we consider to be permanently reinvested. Future sales of foreign subsidiaries are not exempt from capital gains tax in the U.S. We have no plans to dispose of any of our foreign subsidiaries and are not recording deferred taxes on outside basis differences in foreign subsidiaries for the sale of a foreign subsidiary.
Contingencies. We are subject to various investigations, claims and legal and administrative proceedings covering a wide range of matters that arise in the ordinary course of business activities. A significant amount of judgment and use of estimates is required to quantify our ultimate exposure in these matters. For those matters that we can estimate a range of loss, we have established reserves at levels within that range to provide for the most likely scenario based upon available information. The valuation of reserves for contingencies is reviewed on a quarterly basis to ensure that we are properly reserved. Reserve balances are adjusted to account for changes in circumstances for ongoing issues and the establishment of additional reserves for emerging issues. While we believe that the current level of reserves is adequate, changes in the future could impact these determinations.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For more information regarding new applicable accounting pronouncements, see Note 1, “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.