Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” included below in this Annual Report. Operating results are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur in future periods.
This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of many factors including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in Item 1A. included above in this Annual Report. All forward-looking statements included in this Annual Report are based on the information available to us as of the time we file this Annual Report, and except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a late-stage pharmaceutical company committed to the development and commercialization of novel cancer therapies intended to improve outcomes for patients. MEI Pharma's portfolio of drug candidates includes four clinical-stage assets, including zandelisib (f/k/a ME-401), currently in multiple ongoing clinical studies intended to support marketing applications with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) and other regulatory authorities globally. Our common stock is listed on the NASDAQ Capital Market under the symbol “MEIP.”
Clinical Development Programs
We build our pipeline by licensing promising cancer agents and creating value in programs through development, commercialization and strategic partnerships, as appropriate. Our objective is to leverage the mechanisms and properties of our pipeline drug candidates to optimize the balance between efficacy and tolerability to meet the needs of patients with cancer. Our drug candidate pipeline includes:
Zandelisib (f/k/a ME-401), an oral phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (“PI3K”) delta inhibitor;
Voruciclib, an oral cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (“CDK9”) inhibitor;
ME-344, a mitochondrial inhibitor targeting the oxidative phosphorylation (“OXPHOS”) complex; and
Pracinostat, an oral histone deacetylase (“HDAC”) inhibitor.
Recent Developments
For a more complete discussion of our business, see the section of this Annual Report “Item 1 - Business” above.
Equity Transactions
Shelf Registration Statement
We have a shelf registration statement that permits us to sell, from time to time, up to $200.0 million of common stock, preferred stock and warrants. The shelf registration was filed and declared effective in May 2020, replacing our prior shelf registration statement that was filed and declared effective in May 2017, and carrying forward approximately $107.5 million of unsold securities registered under the prior shelf registration statement. As of June 30, 2021, there is $175.7 million aggregate value of securities available under the shelf registration statement, including up to $60.0 million remaining available under the 2020 ATM Sales Agreement described below.
At-The-Market Equity Offering
On November 10, 2020, we entered into an At-The-Market Equity Offering Sales Agreement (the “2020 ATM Sales Agreement”), pursuant to which we may sell an aggregate of up to $60.0 million of our common stock pursuant to the shelf registration statement. We had previously entered into an At-The-Market Equity Offering Sales Agreement in November 2017 (the “2017 ATM Sales Agreement”), pursuant to which we could sell an aggregate of up to $30.0 million of our common stock pursuant to the shelf registration statement. The 2017 ATM Sales Agreement expired on November 8, 2020. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we sold 958,083 shares under the 2017 ATM Sales Agreement for net proceeds of $3.1 million, after costs of $0.1 million. During the year ended June 30, 2020, we also sold 5,471,684 shares under the 2017 ATM Sales Agreement for net proceeds of $20.7 million, after costs of $0.4 million. As of June 30, 2021, there is $60.0 million remaining available under the 2020 ATM Sales Agreement.
Underwritten Registered Offering
In December 2019, we completed an underwritten registered offering of 32,343,750 shares of common stock at a price per share of $1.60. We received net cash proceeds of $48.5 million associated with the offering, after costs of $3.3 million.
Warrants
As of June 30, 2021, we have outstanding warrants to purchase 16,058,985 shares of our common stock. The warrants are fully vested, exercisable at a price of $2.54 per share and expire in May 2023. Pursuant to the terms of the warrants, we could be required to settle the warrants in cash in the event of an acquisition of the Company and, as a result, the warrants are required to be measured at fair value and reported as a liability in the Balance Sheet. Therefore, we are required to account for the warrants as liabilities and record them at fair value. The warrants were revalued as of June 30, 2021 at $22.4 million and as of June 30, 2020 at $40.5 million; the changes in fair value were recorded in our Statement of Operations. During the year ended June 30, 2021, a warrant holder completed a cashless exercise of 2,617 warrants for 964 shares of common stock. No warrants were exercised during the year ended June 30, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Management Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, expenses and related disclosures. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606” or the “new revenue standard”)
We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. For enforceable contracts with our customers, we first identify the distinct performance obligations - or accounting units - within the contract. Performance obligations are commitments in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer.
Payments received under commercial arrangements, such as licensing technology rights, may include non-refundable fees at the inception of the arrangements, cost reimbursements, milestone payments for specific achievements designated in the agreements, and royalties on the sale of products. At the inception of arrangements that include variable consideration, we use judgment to estimate the amount of variable consideration to include in the transaction price using the most likely method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur, the estimated amount is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are not included in the transaction price until those approvals are received. At the end of each reporting period, we re-evaluate estimated variable consideration included in the transaction price and any related constraint and, as necessary, we adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
We develop estimates of the stand-alone selling price for each distinct performance obligation. Variable consideration that relates specifically to our efforts to satisfy specific performance obligations is allocated entirely to those performance obligations. Other components of the transaction price are allocated based on the relative stand-alone selling price, over which management has applied significant judgment. We develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the stand-alone selling price for license-related performance obligations, which may include forecasted revenues, development timelines, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, discount rates and probabilities of technical, regulatory and commercial success. We estimate stand-alone selling price for research and development performance obligations by forecasting the expected costs of satisfying a performance obligation plus an appropriate margin.
In the case of a license that is a distinct performance obligation, we recognize revenue allocated to the license from non-refundable, up-front fees at the point in time when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee can use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other distinct or combined obligations, we use judgment to assess the nature of the performance obligation to determine whether the performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. If the performance obligation is satisfied over time, we evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
The selection of the method to measure progress towards completion requires judgment and is based on the nature of the products or services to be provided. Revenue is recorded proportionally as costs are incurred. We generally use the cost-to-cost measure of progress because it best depicts the transfer of control to the customer which occurs as we incur costs. Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation (an “input method” under Topic 606). We use judgment to estimate the total cost expected to complete the research and development performance obligations, which include subcontractors’ costs, labor, materials, other direct costs and an allocation of indirect costs. We evaluate these cost estimates and the progress each reporting period and, as necessary, we adjust the measure of progress and related revenue recognition.
For arrangements that include sales-based or usage-based royalties, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied or partially satisfied. To date, we have not recognized any sales-based or usage-based royalty revenue from license agreements.
We recognized revenue associated with the following license agreements (in thousands):
The KKC Commercialization Agreement and KKC Japan License Agreement (Note 2) included other distinct performance obligations satisfied over time, and accordingly we recognized $25.1 million, $27.5 million (inclusive of cumulative catch-up amounts), and $2.6 million related to our progress toward satisfying those obligations during the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Based on the characteristics of the Helsinn License Agreement (Note 4), control of the remaining deliverables occurs and therefore we recognized revenue based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligations. Accordingly, we recognized $0.4 million, $1.4 million and $2.3 million related to our progress toward satisfying those obligations during the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of June 30, 2021, our performance obligations related to the Helsinn License Agreement have been met and no future revenue or cost of revenue will be recognized.
Contract Balances
Receivables are included in our balance sheet in “Prepaid expenses and other current assets”, and contract liabilities are included in “Deferred revenue” and “Deferred revenue, long-term”. The following table presents changes in contract assets and contract liabilities accounted for under Topic 606 during the years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020 (in thousands).:
The timing of revenue recognition, invoicing and cash collections results in billed accounts receivable and unbilled receivables (contract assets), and deferred revenue (contract liabilities). We invoice our customers in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms, typically at periodic intervals or upon achievement of contractual milestones. Invoicing may occur subsequent to revenue recognition, resulting in contract assets. We may receive advance payments from our customers before revenue is recognized, resulting in contract liabilities. The contract assets and liabilities reported on the Balance Sheet relate to the KKC Commercialization Agreement, the KKC Japan License Agreement and Helsinn License Agreement.
As of June 30, 2021, we had $7.6 million of contract assets related to our remaining performance obligations under the KKC Commercialization Agreement and no contract assets related to the Helsinn License Agreement, as the remaining performance obligations have been completed. Our contract assets are comprised of amounts that are billable based on the contractual provisions of the license agreement but not yet billed.
As of June 30, 2021, we had $87.3 million of deferred revenue associated with the KKC Commercialization Agreement, of which $64.5 million relates to the U.S. license which is a unit of account under the scope of Topic 808 and is not a deliverable under Topic 606, and $22.8 million relates to the Ex-U.S. License and development services performance obligations which are under the scope of Topic 606.
Our contract liabilities accounted for under Topic 606 relate to the amount of initial upfront consideration that was allocated to the research and development performance obligations as well as additional cost reimbursements in excess of revenue recognized. Contract liabilities are expected to be recognized over the duration of the performance obligations based on the costs incurred relative to total expected costs. Our contract liabilities may fluctuate due to changes in the total estimated cost of the performance obligations and our expected reimbursement of those costs. For the year ended June 30, 2021, we recognized revenue of $13.2 million that was included in the contract liabilities balance at June 30, 2020 related to performance obligations under ASC 606.
For the year ended June 30, 2020, we recognized revenue of $7.5 million and $0.3 million, respectively, that was included in the contract liabilities balance at June 30, 2019 related to performance obligations under ASC 606. To date we have not recognized any amounts related to units of account under Topic 808.
Revenues from Collaborators
We earn revenue in connection with collaboration agreements, which are described in Note 2, KKC Agreements.
At contract inception, we assess whether the collaboration arrangements are within the scope of ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements (“Topic 808”), to determine whether such arrangements involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of such activities. This assessment is performed based on the responsibilities of all parties in the arrangement. For collaboration arrangements within the scope of Topic 808 that contain multiple units of account, we first determine which units of account within the arrangement are within the scope of Topic 808 and which elements are within the scope of Topic 606. For units of account within collaboration arrangements that are accounted for pursuant to Topic 808, an appropriate recognition method is determined and applied consistently, by analogy to authoritative accounting literature. For units of account within collaboration arrangements that are accounted for pursuant to Topic 606, we recognize revenue as
discussed above. Consideration received that does not meet the requirements to satisfy Topic 606 revenue recognition criteria is recorded as deferred revenue in the accompanying balance sheets, classified as either short-term or long-term deferred revenue based on our best estimate of when such amounts will be recognized.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and include costs paid to third-party contractors to perform research, conduct clinical trials and develop and manufacture drug materials. Clinical trial costs, including costs associated with third-party contractors, are a significant component of research and development expenses. We expense research and development costs based on work performed. In determining the amount to expense, management relies on estimates of total costs based on contract components completed, the enrollment of subjects, the completion of trials, and other events. Costs incurred related to the purchase or licensing of in-process research and development for early-stage products or products that are not commercially viable and ready for use, or have no alternative future use, are charged to expense in the period incurred.
Share-Based Compensation
Share-based compensation expense for employees and directors is recognized in the Statement of Operations based on estimated amounts, including the grant date fair value and the expected service period. For stock options, we estimate the grant date fair value using a Black-Scholes valuation model, which requires the use of multiple subjective inputs including estimated future volatility, expected forfeitures and the expected term of the awards. We estimate the expected future volatility based on the stock’s historical price volatility. The stock’s future volatility may differ from the estimated volatility at the grant date. For restricted stock unit (“RSU”) equity awards, we estimate the grant date fair value using our closing stock price on the date of grant. We recognize the effect of forfeitures in compensation expense when the forfeitures occur. The estimated forfeiture rates may differ from actual forfeiture rates which would affect the amount of expense recognized during the period. We recognize the value of the awards over the awards’ requisite service or performance periods. The requisite service period is generally the time over which our share-based awards vest.
Warrant Liability
In May 2018, we issued warrants in connection with our private placement of shares of common stock. Pursuant to the terms of the warrants, we could be required to settle the warrants in cash in the event of an acquisition of the Company and, as a result, the warrants are required to be measured at fair value and reported as a liability in the balance sheet. We recorded the fair value of the warrants upon issuance using the Black-Scholes valuation model, and are required to revalue the warrants at each reporting date with any changes in fair value recorded on our statement of operations. Inputs used to determine estimated fair value of the warrant liabilities include the estimated fair value of the underlying stock at the valuation date, the estimated term of the warrants, risk-free interest rates, expected dividends and the expected volatility of the underlying stock.
Leases
Effective July 1, 2019, we adopted FASB ASC Topic 842, Leases (“ASC 842”), using a modified retrospective basis method under which prior comparative periods are not restated. This standard requires lessees to recognize in the statement of financial position a liability to make lease payments and a right-of-use (“ROU”) asset representing our right to use the underlying asset for the lease term. At the inception of an arrangement, we determine whether the arrangement is or contains a lease based on the unique facts and circumstances within the arrangement. A lease is identified where an arrangement conveys the right to control the use of identified property, plant, and equipment for a period of time in exchange for consideration. Leases which are identified within the scope of ASC 842 and which have a term greater than one year are recognized on our Balance Sheet as ROU assets and lease liabilities. Operating lease liabilities and their corresponding ROU assets are recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected remaining lease term. The lease term includes any renewal options and termination options that we are reasonably certain to exercise. Certain adjustments to the right-of-use asset may be required for items such as initial direct costs paid or incentives received. The present value of lease payments is determined by using the interest rate implicit in the lease, if that rate is readily determinable; otherwise, we use our incremental borrowing rate. The incremental borrowing rate is determined based on the rate of interest that we would pay to borrow on a collateralized basis an amount equal to the lease payments for a similar term and in a similar economic environment. The interest rate implicit in lease contracts to calculate the present value is typically not readily determinable. As such, significant management judgment is required to estimate the incremental borrowing rate.
Rent expense for operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term based on the total lease payments. We have elected the practical expedient to not separate lease and non-lease components for our real estate leases. Our non-lease components are primarily related to property maintenance, which varies based on future outcomes, and thus is recognized in rent expense when incurred.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense consists of current and deferred income tax expense or benefit. Current income tax expense or benefit is the amount of income taxes expected to be payable or refundable for the current year. A deferred income tax asset or liability is recognized for the
future tax consequences attributable to tax credits and loss carryforwards and to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, we have established a valuation allowance to fully reserve our net deferred tax assets. Changes in our ownership may limit the amount of net operating loss carryforwards that can be utilized in the future to offset taxable income.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
We had a loss from operations of $69.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to a loss from operations of $24.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Revenue: We recognized revenue of $25.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to $28.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. Revenue decreased primarily due to our license agreement with KKC, which during the year ended June 30, 2020 included the transfer of the Ex-U.S. License. Revenue related to the license agreement with KKC was $25.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to $27.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. Revenue also includes recognition of fees allocated to performance obligations in accordance with the Helsinn License Agreement. Revenue related the Helsinn License Agreement was $0.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to $1.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2020 due to decreased costs related to the POC study. As of June 30, 2021, our performance obligations related to the Helsinn License Agreement have been met and no future revenue or cost of revenue will be recognized.
Cost of Revenue: We recognized cost of revenue of $1.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to $2.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The cost of revenue includes external costs paid to third-party contractors to perform research, conduct clinical trials and develop and manufacture drug materials, and internal compensation and related personnel expenses associated with pracinostat. Costs of revenue relate to expenses for pracinostat incurred in connection with our development activities in accordance with the Helsinn License Agreement, including both Helsinn’s share and our share of costs related to the POC study, which we are responsible for conducting. Cost of revenue decreased due to decreased costs related to the POC study.
Research and Development: The following is a summary of our research and development expenses to supplement the more detailed discussion below. The dollar values in the following table are in thousands.
Research and development expenses consist primarily of clinical trial costs (including payments to contract research organizations “CROs”), pre-clinical study costs, and costs to manufacture our drug candidates for non-clinical and clinical studies. Other research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel costs, share-based compensation, legal costs, and other costs not allocated to specific drug programs. Research and development expenses were $69.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to $34.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. Costs related to zandelisib for the year ended June 30, 2021 reflected an increase in clinical trial costs ($22.1 million) primarily as a result of start-up costs related to the Phase 3 study, an increase in drug manufacturing costs ($4.3 million), and increased consulting fees ($1.8 million). Costs related to voruciclib increased for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared with the year ended June 30, 2020, due to increased drug manufacturing costs. Cost related to ME-344 increased for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared with the year ended June 30, 2020 due to increased drug manufacturing costs. Other research and development costs increased for the year ended June 30, 2021 due to higher levels of personnel costs ($3.0 million) and share-based compensation ($1.4 million) associated with increased headcount to support our clinical activities.
General and Administrative: General and administrative expenses increased by $7.7 million to $24.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to $16.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase is primarily due to increased external professional services and legal costs ($2.9 million), as well as share-based compensation ($2.1 million) and personnel costs ($1.4 million) associated with increased headcount to support our activities, including preparation for commercial launch of zandelisib, and corporate overhead costs ($1.3 million).
Other income or expense: We recorded a non-cash gain of $18.1 million during the year ended June 30, 2021 and a non-cash expense of $22.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2020 due to a change in the fair value of our warrant liability for warrants issued in connection with our private placement of shares of common stock. The change in the warrant liability is primarily due to changes in our stock price. Additionally, we received interest and dividend income of $0.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to $1.4 million for the year ended
June 30, 2020. The decrease was due to lower yields on cash equivalents and short-term investments during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020.
Comparison of Years Ended June 30, 2020 and 2019
We have omitted discussion of the results of operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 because it would be redundant to the discussion previously included in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, filed with the SEC on September 9, 2020.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to the Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not currently have any off-balance-sheet arrangements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have accumulated losses of $327.8 million since inception and expect to incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future. As of June 30, 2021, we had $153.4 million in cash and cash equivalents, and short-term investments. We believe that these resources will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least 12 months from the issuance of this Annual Report. Our current business operations are focused on continuing the clinical development of our drug candidates. Changes to our research and development plans or other changes affecting our operating expenses may affect actual future use of existing cash resources. Our research and development expenses are expected to increase in the foreseeable future. We cannot determine with certainty costs associated with ongoing and future clinical trials or the regulatory approval process. The duration, costs and timing associated with the development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including uncertainties associated with the results of our clinical trials.
To date, we have obtained cash and funded our operations primarily through equity financings and license agreements. In order to continue the development of our drug candidates, at some point in the future we expect to pursue one or more capital transactions, whether through the sale of equity securities, debt financing, license agreements or entry into strategic partnerships. There can be no assurance that we will be able to continue to raise additional capital in the future.
Sources and Uses of Our Cash
Net cash used in operations for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $32.0 million ($52.4 million, net of $20.4 million received from the Japanese government for tax withholdings). Net cash provided by operations for the year ended June 30, 2020 was $34.3 million (net cash used in operations was $45.3 million, net of a $79.6 million license fee received from KKC). Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended June 30, 2019 was $29.4 million ($39.4 million, net of a $10.0 million license fee received from KKC). The increase in cash used in operating activities year over year is due to increased research and development activities (as described above) as well as other changes in working capital.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $24.7 million compared to $106.3 million used in investing activities for the year ended June 30, 2020. The change was primarily due to higher maturities of short-term investments in 2021, net of purchases. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended June 30, 2019 was $24.3 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended June 30, 2021 was $3.5 million compared with $74.8 million provided by financing activities during the year ended June 30, 2020. Cash raised during the year ended June 30, 2021 reflected the $3.1 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock. Cash raised during the year ended June 30, 2020 reflected $69.2 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock. Cash raised during the year ended June 30, 2019 reflected $1.1 million of proceeds from the exercise of warrants.
Contractual Obligations
We have contracted with various consultants and third parties to assist us in pre-clinical research and development and clinical trials work for our leading drug compounds. The contracts are terminable at any time, but obligate us to reimburse the providers for any time or costs incurred through the date of termination. Additionally, we have employment agreements with certain of our current employees that provide for severance payments and accelerated vesting for share-based awards if their employment is terminated under specified circumstances.
We have leased approximately 32,800 square feet of office space in San Diego, California. The contractual lease term is from July 2020 through March 2028. The average annual lease payments over the term of the lease will approximate $1.6 million, plus a pro rata share of certain building expenses. Our total contractual obligation over the term of the lease is approximately $10.7 million.
Presage License Agreement
In September 2017, we entered into the Presage License Agreement. Under the terms of the Presage License Agreement, Presage granted to us exclusive worldwide rights to develop, manufacture and commercialize voruciclib, a clinical-stage, oral and selective CDK inhibitor, and related compounds. In exchange, we paid Presage $2.9 million. With respect to the first indication, an incremental $2.0 million payment, due upon dosing the first subject in the first registration trial will be owed to Presage, for total payments of $4.9 million prior to receipt of marketing approval of the first indication in the U.S., E.U. or Japan. Additional potential payments of up to $179 million will be due upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory and commercial milestones. We will also pay mid-single-digit tiered royalties on the net sales of any product successfully developed. As an alternative to milestone and royalty payments related to countries in which we sublicense product rights, we will pay to Presage a tiered percent (which decreases as product development progresses) of amounts received from such sublicensees. As of June 30, 2021, we had not accrued any amounts for potential future payments.
S*Bio Purchase Agreement
We are party to a definitive asset purchase agreement with S*Bio, pursuant to which we acquired certain assets comprised of intellectual property and technology including rights to pracinostat. We agreed to make certain milestone payments to S*Bio based on the achievement of certain clinical, regulatory and net sales-based milestones, as well as to make certain contingent earnout payments to S*Bio. Milestone payments will be made to S*Bio up to an aggregate amount of $75.2 million if certain U.S., E.U. and Japanese regulatory approvals are obtained and if certain net sales thresholds are met in North America, the E.U. and Japan. The first milestone payment of $200,000 plus 166,527 shares of our common stock having a value of $500,000 was paid in August 2017 upon the first dosing of a patient in a Phase 3 clinical trial. Subsequent milestone payments will be due upon certain regulatory approvals and sales-based events. As of June 30, 2021, we had not accrued any amounts for potential future payments.
COVID-19
As a result of the ongoing and rapidly evolving COVID-19 pandemic, various public health orders and guidance measures have been implemented across much of the United States, and across the globe, including in the locations of our office, clinical trial sites, key vendors and partners. Despite the relaxation of many governmental orders earlier this year, COVID-19 still impacts the normal conduct of business. In addition, although the FDA authorized vaccines for the treatment of COVID-19, and although a significant portion of the U.S. population has been vaccinated, the vaccination rate of the population and the effectiveness of the vaccines, particularly with respect to the COVID-19 Delta variant, as well as other variants, continues to create uncertainty. Furthermore, the COVID-19 virus may continue to mutate into different strains, which could be more contagious or severe or for which current vaccines and treatments are not effective or available.
While we continue to enroll and dose patients in our clinical trials, our clinical development program timelines may continue to be subject to potential negative impacts from the ongoing pandemic in the U.S. and globally. The extent to which the ongoing pandemic continues to impact our business, including our preclinical studies, CMC studies, manufacturing, and clinical trials, will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence.
We may experience enrollment delays and suspensions, patient withdrawals, postponement of planned clinical or preclinical studies, redirection of site resources from studies, and study deviations or noncompliance. We may also need to maintain or implement study modifications, suspensions, or terminations, the introduction of additional remote study procedures and modified informed consent procedures, study site changes, direct delivery of investigational products to patient homes or alternative sites, which may require state licensing, and changes or delays in site monitoring. The foregoing may require that we consult with relevant review and ethics committees, Institutional Review Boards (“IRBs”), and the FDA. The foregoing may also impact the integrity of our study data. The COVID-19 outbreak may further increase the need for clinical trial patient monitoring and regulatory reporting of adverse effects, and may delay regulatory authority meetings, inspections, or the regulatory review of marketing or investigational applications or submissions.
The COVID-19 pandemic may also impact our ability to procure the necessary supply of our investigational drug products, as well as any ancillary supplies necessary for the conduct of our studies. Third party manufacturers may also need to implement measures and changes, or deviate from typical manufacturing requirements that may otherwise adversely impact our product candidates.
In light of the COVID-19 outbreak, the FDA issued a number of new guidance documents. Specifically, as a result of the potential effect of the COVID-19 outbreak on many clinical trial programs in the U.S. and globally, the FDA issued guidance concerning potential impacts on clinical trial programs, which guidance FDA has continually updated. In addition, the European Medicines Agency (“EMA”) as well as various country regulatory authorities (EU and UK) have issued similar guidance. We have adapted the FDA and EMA/UK guidance for study procedures, data collection, and oversight resulting from the pandemic.