Item 7.Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to our historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors." For a discussion of limitations in the measurement of certain of our community metrics, see the section entitled "Limitations of Key Metrics and Other Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain revenue information in the section entitled "-Revenue-Foreign Exchange Impact on Revenue" is presented on a constant currency basis. This information is a non-GAAP financial measure. To calculate revenue on a constant currency basis, we translated revenue for the full year 2020 using 2019 monthly exchange rates for our settlement or billing currencies other than the U.S. dollar. This non-GAAP financial measure is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. This measure may be different from non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies, limiting its usefulness for comparison purposes. Moreover, presentation of revenue on a constant currency basis is provided for year-over-year comparison purposes, and investors should be cautioned that the effect of changing foreign currency exchange rates has an actual effect on our operating results. We believe this non-GAAP financial measure provides investors with useful supplemental information about the financial performance of our business, enables comparison of financial results between periods where certain items may vary independent of business performance, and allows for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in operating our business.
Executive Overview of Full Year 2020 Results
Our key community metrics and financial results for 2020 are as follows:
Community growth:
•Facebook daily active users (DAUs) were 1.84 billion on average for December 2020, an increase of 11% year-over-year.
•Facebook monthly active users (MAUs) were 2.80 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of 12% year-over-year.
•Family daily active people (DAP) was 2.60 billion on average for December 2020, an increase of 15% year-over-year.
•Family monthly active people (MAP) was 3.30 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of 14% year-over-year.
Financial results:
•Revenue was $85.97 billion, up 22% year-over-year, and advertising revenue was $84.17 billion, up 21% year-over-year.
•Total costs and expenses were $53.29 billion.
•Income from operations was $32.67 billion and operating margin was 38%.
•Net income was $29.15 billion with diluted earnings per share of $10.09.
•Capital expenditures, including principal payments on finance leases, were $15.72 billion.
•Effective tax rate was 12.2%.
•Cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities were $61.95 billion as of December 31, 2020.
•Headcount was 58,604 as of December 31, 2020, an increase of 30% year-over-year.
Our mission is to give people the power to build community and bring the world closer together.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have focused on helping people stay connected, assisting the public health response, and working on the economic recovery. We have also continued to invest based on the following company priorities: (i) continue making progress on the major social issues facing the internet and our company, including privacy, safety, and security; (ii) build new experiences that meaningfully improve people's lives today and set the stage for even bigger improvements in the future; (iii) keep building our business by supporting the millions of businesses that rely on our
services to grow and create jobs; and (iv) communicate more transparently about what we're doing and the role our services play in the world.
In 2020, we also continued to focus on our main revenue growth priorities: (i) helping marketers use our products to connect with consumers where they are and (ii) making our ads more relevant and effective.
Our business has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which has resulted in authorities implementing numerous preventative measures to contain or mitigate the outbreak of the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, limitations on business activity, quarantines, and shelter-in-place orders. These measures have caused, and are continuing to cause, business slowdowns or shutdowns in affected areas, both regionally and worldwide, which have significantly impacted our business and results of operations. Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, we experienced significant increases in the size and engagement of our active user base across a number of regions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. More recently, we have seen user growth and engagement returning to pre-pandemic trends, particularly in the United States & Canada region. We are unable to predict the impact of the pandemic on user growth and engagement with any certainty, and we expect these trends to continue to be subject to volatility.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also previously caused a reduction in the demand for advertising, as well as a related decline in the pricing of our ads, particularly in the second quarter of 2020. More recently, we believe the pandemic has contributed to an acceleration in the shift of commerce from offline to online, as well as increasing consumer demand for purchasing products as opposed to services, and we experienced increasing demand for advertising as a result of these trends. However, it is possible that this increased demand may not continue in future periods and may even recede as the effects of the pandemic subside, which could adversely affect our advertising revenue growth. The impact of the pandemic on user growth and engagement, the demand for and pricing of our advertising services, as well as on our overall results of operations, remains highly uncertain for the foreseeable future. In addition, we expect that future advertising revenue growth will continue to be adversely affected by limitations on our ad targeting and measurement tools arising from changes to the regulatory environment and third-party mobile operating systems and browsers.
We intend to continue to invest in our business based on our company priorities, and we anticipate that additional investments in our data center capacity, servers, network infrastructure, and office facilities, as well as scaling our headcount to support our growth, will continue to drive expense growth in 2021. We expect 2021 capital expenditures to be in the range of $21-23 billion and total expenses to be in the range of $68-73 billion.
Trends in Our Facebook User Metrics
The numbers for our key Facebook metrics, our DAUs, MAUs, and average revenue per user (ARPU), do not include users on Instagram, WhatsApp, or our other products, unless they would otherwise qualify as DAUs or MAUs, respectively, based on their other activities on Facebook.
Trends in the number of users affect our revenue and financial results by influencing the number of ads we are able to show, the value of our ads to marketers, the volume of Payments transactions, as well as our expenses and capital expenditures. Substantially all of our daily and monthly active users (as defined below) access Facebook on mobile devices.
•Daily Active Users (DAUs). We define a daily active user as a registered and logged-in Facebook user who visited Facebook through our website or a mobile device, or used our Messenger application (and is also a registered Facebook user), on a given day. We view DAUs, and DAUs as a percentage of MAUs, as measures of user engagement on Facebook.
DAU/MAU: 66% 66% 66% 66% 66% 66% 66% 66% 66% 67% 66% 66% 66%
DAU/MAU: 77% 77% 77% 76% 77% 77% 77% 77% 77% 77% 77% 77% 76% DAU/MAU: 75% 75% 74% 74% 74% 74% 74% 74% 75% 75% 74% 74% 74%
DAU/MAU: 60% 61% 61% 61% 61% 61% 61% 62% 62% 62% 61% 62% 62% DAU/MAU: 64% 64% 64% 64% 64% 64% 64% 65% 65% 65% 65% 65% 65%
Note: For purposes of reporting DAUs, MAUs, and ARPU by geographic region, Europe includes all users in Russia and Turkey and Rest of World includes all users in Africa, Latin America, and the Middle East.
Worldwide DAUs increased 11% to 1.84 billion on average during December 2020 from 1.66 billion during December 2019. Users in India, the Philippines, and Indonesia represented key sources of growth in DAUs during December 2020, relative to the same period in 2019.
•Monthly Active Users (MAUs). We define a monthly active user as a registered and logged-in Facebook user who visited Facebook through our website or a mobile device, or used our Messenger application (and is also a registered Facebook user), in the last 30 days as of the date of measurement. MAUs are a measure of the size of our global active user community on Facebook.
As of December 31, 2020, we had 2.80 billion MAUs, an increase of 12% from December 31, 2019. Users in India, Indonesia, and the Philippines represented key sources of growth in 2020, relative to the same period in 2019.
Trends in Our Monetization by Facebook User Geography
We calculate our revenue by Facebook user geography based on our estimate of the geography in which ad impressions are delivered, virtual and digital goods are purchased, or consumer hardware devices are shipped. We define ARPU as our total revenue in a given geography during a given quarter, divided by the average of the number of MAUs in the geography at the beginning and end of the quarter. While ARPU includes all sources of revenue, the number of MAUs used in this calculation only includes users of Facebook and Messenger as described in the definition of MAU above. The share of revenue from users who are not also Facebook or Messenger MAUs was not material. The geography of our users affects our revenue and financial results because we currently monetize users in different geographies at different average rates. Our revenue and ARPU in regions such as United States & Canada and Europe are relatively higher primarily due to the size and maturity of those online and mobile advertising markets. For example, ARPU in 2020 in the United States & Canada region was more than 11 times higher than in the Asia-Pacific region.
ARPU: $7.37 $6.42 $7.05 $7.26 $8.52 $6.95 $7.05 $7.89 $10.14
ARPU: $34.86 $30.12 $33.27 $34.55 $41.41 $34.18 $36.49 $39.63 $53.56 ARPU: $10.98 $9.55 $10.70 $10.68 $13.21 $10.64 $11.03 $12.41 $16.87
ARPU: $2.96 $2.78 $3.04 $3.24 $3.57 $3.06 $2.99 $3.67 $4.05 ARPU: $2.11 $1.89 $2.13 $2.24 $2.48 $1.99 $1.78 $2.22 $2.77
Note: Our revenue by Facebook user geography in the charts above is geographically apportioned based on our estimation of the geographic location of our Facebook users when they perform a revenue-generating activity. This allocation differs from our revenue disaggregated by geography disclosure in our consolidated financial statements where revenue is geographically apportioned based on the billing address of the customer.
Our annual worldwide ARPU in 2020, which represents the sum of quarterly ARPU during such period, was $32.03, an increase of 10% from 2019. Over this period, ARPU increased by 18% in the United States & Canada, 15% in Europe, and 9% in Asia-Pacific, and ARPU was flat in Rest of World. In addition, user growth was more rapid in geographies with relatively lower ARPU, such as Asia-Pacific and Rest of World. We expect that user growth in the future will be primarily concentrated in those regions where ARPU is relatively lower, such that worldwide ARPU may continue to increase at a slower rate relative to ARPU in any geographic region, or potentially decrease even if ARPU increases in each geographic region.
Trends in Our Family Metrics
The numbers for our key Family metrics, our DAP, MAP, and average revenue per person (ARPP), do not include users on our other products unless they would otherwise qualify as MAP or DAP, respectively, based on their other activities on our Family products.
Trends in the number of people in our community affect our revenue and financial results by influencing the number of ads we are able to show, the value of our ads to marketers, the volume of Payments transactions, as well as our expenses and capital expenditures. Substantially all of our daily and monthly active people (as defined below) access our Family products on mobile devices.
•Daily Active People (DAP). We define a daily active person as a registered and logged-in user of Facebook, Instagram, Messenger, and/or WhatsApp (collectively, our "Family" of products) who visited at least one of these Family products through a mobile device application or using a web or mobile browser on a given day. We do not require people to use a common identifier or link their accounts to use multiple products in our Family, and therefore must seek to attribute multiple user accounts within and across products to individual people. Our calculations of DAP rely upon complex techniques, algorithms, and machine learning models that seek to estimate the underlying number of unique people using one or more of these products, including by matching user accounts within an individual product and across multiple products when we believe they are attributable to a single person, and counting such group of accounts as one person. As these techniques and models require significant judgment, are developed based on internal reviews of limited samples of user accounts, and are calibrated against user survey data, there is necessarily some margin of error in our estimates. We view DAP, and DAP as a percentage of MAP, as measures of engagement across our products. For additional information, see the section entitled "Limitations of Key Metrics and Other Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
DAP/MAP: 77% 78% 78% 78% 78% 79% 79% 79% 79%
Note: We report the numbers of DAP and MAP as specific amounts, but these numbers are estimates of the numbers of unique people using our products and are subject to statistical variances and errors. While we expect the error margin for these estimates to vary from period to period, we estimate that such margin generally will be approximately 4% of our worldwide MAP. At our scale, it is very difficult to attribute multiple user accounts within and across products to individual people, and it is possible that the actual numbers of unique people using our products may vary significantly from our estimates, potentially beyond our estimated error margins. For additional information, see the section entitled "Limitations of Key Metrics and Other Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In the second quarter of 2020, we updated our Family metrics calculations to reflect recent data from a periodic WhatsApp user survey and to incorporate certain methodology improvements, and we estimate such updates contributed an aggregate of approximately 40 million DAP to our reported worldwide DAP in June 2020.
Worldwide DAP increased 15% to 2.60 billion on average during December 2020 from 2.26 billion during December 2019.
•Monthly Active People (MAP). We define a monthly active person as a registered and logged-in user of one or more Family products who visited at least one of these Family products through a mobile device application or using a web or mobile browser in the last 30 days as of the date of measurement. We do not require people to use a common identifier or link their accounts to use multiple products in our Family, and therefore must seek to attribute multiple user accounts within and across products to individual people. Our calculations of MAP rely upon complex techniques, algorithms, and machine learning models that seek to estimate the underlying number of unique people using one or more of these products, including by matching user accounts within an individual product and across multiple products when we believe they are attributable to a single person, and counting such group of accounts as one person. As these techniques and models require significant judgment, are developed based on internal reviews of limited samples of user accounts, and are calibrated against user survey data, there is necessarily some margin of error in our estimates. We view MAP as a measure of the size of our global active community of people using our products. For additional information, see the section entitled "Limitations of Key Metrics and Other Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Note: We report the numbers of DAP and MAP as specific amounts, but these numbers are estimates of the numbers of unique people using our products and are subject to statistical variances and errors. While we expect the error margin for these estimates to vary from period to period, we estimate that such margin generally will be approximately 4% of our worldwide MAP. At our scale, it is very difficult to attribute multiple user accounts within and across products to individual people, and it is possible that the actual numbers of unique people using our products may vary significantly from our estimates, potentially beyond our estimated error margins. For additional information, see the section entitled "Limitations of Key Metrics and Other Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In the second quarter of 2020, we updated our Family metrics calculations to reflect recent data from a periodic WhatsApp user survey and to incorporate certain methodology improvements, and we estimate such updates contributed an aggregate of approximately 50 million MAP to our reported worldwide MAP in June 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we had 3.30 billion MAP, an increase of 14% from 2.89 billion as of December 31, 2019.
•Average Revenue Per Person (ARPP). We define ARPP as our total revenue during a given quarter, divided by the average of the number of MAP at the beginning and end of the quarter. While ARPP includes all sources of revenue, the number of MAP used in this calculation only includes users of our Family products as described in the definition of MAP above. The share of revenue from users who are not also MAP was not material.
ARPP: $6.52 $5.66 $6.20 $6.33 $7.38 $6.03 $6.10 $6.76 $8.62
Our annual worldwide ARPP in 2020, which represents the sum of quarterly ARPP during such period, was $27.51, an increase of 8% from 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if the nature of the estimates or assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change, and the impact of the estimates and assumptions on our consolidated financial statements is material. We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with gross vs. net in revenue recognition, valuation of equity investments, income taxes, loss contingencies, valuation of long-lived assets including goodwill and intangible assets and their associated estimated useful lives have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates. For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 1-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In response to the economic slowdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with collectibility assessment of revenue and credit losses of accounts receivable could have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements in future periods, depending on the duration or degree of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy.
Collectibility Assessment of Revenue
Under Topic 606, we recognize revenue using a five-step model. In step one, for a revenue contract to exist, it must be probable that substantially all of the consideration to which we are entitled to will be collected. In performing such collectibility assessment, we consider various facts and circumstances including future expectations about our customer's ability and intention to pay. Collectibility assessment uses a probable threshold which requires estimation based on several objective and subjective factors, such as probability of default, customer’s intention to pay, payment history, financial strength, geography, and industry sub-vertical risks. The collectibility assessment has become uncertain during the current economic environment caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, and our actual experience in the future may differ from our past experiences or current assessment.
Credit Losses of Accounts Receivable
On January 1, 2020, we adopted Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which requires the measurement and recognition of expected credit losses for financial assets held at amortized cost that an entity does not expect to collect over the asset's contractual life, considering past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions.
For accounts receivable measured at amortized cost, we use aging analysis, probability of default methods and incorporate macroeconomic variables that are most relevant to evaluating and estimating the expected credit losses. These macroeconomic variables may vary by geography, customer-type, or industry sub-vertical. The contractual life of our trade accounts receivable is generally short-term; however, we may experience increasing credit loss risks from accounts receivable in future periods depending on the duration or degree of economic slowdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, and our actual experience in the future may differ from our past experiences or current assessment.
Gross vs. Net in Revenue Recognition
For revenue generated from arrangements that involve third-party publishers, there is significant judgment in evaluating whether we are the principal, and report revenue on a gross basis, or the agent, and report revenue on a net basis. In this assessment, we consider if we obtain control of the specified goods or services before they are transferred to the customer, as well as other indicators such as the party primarily responsible for fulfillment, inventory risk, and discretion in
establishing price. The assessment of whether we are considered the principal or the agent in a transaction could impact our revenue and cost of revenue recognized on the consolidated statements of income.
Valuation of Equity Investments
For our equity securities without readily determinable fair values accounted for using the measurement alternative, determining whether an equity security issued by the same issuer is similar to the equity security we hold may require judgment in (a) assessment of differences in rights and obligations associated with the instruments such as voting rights, distribution rights and preferences, and conversion features, and (b) adjustments to the observable price for differences such as, but not limited to, rights and obligations, control premium, liquidity, or principal or most advantageous markets. In addition, the identification of observable transactions will depend on the timely reporting of these transactions from our investee companies, which may occur in a period subsequent to when the transactions take place. Therefore, our fair value adjustment for these observable transactions may occur in a period subsequent to when the transaction actually occurred. For equity investments, we perform a qualitative assessment at each reporting date to determine whether there are triggering events for impairment. The qualitative assessment considers factors such as, but not limited to, the investee's financial condition and business outlook; industry and sector performance; regulatory, economic or technological environment; operational and financing cash flows; and other relevant events and factors affecting the investee. When indicators of impairment exist, we estimate the fair value of our equity investments using the market approach and/or the income approach and recognize impairment loss in the consolidated statements of income if the estimated fair value is less than the carrying value. Estimating fair value requires judgment and use of estimates such as discount rates, forecast cash flows, holding period, and market data of comparable companies, among others.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes and income tax assets and liabilities, including evaluating uncertainties in the application of accounting principles and complex tax laws.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if we believe that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. These uncertain tax positions include our estimates for transfer pricing that have been developed based upon analyses of appropriate arms-length prices. Similarly, our estimates related to uncertain tax positions concerning research tax credits are based on an assessment of whether our available documentation corroborating the nature of our activities supporting the tax credits will be sufficient. Although we believe that we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions (including net interest and penalties), we can provide no assurance that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be materially different. We make adjustments to these reserves in accordance with the income tax accounting guidance when facts and circumstances change, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different from the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made, and could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results.
Loss Contingencies
We are involved in legal proceedings, claims, and regulatory, tax or government inquiries and investigations that arise in the ordinary course of business. Certain of these matters include speculative claims for substantial or indeterminate amounts of damages. Additionally, we are required to comply with various legal and regulatory obligations around the world. The requirements for complying with these obligations may be uncertain and subject to interpretation and enforcement by regulatory and other authorities, and any failure to comply with such obligations could eventually lead to asserted legal or regulatory action. With respect to these matters, asserted and unasserted, we evaluate the associated developments on a regular basis and accrue a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. If we determine there is a reasonable possibility that we may incur a loss and the loss or range of loss can be estimated, we disclose the possible loss in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements to the extent material.
We review the developments in our contingencies that could affect the amount of the provisions that have been previously recorded, and the matters and related reasonably possible losses disclosed. We make adjustments to our provisions and changes to our disclosures accordingly to reflect the impact of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel,
and updated information. Significant judgment is required to determine the probability of loss and the estimated amount of loss, including when and if the probability and estimate has changed for asserted and unasserted matters.
The ultimate outcome of these matters, such as whether the likelihood of loss is remote, reasonably possible, or probable or if and when the reasonably possible range of loss is estimable, is inherently uncertain. Therefore, if one or more of these matters were resolved against us for amounts in excess of management's estimates of losses, our results of operations and financial condition, including in a particular reporting period in which any such outcome becomes probable and estimable, could be materially adversely affected. See Note 12-Commitments and Contingencies and Note 15-Income Taxes of the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" and Part I, Item 3, "Legal Proceedings" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding these contingencies.
Valuation of Long-lived Assets including Goodwill, Intangible Assets and Estimated Useful Lives
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, estimated replacement costs and future expected cash flows from acquired users, acquired technology, acquired patents, and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives, and discount rates. Management's estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Allocation of purchase consideration to identifiable assets and liabilities affects our amortization expense, as acquired finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over the useful life, whereas any indefinite lived intangible assets, including goodwill, are not amortized. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
We review goodwill for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our single reporting unit below its carrying value. As of December 31, 2020, no impairment of goodwill has been identified.
Long-lived assets, including property and equipment and intangible assets are reviewed for possible impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. The evaluation is performed at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate from the use and eventual disposition. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of property and equipment and intangible assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value. We have not recorded any significant impairment charges during the years presented.
The useful lives of our long-lived assets including property and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets are determined by management when those assets are initially recognized and are routinely reviewed for the remaining estimated useful lives. The current estimate of useful lives represents our best estimate based on current facts and circumstances, but may differ from the actual useful lives due to changes in future circumstances such as changes to our business operations, changes in the planned use of assets, and technological advancements. When we change the estimated useful life assumption for any asset, the remaining carrying amount of the asset is accounted for prospectively and depreciated or amortized over the revised estimated useful life. Historically changes in useful lives have not resulted in material changes to our depreciation and amortization expense.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Advertising. We generate substantially all of our revenue from advertising. Our advertising revenue is generated by displaying ad products on Facebook, Instagram, Messenger, and third-party affiliated websites or mobile applications. Marketers pay for ad products either directly or through their relationships with advertising agencies or resellers, based on the number of impressions delivered or the number of actions, such as clicks, taken by users.
We recognize revenue from the display of impression-based ads in the contracted period in which the impressions are delivered. Impressions are considered delivered when an ad is displayed to a user. We recognize revenue from the delivery of action-based ads in the period in which a user takes the action the marketer contracted for. The number of ads we show is subject to methodological changes as we continue to evolve our ads business and the structure of our ads products. We calculate price per ad as total ad revenue divided by the number of ads delivered, representing the effective price paid per impression by a marketer regardless of their desired objective such as impression or action. For advertising revenue arrangements where we are not the principal, we recognize revenue on a net basis.
Other revenue. Other revenue consists of revenue from the delivery of consumer hardware devices, net fees we receive from developers using our Payments infrastructure, and revenue from various other sources.
Cost of Revenue and Operating Expenses
Cost of revenue. Our cost of revenue consists primarily of expenses associated with the delivery and distribution of our products. These include expenses related to the operation of our data centers and technical infrastructure, such as facility and server equipment depreciation, salaries, benefits, and share-based compensation for employees on our operations teams, and energy and bandwidth costs. Cost of revenue also includes costs associated with partner arrangements, including traffic acquisition and content costs, credit card and other transaction fees related to processing customer transactions, and cost of consumer hardware devices sold.
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits, share-based compensation, and facilities-related costs for employees on our engineering and technical teams who are responsible for building new products as well as improving existing products.
Marketing and sales. Marketing and sales expenses consist of salaries and benefits, and share-based compensation for our employees engaged in sales, sales support, marketing, business development, and customer service functions. Our marketing and sales expenses also include marketing and promotional expenditures and professional services such as content reviewers to support our community and product operations.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist of legal-related costs; salaries and benefits, and share-based compensation for certain of our executives as well as our legal, finance, human resources, corporate communications and policy, and other administrative employees; and professional services.
Results of Operations
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of income data (in millions):
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of income data (as a percentage of revenue)(1):
_________________________
(1)Percentages have been rounded for presentation purposes and may differ from unrounded results.
Share-based compensation expense included in costs and expenses (in millions):
Share-based compensation expense included in costs and expenses (as a percentage of revenue)(1):
_________________________
(1)Percentages have been rounded for presentation purposes and may differ from unrounded results.
Revenue
2020 Compared to 2019. Revenue in 2020 increased $15.27 billion, or 22%, compared to 2019. The increase was mostly due to an increase in advertising revenue as a result of an increase in the number of ads delivered, partially offset by a decrease in the average price per ad.
In 2020, the number of ads delivered increased by 34%, as compared with approximately 33% in 2019. The increase in the ads delivered was driven by an increase in the number and frequency of ads displayed across our products, and an increase in users. In 2020, the average price per ad decreased by 10%, as compared with a decrease of approximately 5% in 2019. The decrease in average price per ad during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by a decrease in advertising demand globally during the first two quarters of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and, to a lesser extent, by an increasing proportion of the number of ads delivered as Stories ads and in geographies that monetize at lower rates.
In the near-term, we anticipate that future advertising revenue growth will be determined primarily by several factors: the extent to which we continue to see increasing advertising demand in connection with the shift of commerce from offline to online, as well as increased consumer demand for purchasing products as opposed to services, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic; the status of the economic recovery from the slowdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the magnitude of fiscal stimulus; and the extent to which changes to the regulatory environment and third-party mobile operating systems and browsers result in limitations on our ad targeting and measurement tools.
Advertising spending is traditionally seasonally strong in the fourth quarter of each year. We believe that this seasonality in advertising spending affects our quarterly results, which generally reflect significant growth in advertising revenue between the third and fourth quarters and a decline in advertising spending between the fourth and subsequent first quarters. For instance, our advertising revenue increased 28%, 19%, and 23% between the third and fourth quarters of 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, while advertising revenue for both the first quarters of 2020 and 2019 declined 16% and 10% compared to the fourth quarters of 2019 and 2018, respectively.
No customer represented 10% or more of total revenue during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Foreign Exchange Impact on Revenue
The general strengthening of the U.S. dollar relative to certain foreign currencies in the full year 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, had an unfavorable impact on revenue. If we had translated revenue for the full year 2020 using the prior year's monthly exchange rates for our settlement or billing currencies other than the U.S. dollar, our total revenue and
advertising revenue would have been $86.08 billion and $84.30 billion, respectively. Using these constant rates, total revenue and advertising revenue would have been $120 million and $129 million, respectively, higher than actual total revenue and advertising revenue for the full year 2020. Using the same constant rates, full year 2020 total revenue and advertising revenue would have been $15.39 billion and $14.64 billion, respectively, higher than actual total revenue and advertising revenue for the full year 2019.
Cost of revenue
2020 Compared to 2019. Cost of revenue in 2020 increased $3.92 billion, or 31%, compared to 2019. The increase was mostly due to an increase in operational expenses related to our data centers and technical infrastructure, higher cost associated with partner arrangements, including traffic acquisition and content costs and, to a lesser extent, an increase in cost of consumer hardware devices sold.
In 2021, we anticipate that the cost of revenue will increase as we continue to expand our data center capacity and technical infrastructure to support user growth, increased user engagement, and the delivery of new products and services and, to a lesser extent, due to higher costs associated with partner arrangements and consumer hardware devices.
Research and development
2020 Compared to 2019. Research and development expenses in 2020 increased $4.85 billion, or 36%, compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to increases in payroll and benefits expenses as a result of a 40% growth in employee headcount from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 in engineering and other technical functions supporting our continued investment in our Family of products and consumer hardware products.
In 2021, we plan to continue to hire software engineers and other technical employees, and to increase our investment to support our research and development initiatives.
Marketing and sales
2020 Compared to 2019. Marketing and sales expenses in 2020 increased $1.72 billion, or 17%, compared to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increases in marketing expenses and payroll and benefits expenses, which were partially offset by a decrease in travel-related expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our payroll and benefits expenses increased as a result of a 16% increase in employee headcount from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 in our marketing and sales functions.
In 2021, we plan to continue the hiring of marketing and sales employees to support our marketing, sales, and partnership efforts, and we anticipate marketing expenses will increase.
General and administrative
2020 Compared to 2019. Excluding the $5.0 billion FTC settlement accrual recorded in 2019, general and administrative expenses in 2020 increased $1.10 billion, or 20%, compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher professional services costs and an increase in payroll and benefits expenses as a result of a 23% increase in employee headcount from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 in our general and administrative functions.
In 2021, we plan to continue to increase general and administrative expenses to support overall company growth.
Interest and other income, net
2020 Compared to 2019. Interest and other income, net in 2020 decreased $317 million compared to 2019. The majority of the decrease was due to a decrease in interest income related to lower interest rates compared to 2019.
Provision for income taxes
2020 Compared to 2019. Our provision for income taxes in 2020 decreased $2.29 billion, or 36%, compared to 2019, mostly due to the additional tax expense incurred in 2019 from the Altera Ninth Circuit Opinion and the effects of a tax election to capitalize and amortize certain research and development expenses for U.S. income tax purposes, both discussed below.
Our effective tax rate in 2020 decreased compared to 2019, primarily due to the 2019 legal accrual related to the FTC settlement that was not tax-deductible, the additional tax expense incurred in 2019 from the Altera Ninth Circuit Opinion, and the effects of a tax election to capitalize and amortize certain research and development expenses for U.S. income tax purposes.
In the third quarter of 2020, as part of finalizing our U.S. income tax return, we elected to capitalize and amortize certain research and development expenses for U.S. income tax purposes. As a result, we recorded a total of $1.07 billion
income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020. The income tax benefit resulted from recording a deferred income tax asset that was greater than the current income tax liability due to different tax rates applicable for the periods in which capitalized expenses will be amortized versus the period in which the increased current tax liability was accrued. We do not believe this election will materially affect our effective tax rate trend in the future.
On July 27, 2015, the United States Tax Court issued a decision (Tax Court Decision) in Altera Corp. v. Commissioner, which concluded that related parties in a cost sharing arrangement are not required to share expenses related to share-based compensation. The Tax Court Decision was appealed by the Commissioner to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals (Ninth Circuit). On June 7, 2019, the Ninth Circuit issued an opinion (Altera Ninth Circuit Opinion) that reversed the Tax Court Decision. Based on the Altera Ninth Circuit Opinion, we recorded a cumulative income tax expense of $1.11 billion in the second quarter of 2019. On July 22, 2019, the taxpayer requested a rehearing before the full Ninth Circuit and the request was denied on November 12, 2019. The taxpayer requested a hearing before the Supreme Court of the United States and the request was denied on June 22, 2020. Since we started to accrue income tax for share-based compensation cost-sharing expense in the second quarter of 2019, the denial of the request by the Supreme Court did not have a material impact to our financial results in 2020.
Effective Tax Rate Items. Our effective tax rate in the future will depend upon the proportion between the following items and income before provision for income taxes: U.S. tax benefits from foreign derived intangible income, tax effects from share-based compensation, tax effects of integrating intellectual property from acquisitions, settlement of tax contingency items, tax effects of changes in our business, and the effects of changes in tax law.
The accounting for share-based compensation may increase or decrease our effective tax rate based upon the difference between our share-based compensation expense and the deductions taken on our tax return which depends upon the stock price at the time of employee award vesting. If our stock price remains constant to the January 22, 2021 price, we expect our effective tax rate for the full year of 2021 will be in the high-teens.
Integrating intellectual property from acquisitions into our business generally involves intercompany transactions that have the impact of increasing our provision for income taxes. Consequently, our provision for income taxes and our effective tax rate may initially increase in the period of an acquisition and integration. The magnitude of this impact will depend upon the specific type, size, and taxing jurisdictions of the intellectual property as well as the relative contribution to income in subsequent periods.
Unrecognized Tax Benefits. As of December 31, 2020, we had net unrecognized tax benefits of $3.48 billion which were accrued as other liabilities. These unrecognized tax benefits were predominantly accrued for uncertainties related to transfer pricing with our foreign subsidiaries, which includes licensing of intellectual property, providing services and other transactions, as well as for uncertainties with our research tax credits. The ultimate settlement of the liabilities will depend upon resolution of tax audits, litigation, or events that would otherwise change the assessment of such items. Based upon the status of litigation described below and the current status of tax audits in various jurisdictions, we do not anticipate a material change to such amounts within the next 12 months.
In July 2016, we received a Statutory Notice of Deficiency (Notice) from the IRS related to transfer pricing with our foreign subsidiaries in conjunction with the examination of the 2010 tax year. While the Notice applies only to the 2010 tax year, the IRS stated that it will also apply its position for tax years subsequent to 2010. We do not agree with the position of the IRS and have filed a petition in the Tax Court challenging the Notice. On January 15, 2020, the IRS filed its Pretrial Memorandum in the case stating that it planned to assert at trial an adjustment that is higher than the adjustment stated in the Notice. The first sessions of the trial began in February 2020, and additional sessions are expected to continue in 2021. The IRS did not provide any information about how it intends to apply the revised adjustment to future years. Based on the information provided, we believe that, if the IRS prevails in its updated position, this could result in an additional federal tax liability of an estimated, aggregate amount of up to approximately $9.0 billion in excess of the amounts in our originally filed U.S. return, plus interest and any penalties asserted.
In March 2018, we received a second Notice from the IRS in conjunction with the examination of our 2011 through 2013 tax years. The IRS applied its position from the 2010 tax year to each of these years and also proposed new adjustments related to other transfer pricing with our foreign subsidiaries and certain tax credits that we claimed. If the IRS prevails in its position for these new adjustments, this could result in an additional federal tax liability of up to approximately $680 million
in excess of the amounts in our originally filed U.S. returns, plus interest and any penalties asserted. We do not agree with the positions of the IRS in the second Notice and have filed a petition in the Tax Court challenging the second Notice.
We have previously accrued an estimated unrecognized tax benefit consistent with the guidance in ASC 740, Income Taxes, that is lower than the potential additional federal tax liability from the positions taken by the IRS in the two Notices and its Pretrial Memorandum. In addition, if the IRS prevails in its positions related to transfer pricing with our foreign subsidiaries, the additional tax that we would owe would be partially offset by a reduction in the tax that we owe under the mandatory transition tax on accumulated foreign earnings from the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (Tax Act). As of December 31, 2020, we have not resolved these matters and proceedings continue in the Tax Court.
We believe that adequate amounts have been reserved in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes, for any adjustments to the provision for income taxes or other tax items that may ultimately result from these examinations. The timing of the resolution, settlement, and closure of any audits is highly uncertain, and it is reasonably possible that the balance of gross unrecognized tax benefits could significantly change in the next 12 months. Given the number of years remaining that are subject to examination in various jurisdictions, we are unable to estimate the full range of possible adjustments to the balance of gross unrecognized tax benefits. If the taxing authorities prevail in the assessment of additional tax due, the assessed tax, interest, and penalties, if any, could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
Quarterly Results of Operations Data
The following tables set forth our unaudited quarterly consolidated statements of income data in dollars and as a percentage of total revenue for each of the eight quarters in the period ended December 31, 2020. We have prepared the quarterly consolidated statements of income data on a basis consistent with the audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In the opinion of management, the financial information reflects all adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring adjustments, which we consider necessary for a fair presentation of this data. This information should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The results of historical periods are not necessarily indicative of the results of operations for any future period.
The following tables set forth our consolidated statements of income data (as a percentage of revenue)(1):
_________________________
(1)Percentages have been rounded for presentation purposes and may differ from unrounded results.
Share-based compensation expense included in costs and expenses:
Share-based compensation expense included in costs and expenses (as a percentage of revenue)(1):
_________________________
(1)Percentages have been rounded for presentation purposes and may differ from unrounded results.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities, and cash generated from operations. Cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities consist mostly of cash on deposit with banks, investments in money market funds, and investments in U.S. government securities, U.S. government agency securities, and corporate debt securities. Cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities were $61.95 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $7.10 billion from December 31, 2019. The increase was mostly due to $38.75 billion of cash generated from operations, offset by $15.72 billion for capital expenditures, including principal payments on finance leases, $6.36 billion for purchases of equity investments, $6.27 billion for repurchases of our Class A common stock, and $3.56 billion of taxes paid related to net share settlement of employee restricted stock units (RSU) awards.
Cash paid for income taxes was $4.23 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, our federal net operating loss carryforward was $10.62 billion and our federal tax credit carryforward was $424 million. We anticipate the utilization of a significant portion of these net operating losses and credits within the next three years.
Our board of directors has authorized a share repurchase program of our Class A common stock, which commenced in January 2017 and does not have an expiration date. As of December 31, 2019, $4.90 billion remained available and authorized for repurchases under this program. In 2020, we repurchased and subsequently retired 27 million shares of our Class A common stock for $6.30 billion. As of December 31, 2020, $8.60 billion remained available and authorized for repurchases. In January 2021, an additional $25 billion of repurchases was authorized under this program.
As of December 31, 2020, $7.18 billion of the $61.95 billion in cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities was held by our foreign subsidiaries. The Tax Act imposed a mandatory transition tax on accumulated foreign earnings and eliminated U.S. taxes on foreign subsidiary distributions. As a result, earnings in foreign jurisdictions are available for distribution to the U.S. without incremental U.S. taxes.
In July 2019, we entered into a settlement and modified consent order to resolve the inquiry of the FTC into our platform and user data practices, which was approved by the federal court and took effect in April 2020. We paid the penalty of $5.0 billion in April 2020 upon the effectiveness of the modified consent order. On April 21, 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to invest in Jio Platforms Limited, a subsidiary of Reliance Industries Limited. The transaction closed on July 7, 2020, and we paid approximately $5.8 billion at the then-current exchange rate.
We currently anticipate that our available funds and cash flow from operations will be sufficient to meet our operational cash needs and fund our share repurchase program for the foreseeable future.
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Cash flow from operating activities during 2020 mostly consisted of net income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including $6.86 billion of depreciation and amortization and $6.54 billion of share-based compensation expense, and offset by a cash payment of $5.0 billion for the FTC legal settlement. The increase in cash flow from operating activities during 2020 compared to 2019 was mostly due to higher net income as adjusted for certain non-cash items, such as depreciation and
amortization, share-based compensation expense and deferred income tax, partially offset by the payment of $5.0 billion for the FTC legal settlement.
Cash flow from operating activities during 2019 primarily consisted of net income, adjusted for certain non-cash items, including $5.74 billion of depreciation and amortization and $4.84 billion of share-based compensation expense. The increase in cash flow from operating activities during 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to higher net income prior to the effect of the $5.0 billion FTC legal settlement accrual, an increase in taxes payable as well as increases in the non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization, and share-based compensation expense.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities during 2020 mostly resulted from $15.11 billion of purchases of property and equipment as we continued to invest in data centers, servers, office facilities, and network infrastructure, $8.16 billion of net purchases of marketable securities, and $6.36 billion of purchases of equity investments. The increase in cash used in investing activities during 2020 compared to 2019 was due to increases in purchases of equity investments and in net purchases of marketable securities.
Cash used in investing activities during 2019 mostly resulted from $15.10 billion of net purchase of property and equipment as we continued to invest in data centers, servers, network infrastructure, and $4.19 billion of net purchases of marketable securities. The increase in cash used in investing activities during 2019 compared to 2018 was mostly due to increases in the net purchases of marketable securities and property and equipment.
We anticipate making capital expenditures of approximately $21 billion to $23 billion in 2021.
Cash Used in Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities during 2020 mostly consisted of $6.27 billion for repurchases of our Class A common stock and $3.56 billion of taxes paid related to net share settlement of RSUs. The increase in cash used in financing activities during 2020 compared to 2019 was due to increases in repurchases of our Class A common stock and in taxes paid related to net share settlement of RSUs.
Cash used in financing activities during 2019 mostly consisted of $4.20 billion used to settle repurchases of our Class A common stock, and $2.34 billion of taxes paid related to net share settlement of equity awards, and $552 million of principal payments on finance leases. The decrease in cash used in financing activities during 2019 compared to 2018 was mostly due to a decrease in repurchases of our Class A common stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal commitments consist mostly of obligations under operating leases and other contractual commitments. Our obligations under operating leases include among others, certain of our offices, data centers, land, colocations, and equipment. Our other contractual commitments are mostly related to our investments in network infrastructure, consumer hardware, content costs, and data center operations. The following table summarizes our commitments to settle contractual obligations in cash as of December 31, 2020:
_________________________
(1)Includes variable lease payments that were fixed subsequent to lease commencement or modification.
Additionally, as part of the normal course of the business, we may also enter into multi-year agreements to purchase renewable energy that do not specify a fixed or minimum volume commitment. These agreements are generally entered into in order to secure either volume or price. Using projected market prices or expected volume consumption, the total estimated spend is approximately $4.94 billion. The ultimate spend under these agreements may vary and will be based on prevailing market prices or actual volume purchased.
Our other liabilities also include $3.48 billion related to net uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2020. Due to uncertainties in the timing of the completion of tax audits, the timing of the resolution of these positions is uncertain and we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years beyond 12 months. As a result, this amount is not included in the above contractual obligations table.
Contingencies
We are involved in legal proceedings, claims, and regulatory, tax or government inquiries and investigations. We record a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a liability has been incurred, and that the amount can be reasonably estimated. If we determine there is a reasonable possibility that we may incur a loss and the loss or range of loss can be estimated, we disclose the possible loss in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements to the extent material. Significant judgment is required to determine both probability and the estimated amount of loss. Such matters are inherently unpredictable and subject to significant uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. Should any of these estimates and assumptions change or prove to be incorrect, it could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position, and cash flows.
See Note 12-Commitments and Contingencies and Note 15-Income Taxes in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" and Part I, Item 3, "Legal Proceedings" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding contingencies.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For further information on recently issued accounting pronouncements, see Note 1-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.