Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion is intended to assist you in understanding our results of operations and our present financial condition and contains forward-looking statements that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. The forward-looking statements are dependent upon events, risks and uncertainties that may be outside our control. We caution you that our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences are discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors,” all of which are difficult to predict. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events discussed may not occur. We do not undertake any obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements except as otherwise required by applicable law.
Overview
Our primary source of revenue is the sale of metallurgical coal. We have a 262 million ton reserve base of high-quality metallurgical coal and a development portfolio including four primary properties. Our plan is to continue development of our existing properties and grow production to 4-4.5 million clean tons of metallurgical coal, subject to market conditions, permitting and additional capital deployment. We may make acquisitions of reserves or infrastructure that continue our focus on advantaged geology and lower costs.
During 2020, we sold 1.75 million tons of coal. Of this, 71% was sold in North American markets and 29% was sold in export markets, excluding Canada, principally to Europe, South America, Asia and Africa. We also purchase coal from third parties for sale for our own account; although, these volumes decreased in 2019 and 2020. Sales of higher margin Company produced coal made up 99% of total sales in 2020 as compared with 96% in 2019.
The overall outlook of the metallurgical coal business is dependent on a variety of factors such as pricing, regulatory uncertainties and global economic conditions. Coal consumption and production in the U.S. is driven by several market dynamics and trends including the U.S. and global economies, the U.S. dollar’s strength relative to other currencies and accelerating production cuts.
Metallurgical coal markets weakened significantly during 2020 due to the on-going severe global economic slowdown stemming from COVID-19 outbreak. The global spread of COVID-19 has created significant market volatility and economic uncertainty and disruption since early-2020. In response to the pandemic, governments worldwide have placed significant restrictions on both domestic and international travel and have taken action to restrict the movement of people and suspend some business operations, ranging from targeted restrictions to full national lockdowns. These lockdowns, restrictions on public gatherings and stay-at-home measures, coupled with the spread and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, have resulted in a significant worldwide economic slowdown. In certain cases, states that had begun taking steps to reopen their economies experienced a subsequent surge in cases of COVID-19, causing these states to cease such reopening measures in some cases and reinstitute restrictions in others. The COVID-19 pandemic may significantly worsen in the United States during the upcoming months, which may cause federal, state and local governments to reconsider imposing more severe restrictions on business and social activities. In the event governments impose such restrictions, the re-opening of the economy may be further delayed.
The Company has been adversely affected by the deterioration and increased uncertainty in the macroeconomic environment as a result of the impact of COVID-19. In 2020, two customers notified us that their contractual obligations to purchase metallurgical coal from us would be delayed or curtailed because of COVID-19. These delays or curtailments reduced our total contracted sales volumes for 2020 by approximately 10% or almost 200,000 tons.
We took certain actions to limit our production and reduce capital expenditures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and reduced global demand for metallurgical coal. These included:
● an operational furlough of approximately 182 employees at the Elk Creek mining complex in West Virginia for most of the month of April 2020;
● a one-week operational furlough of approximately 157 employees at the Elk Creek mining complex in July 2020;
● the partial closure of our Berwind low volatile development mine complex affecting approximately 44 employees effective in July 2020; and
● a reduction or deferral of non-essential capital expenditures, including cessation of the slope project at the Berwind mining complex to adapt to the current market conditions.
To date we have not had significant issues with any of our critical suppliers, but we continue to communicate with them and closely monitor their developments to ensure we have access to the goods and services required to maintain our operations.
We continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions altering our business operations if we determine they are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers, and stakeholders, or as required by federal, state, or local authorities. Additional measures we may take could include extensions of operational furloughs, temporary salary reductions for certain executives, staffing reductions and idling or realignment of additional mines as conditions dictate. It is not clear what potential effects any such alterations or modifications may have on our business. The impact on our results in future periods could be much more significant and cannot currently be quantified.
The annual contracting season with North American steel producers generally occurs in late-summer through the fall. As of December 31, 2020, we had entered into forward sales contracts with certain North American customers for 2021 on a fixed price basis for 1.3 million tons of metallurgical coal at an average realizable price of $84/ton FOB mine. This level of pricing in 2021 is lower than we realized in 2020 and is due to a combination of factors, including the impact of COVID-19 discussed above, lower year-over-year steel prices, changes in types of coal qualities purchased by customers in 2021 and general economic concerns in the United States. We anticipate placing a greater percentage of our overall sales in the spot markets in 2021.
In 2020, our capital expenditures totaled approximately $24.8 million, down from $45.7 million in 2019. We continued to invest in infrastructure and mine equipment at our Elk Creek mining complex, primarily related to increasing our long-term refuse disposal. In 2020, we suspended development at the Berwind mining complex due to lower pricing and demand largely caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. This complex remains a key part of our anticipated future growth.
On November 5, 2018, one of our three raw coal storage silos that fed our Elk Creek plant experienced a partial structural failure. A temporary conveying system completed in late-November 2018 restored approximately 80% of our plant capacity. We completed a permanent belt workaround and restored the preparation plant to its full processing capacity in mid-2019. Our insurance carrier disputed our claim for coverage based on certain exclusions to the applicable policy and therefore on August 21, 2019, we filed suit seeking a declaratory judgment that the partial silo collapse was an insurable event and to require coverage under our policy. Please see “Commitments and Contingencies,” Note 10 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of this matter.
Results of Operations
Adjusted EBITDA was $18.5 million in 2020, which was 67% below that for 2019. We sold 1.75 million tons of Company produced tons at realized pricing of $85/ton in 2020. In 2019, we sold 1.9 million tons of Company produced tons at realized pricing of $109/ton. The decrease in EBITDA is principally due to lower pricing and volumes sold in 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue. Our revenue includes sales to customers of Company produced coal and coal purchased from third parties. We include amounts billed by us for transportation to our customers within revenue and transportation costs incurred within cost of sales.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had revenue of $168.9 million from the sale of 1.75 million tons of coal including 0.03 million tons of purchased coal. During 2019, we sold 1.95 million tons of coal including 0.08 million tons of purchased coal for total revenue of $230.2 million.
Coal sales information is summarized as follows:
Metallurgical coal pricing and demand weakened significantly in mid- to late-2019 coinciding with the time that annual contracts for 2020 shipments of North American metallurgical coal were being entered. Because of this, we contracted for fewer tons to domestic markets under annual contracts in 2020 as compared with 2019. Modestly higher volumes were planned for sale in the spot market during 2020 as compared with 2019. The aforementioned weakness in spot market demand and pricing, principally attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic, limited our overall sales results in 2020.
Cost of sales. Our cost of sales totaled $145.5 million for 2020 as compared to $162.5 million for 2019. The total cash cost per ton sold (FOB mine) during 2020 was approximately $72 for Company produced coal as compared with $73 for 2019. The cost of sales for coal we purchased from third parties declined to $1.6 million in 2020 from $8.9 million in 2019.
Asset retirement obligation accretion. Our asset retirement obligation (“ARO”) accretion was $0.6 million for 2020 as compared to $0.5 million for 2019.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation of our plant and equipment totaled $17.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with $14.2 million for the previous year. Higher depreciation expense for 2020 was principally due to the increase in employment of additional mining equipment. Amortization of capitalized development costs totaled $3.8 million in 2020 as compared with $5.3 million for the previous year. The decrease in amortization of development costs in 2020 was driven by lower coal production from our properties and the full amortization of certain preparation plant assets in 2019.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $21.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with $18.2 million for 2019. This increase reflects the growth of our organization including higher fees for professional services.
Other income. Other income was $11.9 million for 2020 and $1.8 million in 2019. We recognized $8.4 million of other income during 2020 for the anticipated full forgiveness of the $8.4 million loan (the “PPP Loan”) we received pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program based on our usage of loan proceeds for eligible payroll expenses, lease, interest and utility payments. Other income also includes third-party royalty income and rail rebates received, each of which increased modestly in 2020.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net was approximately $1.2 million in 2020, which was approximately equal that of the prior year.
Income tax expense. We recognized an income tax benefit of $3.5 million in 2020 as compared with income tax expense of $5.2 million in 2019. The income tax benefit for 2020 includes $1.8 million of benefit associated with the recognition of other income for the anticipated PPP Loan forgiveness. In December 2020, the President signed new legislation making the PPP Loan forgiveness income tax free. Excluding this impact, our effective tax rate was 20.4% for 2020, compared to 17.2% for 2019. The primary difference from the statutory rate of 21% is related to permanent differences for state income taxes, non-deductible expenses and the difference in depletion expense between U.S. GAAP and federal income tax purposes.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Please see Part I, Item 7, "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the results of operation for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA is used as a supplemental non-GAAP financial measure by management and external users of our financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies. We believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful because it allows us to more effectively evaluate our operating performance.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income plus net interest expense, stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization expenses and any transaction related costs. A reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA is included below. Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to serve as an alternative to U.S. GAAP measures of performance and may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures presented by other companies.
Non-GAAP revenue per ton. Non-GAAP revenue per ton (FOB mine) is calculated as coal sales revenue less transportation costs, divided by tons sold. We believe revenue per ton (FOB mine) provides useful information to investors as it enables investors to compare revenue per ton we generate against similar measures made by other publicly-traded coal companies and more effectively monitor changes in coal prices from period to period excluding the impact of transportation costs which are beyond our control. The adjustments made to arrive at these measures are significant in understanding and assessing our financial condition. Revenue per ton sold (FOB mine) is not a measure of financial performance in accordance with U.S. GAAP and therefore should not be considered as an alternative to revenue under U.S. GAAP.
Non-GAAP cash cost per ton sold. Non-GAAP cash cost per ton sold is calculated as cash cost of sales less transportation costs, divided by tons sold. We believe cash cost per ton sold provides useful information to investors as it enables investors to compare our cash cost per ton against similar measures made by other publicly-traded coal companies and more effectively monitor changes in coal cost from period to period excluding the impact of transportation costs which are beyond our control. The adjustments made to arrive at these measures are significant in understanding and assessing our financial condition. Cash cost per ton sold is not a measure of financial performance in accordance with U.S. GAAP and therefore should not be considered as an alternative to cost of sales under U.S. GAAP.
2021 Sales Commitments
As of December 31, 2020, we had entered into forward sales contracts with North American customers for 2021 on a fixed price basis for 1.3 million tons at an average realizable price of $84/ton FOB mine. These volumes were all metallurgical quality coal.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary source of cash is proceeds from the sale of our coal production to customers. Our primary uses of cash include the cash costs of coal production, capital expenditures, royalty payments and other operating expenditures.
Cash flow information is as follows:
Cash flows from operating activities during 2020 decreased from the comparable period of the prior year primarily resulting from lower cash earnings and reduced amounts required for working capital (receivables, inventories and accounts payable).
Net cash used in investing activities, all of which was used for capital expenditures, was $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with $45.7 million for 2019.
Cash flows from financing activities were $11.3 million for 2020, which was primarily due to net borrowings during the period and proceeds from the PPP Loan. Cash flows from financing activities were $2.8 million for 2019, which was due to net proceeds from short term borrowings.
Restricted cash balances at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $1.4 million and $1.3 million, respectively, consisted of funds held in escrow for potential future workers’ compensation claims and were classified in other current assets in the consolidated balance sheets.
Indebtedness
Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan-On November 2, 2018, we entered into a Credit and Security Agreement (as amended, the “Revolving Credit Facility”) with KeyBank National Association (“KeyBank”). The Revolving Credit Facility was amended on February 20, 2020, and consists of a $10.0 million term loan (the “Term Loan”) and up to $30.0 million revolving line of credit, including $3.0 million letter of credit availability. All personal property assets, including, but not limited to accounts receivable, coal inventory and certain mining equipment are pledged to secure the Revolving Credit Facility.
The Revolving Credit Facility has a maturity date of December 31, 2023 and bears interest based on LIBOR + 2.0% or Base Rate + 1.5%. Base Rate is the highest of (i) KeyBank’s prime rate, (ii) Federal Funds Effective Rate + 0.5%, or (iii) LIBOR + 2.0%. Advances under the Revolving Credit Facility are made initially as base rate loans, but may be converted to LIBOR rate loans at certain times at our discretion. As of December 31, 2020, $7.0 million was outstanding on the Revolving Credit Facility and we had remaining availability of $16.7 million.
The Term Loan is secured under a Master Security Agreement with a pledge of certain underground and surface mining equipment, bears interest at LIBOR + 5.15% and is required to be repaid in monthly installments of $278 thousand including accrued interest. The outstanding principal balance of the Term Loan was $6.7 million at December 31, 2020.
The Revolving Credit Facility contains usual and customary covenants including limitations on liens, additional indebtedness, investments, restricted payments, asset sales, mergers, affiliate transactions and other customary limitations, as well as financial covenants. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all debt covenants.
Equipment Financing Loan-On April 16, 2020, we entered into an equipment loan with Key Equipment Finance, a division of KeyBank, as lender, in the principal amount of approximately $4.7 million for the financing of existing underground and surface equipment. The equipment loan bears interest at 7.45% per annum and is payable in 36 monthly installments of $147 thousand. There is a 3% premium for prepayment of the note within the first 12 months.
This premium declines by 1% during each successive 12-month period. The outstanding principal balance of the Equipment Financing Loan was $3.8 million at December 31, 2020.
SBA Paycheck Protection Program Loan- On April 20, 2020, we received proceeds from a PPP Loan in the amount of approximately $8.4 million from KeyBank, as lender, pursuant to the PPP of the CARES Act. The purpose of the PPP is to encourage the continued employment of workers. Based upon receipt of this funding, we elected to recall our furloughed workers at our Elk Creek complex. We used all proceeds from the PPP Loan to retain employees, maintain payroll and make lease, interest and utility payments.
The PPP Loan matures on April 16, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 1% per annum. Pursuant to the subsequently enacted Paycheck Protection Flexibility Act of 2020, we are permitted to defer required monthly payments of principal and interest until such time as an approval or denial of forgiveness is received from the SBA.
The PPP Loan is evidenced by a promissory note dated April 16, 2020, which contains customary events of default relating to, among other things, payment defaults and breaches of representations and warranties. The PPP Loan may be prepaid by the Company at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties.
All or a portion of the PPP Loan and accrued interest thereon may be forgiven by the SBA upon documentation of expenditures in accordance with the SBA requirements and proper application by the Company. Under the CARES Act and Paycheck Protection Flexibility Act of 2020, loan forgiveness is available for the sum of documented payroll costs, covered rent payments, covered mortgage interest and covered utilities during either the eight week period or 24-week period beginning on the date of loan funding. For purposes of the PPP Loan, payroll costs exclude cash compensation of an individual employee in excess of $100 thousand, prorated annually. Not more than 40% of the forgiven amount may be for non-payroll costs. Forgiveness could be reduced if full-time headcount declines, or if salaries and wages for employees with salaries of $100 thousand or less annually are reduced by more than 25%.
Our application for forgiveness was approved by KeyBank and is currently being reviewed by the SBA. We anticipate that the full amount of the PPP Loan principal, together with accrued interest thereon, will be forgiven. Accordingly, we recognized $8.4 million as other income in the consolidated statement of operations for 2020.
Refer to Notes 6 and 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part I in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on indebtedness.
Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, our available liquidity was $22.0 million, comprised of cash and availability under our Revolving Credit Facility. We expect to fund our capital and liquidity requirements with cash on hand, borrowings discussed above and projected cash flow from operations. Factors that could adversely impact our future liquidity and ability to carry out our capital expenditure program include the following:
● Timely delivery of our product by rail and other transportation carriers;
● Timely payment of accounts receivable by our customers;
● Cost overruns in our purchases of equipment needed to complete our mine development plans;
● Delays in completion of development of our various mines which would reduce the coal we would have available to sell and our cash flow from operations; and
● Adverse changes in the metallurgical coal markets that would reduce the expected cash flow from operations.
Capital Requirements
Our primary use of cash includes capital expenditures for mine development and for ongoing operating expenses. During 2020 we spent $24.8 million primarily for the purchase of mining equipment, infrastructure and development of mines at our Elk Creek and Berwind mining complexes. We anticipate capital expenditures of approximately $15 million in 2021, with the potential to increase this amount depending on market conditions.
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, management believes that current cash on hand, cash flow from operations and available liquidity under our Revolving Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet its capital expenditure and operating plans. We expect to fund any new reserve acquisitions from cash on hand, cash from operations and potential future issuances of debt or equity securities.
If future cash flows are insufficient to meet our liquidity needs or capital requirements, we may reduce our expected level of capital expenditures and/or fund a portion of our capital expenditures through the issuance of debt or equity securities, the entry into debt arrangements or from other sources, such as asset sales.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the amounts of revenue and expenses reported for the period then ended.
Mine development costs. Mine development costs represent the costs incurred to prepare future mine sites and/or seams of coal for mining. These costs include costs of acquiring, permitting, planning, research, and developing access to identified mineral reserves and other preparations for commercial production as necessary to develop and permit the properties for mining activities. Mine development costs are capitalized and amortized on a units-of-production basis as mining of the associated mine’s assigned reserves takes place. Operating expenditures, including certain professional fees and overhead costs, are not capitalized but are expensed as incurred.
Asset retirement obligations. We recognize as a liability an asset retirement obligation, or ARO, associated with the retirement of a tangible long-lived asset in the period in which it is incurred or becomes determinable, with an associated increase in the carrying amount of the related long-lived asset. The initially recognized asset retirement cost is amortized using the same method and useful life as the long-lived asset to which it relates. Accretion expense is recognized over time as the discounted liability is accreted to its expected settlement value.
Estimating the future ARO requires management to make estimates and judgments regarding timing and existence of a liability, as well as what constitutes adequate restoration. Inherent in the fair value calculation are numerous assumptions and judgments including the ultimate costs, inflation factors, credit adjusted discount rates, timing of settlement and changes in the legal, regulatory, environmental and political environments. To the extent future revisions to these assumptions impact the fair value of the existing ARO liability, a corresponding adjustment is made to the related asset.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets. We review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. These events and circumstances
include, but are not limited to, a current expectation that a long-lived asset will be disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life, a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which we use a long-lived asset or a change in its physical condition.
When such events or changes in circumstances occur, a recoverability test is performed comparing projected undiscounted cash flows from the use and eventual disposition of an asset or asset group to its carrying amount. If the projected undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying amount, an impairment is recorded for the excess of the carrying amount over the estimated fair value.
We make various assumptions, including assumptions regarding future cash flows in our assessments of long-lived assets for impairment. The assumptions about future cash flows and growth rates are based on the current and long-term business plans related to the long-lived assets.
Stock-based compensation expense. Compensation cost for equity incentive awards is based on the fair value of the equity instrument generally on the date of grant and is recognized over the requisite service period.
The fair value of restricted stock awards is determined using the publicly-traded price of our common stock on the grant date. The fair value of option awards is calculated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes model requires us to make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the calculation, including the expected term, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, dividend rate and service period.
Income Taxes. We provide for deferred income taxes for temporary differences arising from differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities existing at each balance sheet date using enacted tax rates. We initially recognize the effects of a tax position when it is more than 50 percent likely, based on the technical merits that the position will be sustained upon examination. Our determination of whether or not a tax position has met the recognition threshold depends on the facts, circumstances, and information available at the reporting date.
A valuation allowance may be recorded to reflect the amount of future tax benefits that management believes are not likely to be realized. The assessment takes into account expectations of future taxable income or loss, available tax planning strategies and the reversal of temporary differences. The development of these expectations involves the use of estimates such as production levels, operating profitability, timing of development activities and the cost and timing of reclamation work. If actual outcomes differ from our expectations, we may record an additional valuation allowance through income tax expense in the period such determination is made.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements. See Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recent Accounting Pronouncements.”