Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying notes included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
GENERAL
We are an internally-managed REIT primarily engaged in the business of investing, on a leveraged basis, in residential mortgage assets, including residential whole loans, residential mortgage securities and MSR-related assets. Our principal business objective is to deliver shareholder value through the generation of distributable income and through asset performance linked to residential mortgage credit fundamentals. We selectively invest in residential mortgage assets with a focus on credit analysis, projected prepayment rates, interest rate sensitivity and expected return.
As previously disclosed, as a result of the market disruptions experienced related to the unprecedented conditions arising in connection with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020, during the first and second quarters of 2020 we engaged in asset sales and took other actions that significantly changed our asset composition. In particular, we sold all of our Agency and Legacy Non-Agency MBS investments, and substantially reduced our investments in MSR-related assets, RPL/NPL MBS and CRT securities. As a result of these actions, our primary investment assets as of December 31, 2020, are comprised of our residential whole loans. During the second quarter, to further help stabilize our financial position and liquidity, we entered into a $500 million senior secured credit agreement. In addition, during the second quarter, in conjunction with our previously disclosed exit from forbearance arrangements with lenders, we entered into several new asset-backed financing arrangements and renegotiated financing arrangements for certain assets with existing lenders, which together resulted in us essentially refinancing the majority of our investment portfolio.
During the third and fourth quarters of 2020, we continued to make significant progress on initiatives to lower the cost of financing our investments with more durable forms of borrowing. For example, we completed a $390 million securitization transaction of Non-QM assets in early September, which generated $92.7 million of additional liquidity and lowered the funding rate for the associated assets by approximately 165 basis points. In addition, during the fourth quarter we completed two Non-QM securitizations totaling $951.6 million, which generated $214.6 million of additional liquidity and lowered the funding rate for the associated assets by approximately 193 basis points. Additionally, during the fourth quarter we undertook steps to reduce our exposure to higher cost forms of financing that we had obtained in connection with our exit from forbearance in the second quarter. On October 9, 2020, we repaid $400 million of the principal outstanding on the senior secured loan, and the remaining balance of this facility of $81.25 million was repaid on October 30, 2020. The repayments were made without penalty or yield maintenance. Subsequent to the end of the fourth quarter, we completed a securitization solely consisting of $217.5 million of Business Purpose Rental Loans, generating approximately $48.4 million of additional liquidity. As the weighted average coupon of the bonds sold was approximately 1.06%, this transaction is expected to lower the funding rate of the underlying assets by more than 150 basis points. In addition, on January 6, 2021, we redeemed all of our outstanding $100 million aggregate principal amount of 8.00% Senior Notes Due 2042. In connection with this redemption, we recorded in our fourth quarter interest expense a non-cash charge of approximately $3.1 million representing remaining unamortized deferred expenses incurred when the Senior Notes were originally issued in 2012.
At December 31, 2020, we had total assets of approximately $6.9 billion, of which $5.3 billion, or 77%, represented residential whole loans acquired through interests in certain trusts established to acquire the loans. Our Purchased Performing Loans, which as of December 31, 2020 comprised approximately 65% of our residential whole loans, include: (i) loans to finance (or refinance) one-to four-family residential properties that are not considered to meet the definition of a “Qualified Mortgage” in accordance with guidelines adopted by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (or Non-QM loans), (ii) short-term business purpose loans collateralized by residential properties made to non-occupant borrowers who intend to rehabilitate and sell the property for a profit (or Rehabilitation loans or Fix and Flip loans), (iii) loans to finance (or refinance) non-owner occupied one-to four-family residential properties that are rented to one or more tenants (or Single-family rental loans), and (iv) previously originated loans secured by residential real estate that is generally owner occupied (or Seasoned performing loans). In addition, at December 31, 2020, we had approximately $161.0 million in investments in residential mortgage securities, which represented approximately 2% of our total assets. At such date, our portfolio included $104.2 million of CRT securities and $56.8 million of Non-Agency MBS which were primarily comprised of RPL/NPL MBS. At December 31, 2020, our investments in MSR-related assets were $239.0 million, or 3% of our total assets. Our MSR-related assets include term notes whose cash flows are considered to be largely dependent on MSR collateral and loan participations to provide financing to mortgage originators that own MSRs. Our remaining investment-related assets, which represent approximately 5% of our total assets at December 31, 2020, were primarily comprised of REO, capital contributions made to loan origination partners and MBS and loan-related receivables.
The results of our business operations are affected by a number of factors, many of which are beyond our control, and primarily depend on, among other things, the level of our net interest income and the market value of our assets, which is driven by numerous factors, including the supply and demand for residential mortgage assets in the marketplace, the terms and availability of adequate financing, general economic and real estate conditions (both on a national and local level), the impact of government actions in the real estate and mortgage sector, and the credit performance of our credit sensitive residential mortgage assets. Changes in these factors, or uncertainty in the market regarding the potential for changes in these factors, can result in significant changes in the value and/or performance of our investment portfolio. Further, our GAAP results may be impacted by market volatility, resulting in changes in market values of certain financial instruments for which changes in fair value are recorded in net income each period, such as CRT securities, and certain residential whole loans. Our net interest income varies primarily as a result of changes in interest rates, the slope of the yield curve (i.e., the differential between long-term and short-term interest rates), borrowing costs (i.e., our interest expense) and prepayment speeds, the behavior of which involves various risks and uncertainties. Interest rates and conditional prepayment rates (or CPRs) (which measure the amount of unscheduled principal prepayment on an asset as a percentage of the asset balance), vary according to the type of investment, conditions in the financial markets, competition and other factors, none of which can be predicted with any certainty. With the adoption in January 2020 of new accounting standards for the measurement and recognition of credit losses, and given the extent of current and anticipated future investments in residential whole loans, our financial results are impacted by estimates of credit losses that are required to be recorded when loans that are not accounted for at fair value through net income are acquired or originated, as well as changes in these credit loss estimates that will be required to be made periodically.
With respect to our business operations, increases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause: (i) the interest expense associated with our borrowings to increase; (ii) the value of certain of our residential mortgage assets and, correspondingly, our stockholders’ equity to decline; (iii) coupons on our adjustable-rate assets to reset, on a delayed basis, to higher interest rates; (iv) prepayments on our assets to decline, thereby slowing the amortization of purchase premiums and the accretion of our purchase discounts, and slowing our ability to redeploy capital to generally higher yielding investments; and (v) the value of our derivative hedging instruments, if any, and, correspondingly, our stockholders’ equity to increase. Conversely, decreases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause: (i) the interest expense associated with our borrowings to decrease; (ii) the value of certain of our residential mortgage assets and, correspondingly, our stockholders’ equity to increase; (iii) coupons on our adjustable-rate assets, on a delayed basis, to lower interest rates; (iv) prepayments on our assets to increase, thereby accelerating the amortization of purchase premiums and the accretion of our purchase discounts, and accelerating the redeployment of our capital to generally lower yielding investments; and (v) the value of our derivative hedging instruments, if any, and, correspondingly, our stockholders’ equity to decrease. In addition, our borrowing costs and credit lines are further affected by the type of collateral we pledge and general conditions in the credit market.
Our investments in residential mortgage assets expose us to credit risk, meaning that we are generally subject to credit losses due to the risk of delinquency, default and foreclosure on the underlying real estate collateral. Our investment process for credit sensitive assets focuses primarily on quantifying and pricing credit risk. With respect to investments in Purchased Performing Loans, we believe that sound underwriting standards, including low LTVs at origination, significantly mitigate our risk of loss. Further, we believe the discounted purchase prices paid on certain non-performing and Purchased Credit Deteriorated Loans mitigate our risk of loss in the event that, as we expect on most such investments, we receive less than 100% of the par value of these investments. (see Part I, Item 1A., “Risk Factors - Credit and Other Risks Related to our Investments” and