Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
General
MGE Energy is an investor-owned public utility holding company operating through subsidiaries in five business segments:
 Regulated electric utility operations, conducted through MGE,
 Regulated gas utility operations, conducted through MGE,
 Nonregulated energy operations, conducted through MGE Power and its subsidiaries,
 Transmission investments, representing our equity investment in ATC and ATC Holdco, and
 All other, which includes corporate operations and services.
Our principal subsidiary is MGE, which generates and distributes electric energy, distributes natural gas, and represents a majority portion of our assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. MGE generates, purchases, and distributes electricity to approximately 157,000 customers in Dane County, Wisconsin, including the city of Madison, and purchases and distributes natural gas to approximately 166,000 customers in the Wisconsin counties of Columbia, Crawford, Dane, Iowa, Juneau, Monroe, and Vernon.
Our nonregulated energy operations own interests in electric generating capacity that is leased to MGE. The ownership/leasing structure was adopted under applicable state regulatory guidelines for MGE's participation in these generation facilities, consisting principally of a stable return on the equity investment in the new generation facilities over the term of the related leases. The nonregulated energy operations include an ownership interest in two coal-fired generating units in Oak Creek, Wisconsin and a partial ownership of a cogeneration project on the UW-Madison campus. A third party operates the units in Oak Creek, and MGE operates the cogeneration project. Due to the nature of MGE's participation in these facilities, the results of MGE Energy's nonregulated operations are also consolidated into MGE's consolidated financial position and results of operations under applicable accounting standards.
We have not included a discussion of results of operations and changes in financial position for the year ended
December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. That discussion can be found in Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on February 26, 2020.
Executive Overview
Our primary focus today and for the foreseeable future is our core utility customers at MGE as well as creating long-term value for our shareholders. MGE continues to face the challenge of providing its customers with reliable power at competitive prices. MGE works on meeting this challenge by investing in more efficient generation projects, including renewable energy sources. MGE continues to examine and pursue opportunities to reduce the proportion that coal generation represents in its generation mix, as evidenced by its most recent announcement of the retirement of Columbia and its growing ownership of renewable generation sources. MGE will continue to focus on growing earnings while controlling operating and fuel costs. MGE's goal is to provide safe and efficient operations in addition to providing customer value. We believe it is critical to maintain a strong credit rating consistent with financial strength in MGE as well as the parent company in order to accomplish these goals.
We earn revenue and generate cash from operations by providing electric and natural gas utility services, including electric power generation and electric power and gas distribution. The earnings and cash flows from the utility business are sensitive to various external factors, including:
 Weather, and its impact on customer sales,
 Economic conditions, including current business activity and employment and their impact on customer demand,
 Regulation and regulatory issues, and their impact on the timing and recovery of costs,
 Energy commodity prices, including natural gas prices,
 Equity price risk pertaining to pension related assets,
 Credit market conditions, including interest rates and our debt credit rating,
 Environmental laws and regulations, including adopted and pending environmental rule changes,
 Governmental efforts to address the COVID-19 pandemic, including restrictions on activity, increased employee health and welfare costs, and precautions for dealing with members of the public, and
 Other factors listed in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Report.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, MGE Energy's earnings were $92.4 million or $2.60 per share compared to $86.9 million or $2.51 per share for the same period in the prior year. MGE's earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020, were $63.1 million compared to $58.4 million for the same period in the prior year.
MGE Energy's net income was derived from our business segments as follows:
Our net income during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily reflects the effects of the following factors:
Electric Utility
Electric net income increased primarily due to AFUDC equity earned from the construction of Two Creeks and Badger Hollow I and II and savings in operating and maintenance costs. An increase in assets included in rate base also contributed to increased earnings for 2020. A reduction of retail sales driven by the impacts of COVID-19 and associated governmental regulations affected electric earnings in 2020. During 2020, commercial retail sales decreased approximately 7%, compared to the same period in the prior year. This decrease was partially mitigated by an increase in residential sales of approximately 6%, compared to the same period in the prior year. As businesses shifted their workforce to a remote work environment, residential sales increased.
During 2020, the following events occurred:
2019/2020 Rate Change Settlement: In December 2018, the PSCW approved a settlement agreement between MGE and intervening parties in the then-pending rate case. The settlement decreased electric rates by 2.24%, or $9.2 million, in 2019. The decrease in electric rates reflected the ongoing impacts of the 2017 Tax Act. Lower fuel costs and an increase in rate base from renewable generation assets further impacted the rate change. In 2020, electric rates decreased a further 0.84%, or $3.4 million, as approved by the PSCW in December 2019 in MGE's 2020 Fuel Cost Plan, which reflected lower fuel costs. The settlement agreement increased gas rates by 1.06%, or $1.7 million, in 2019 and 1.46%, or $2.4 million, in 2020. The gas increase covered infrastructure costs. It also reflected the impacts of the 2017 Tax Act.
PSCW Approval of Deferral of Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Costs: As a result of lower investment returns in the fourth quarter of 2018, pension and postretirement benefit costs increased in 2019. In August 2019, the PSCW approved MGE's request to defer the difference between estimated pension and other postretirement costs included in the 2019 and 2020 rate settlement and actual costs incurred. During 2019, MGE deferred approximately $6.2 million of pension and other postretirement costs. During 2020, MGE collected approximately $0.9 million of pension and other postretirement costs, which reduced the amount deferred in 2019. Net pension and other postretirement costs deferred over the two-year period is approximately $5.3 million as of December 31, 2020. The net deferred costs were factored into the 2021 rate settlement.
Utility Solar: Larger solar generation projects recently completed or under construction are shown in the following table. Incurred costs are reflected in "Property, plant, and equipment, net" for projects placed in service or "Construction work in progress" for projects under construction on the consolidated balance sheets. MGE has received specific approval to recover 100% AFUDC on Two Creeks and Badger Hollow I and II. After tax, MGE recognized $3.4 million, $2.2 million, and $0.2 million of AFUDC equity on Two Creeks and Badger Hollow I and II, respectively, during construction.
(a)Excluding AFUDC.
(b)Estimated date of commercial operation.
Equity Issuance: In May 2020, MGE Energy issued 1.5 million shares of common stock in an underwritten offering. The net proceeds of $79.6 million are being used for general corporate purposes including funding capital expenditures by MGE in projects such as Two Creeks, Badger Hollow I and II, Renewable Energy Rider solar projects, and other capital projects.
Deferred Fuel Costs - Subject to Refund: As of December 31, 2020, MGE had deferred $3.2 million of 2020 fuel savings. These costs will be subject to the PSCW's annual review of 2020 fuel costs, expected to be completed during 2021.
During 2021, several items may affect us, including:
2021 Rate Settlement Agreement: In December 2020, the PSCW approved MGE's settlement agreement for its 2021 rate case. The settlement agreement has a zero percent increase for electric rates and an approximately 4% increase for gas rates in 2021. See "Other Matters" below for additional information on the 2021 rate settlement agreement.
2019 Annual Fuel Proceeding: The PSCW issued a final decision in the 2019 fuel rules proceedings regarding $1.5 million of deferred savings giving MGE the option either to use the $1.5 million as part of the settlement to MGE's 2021 rate case or to refund the balance to customers in October 2020. MGE elected to include the savings as part of the 2021 Rate Settlement Agreement described above, reducing electric retail rates as opposed to a one-time credit back to retail customers. There was no change to the refund in the fuel rules proceedings from the amount MGE deferred in the previous year.
Tax Reform: Pursuant to the 2017 Tax Act, deferred income tax balances as of December 31, 2017, were remeasured to reflect the decrease in the corporate tax rate. A regulatory liability of approximately $131 million was recorded to reflect the fact that changes in income taxes are generally passed through in customer rates for the regulated utility. The amount and timing of the cash impact will depend on the period over which certain income tax benefits are provided to customers. Approximately $117 million of the regulatory liability is a protected benefit that is being returned to customers using a normalization method of accounting. IRS normalization rules limit the rate at which MGE can return the benefits to customers. As determined in the rate settlement agreement for 2019 and 2020, MGE has included approximately $8.3 million of the protected benefit in base rates. The approved rate settlement agreement for 2021 includes approximately $5.3 million of the protected benefit in base rates and $18.2 million of the unprotected benefit in electric base rates. The collection of the remaining unprotected portion related to gas will be addressed by the PSCW in a future rate case.
ATC Return on Equity: Several parties have filed complaints with the FERC seeking to reduce the ROE used by MISO transmission owners, including ATC. Any change to ATC's ROE could result in lower equity earnings and distributions from ATC in the future. We derived approximately 8.0% of our net income for the year ended December 31, 2020, from our investment in ATC. See "Other Matters" below for additional information concerning ATC.
Environmental Initiatives: There are proposed legislative rules and initiatives involving matters related to air emissions, water effluent, hazardous materials, and greenhouse gases, all of which affect generation plant capital expenditures and operating costs as well as future operational planning. At present, it is unclear how the changes in the presidential, congressional, and EPA administrations may affect existing, pending or new legislative or rulemaking proposals or regulatory initiatives. Such legislation and rulemaking could significantly affect the costs of
owning and operating fossil-fueled generating plants. We would expect to seek and receive recovery of any such costs in rates. However, it is difficult to estimate the amount of such costs due to the uncertainty as to the timing and form of the legislation and rules, and the scope and time of the recovery of costs in rates, which may lag after those costs have been incurred.
EPA’s Affordable Clean Energy (ACE) Rule: In January 2021, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit (D.C. Circuit) vacated and remanded to the EPA the ACE Rule and the repeal of the predecessor Clean Power Plan Rule, both of which regulated greenhouse gas emissions from existing electric generation units pursuant to Section 111(d) of the Clean Air Act. MGE is still evaluating this D.C. Circuit decision for what impacts it may have to MGE operations. MGE will continue to evaluate the rule development and monitor ongoing and potential legal proceedings.
Future Generation - Riverside: In 2016, MGE entered into an agreement with WPL under which MGE may acquire up to 50 MW of capacity in a gas-fired generating plant being constructed by WPL at its Riverside Energy Center in Beloit, Wisconsin, during the five-year period following the in-service date of the plant. The plant was placed in service in May 2020. MGE has not yet determined whether it will exercise its option in the Riverside plant. A determination will be made based on a variety of factors during the option period. If MGE acquires 50 MW of capacity, the estimated cost would be approximately $50 million.
Columbia: In February 2021, MGE, along with the co-owners, announced plans to retire the two unit coal-fired Columbia generating plant near Portage, Wisconsin. MGE currently owns 19% of the facility. The co-owners intend to retire Unit 1 by the end of 2023 and Unit 2 by the end of 2024. Final timing and retirement dates for Units 1 and 2 are subject to PSCW and regional regulatory reviews, including identification and approval of energy and capacity resources to replace Columbia. MGE continues to evaluate additional investments to replace the generation from Columbia while maintaining electric service reliability. These investments include cost-effective, clean energy projects to help achieve MGE's carbon reduction goals. See "Capital expenditures" below for additional information on forecasted capital expenditures.
Paris Solar-Battery Park: In February 2021, MGE, We Energies, and WPSC, filed a joint application with the PSCW for approval to acquire and construct the Paris Solar-Battery Park in the Town of Paris in Kenosha County, Wisconsin. If approved, MGE will own 20 MW of solar generation capacity and 11MW of battery storage. MGE's share of capital costs is expected to be approximately $43 million and the project is anticipated to be completed by 2023.
COVID-19 Update
With the global outbreak of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) and the declaration of a pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020, U.S. governmental authorities have deemed electric and gas utilities to be critical infrastructure. MGE Energy therefore has an obligation to keep operating and maintaining our critical electric and gas infrastructure. Since then, MGE Energy has been subject to, and is following, local, state and federal public health and safety regulations and guidance to control the pandemic. MGE Energy has operated continuously throughout the pandemic and suffered no material disruptions in service or employment.
We discuss various COVID-19-related events and their effects below:
 Governmental Actions. State and local governments and regulators have taken steps to address the pandemic and its effects, which have affected levels of economic activity, revenues and expense.
o State and Local Governments: State and local governments issued orders and regulations to restrict or manage business and individual activity that continues to evolve in response to changing health metrics and safety and health guidance. A late March 2020 statewide Stay at Home order has given way to phased activity resumption driven by local governments and public health departments. Actions by Public Health Madison & Dane County (PHMDC) affect Dane County, which comprises a majority of MGE's service area. PHMDC has issued several Emergency Orders and the Forward Dane plan (collectively, the PHMDC Directives) addressing activity during the pandemic. The PHMDC Directives provide for scaled re-opening of businesses and increased activity for residents based upon specific health metrics and consist of guidance and regulations
concerning how and when residents can interact and conduct business. In general, the PHMDC Directives: identify "essential" and "non-essential" businesses; regulate how those entities may conduct business safely; restrict capacity inside businesses depending upon business type and sector; limit the size of private and public gatherings; and require masks for occupants of public and private buildings. The PHMDC Directives are subject to modification throughout the pandemic based upon current health metrics in the county.
o Regulatory - PSCW Orders: On March 24, 2020, the PSCW ordered changes to the tariff provisions of all public utilities in Wisconsin in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The order prohibited late payment charges, service disconnections, service refusals, and cash deposits as a condition of service. The order also required utilities to offer deferred payment arrangements to customers. The order resulted in increased bad debt expense and foregone revenue from late payment charges. This order, as it pertained to the prohibitions on service disconnections for residential customers, was in effect until November 1, 2020, at which time the annual winter disconnection moratorium began and continues until April 15, 2021. All other restrictions were lifted in July 2020. As permitted by regulatory action, MGE notified the PSCW of its election to continue to waive late fees until April 1, 2021, for all customer classes and seek recovery in a future period.
On March 24, 2020, the PSCW issued a further order authorizing deferral of expenditures incurred to ensure the provision of safe, reliable, and affordable access to utility services during the COVID-19 pandemic and late payment charges. Expenditures included items such as bad debt expense and personal protective equipment. Foregone revenue from late payment charges and the potential delay in payments from customers is expected to impact the timing of cash inflows. Subject to PSCW approval of recovery, foregone late payment charges are expected to be recognized as revenue when they are collected from customers, and deferred expenditures are expected to be recognized as a regulatory asset as costs are incurred (meaning that those expenditures will affect cash flows when paid but will not affect income until recovery is permitted by the PSCW). Recovery of expenditures and late payment charges is expected to be addressed in future rate proceedings. While management believes that cost recovery is probable, the timing of collection from customers cannot be estimated at this time. Management will continue to assess the probability of recovery of deferred costs as the COVID-19 pandemic progresses.
 Liquidity: We remain focused on maintaining strong credit quality. Subject to the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe we have adequate liquidity on hand to support future operations and capital expenditures over the next twelve months. See "Liquidity and Capital Resources - Credit Facilities" below for more information about our credit facilities.
 Revenue and Expense Impacts: We began to see the impacts of COVID-19 and associated governmental regulations on customer demand in late March through the remainder of 2020 and continue to see lower retail sales. Commercial sales were down approximately 7% in 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year. In 2020, the reduction in revenue due to COVID-19 and associated governmental regulations was partially offset by cost containment measures. Residential sales increased approximately 6% in 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year. This effect was driven by businesses shifting their workforces to a remote work environment. We expect the commercial and residential sales trends to continue in 2021. We will continue to assess the degree to which our discretionary operations and maintenance expenses and capital spending can be reduced. This reduction has consisted, and is expected to continue to consist of deferring nonessential spending and management efforts to control spending, which includes travel, conferences, and other discretionary costs.
 Capital Expenditures: During 2020, we shifted the timing of expenditures for current and forecasted capital projects. COVID-19 and associated governmental regulations did not significantly delay or disrupt the Two Creeks solar project, which entered commercial operation in November 2020. Badger Hollow I solar project was expected to be completed in 2020 and is now expected to be completed in April 2021. Badger Hollow II was expected to be completed in 2021 and is now expected to be completed in December 2022. The O'Brien solar project was expected to be completed by January 1, 2021 and is now
expected to be completed in mid-2021. We have delayed other non-essential utility capital expenditures initially planned for 2020. No significant increase in costs is expected due to the delay. These updates have been reflected in our 2021-2023 capital expenditure forecast included under "Liquidity and Capital Resources" below.
 Operations: To date, MGE Energy has experienced no material disruptions in utility operations. Our administrative personnel have been working largely remotely, and our field operations have not been materially affected. We have seen some additional expenses associated with personal protective equipment and enhanced efforts to protect our personnel from the virus, which have been deferred as a regulatory asset.
As the duration of general economic disruption continues, so does the potential of a material adverse impact on our business. For this reason, although sales for 2020 were negatively impacted by COVID-19 and associated governmental regulations, we cannot reasonably estimate with any degree of certainty the actual impact they may have on future results of operations, financial position, and liquidity. See Part II, Item 1A. "Risk Factors" "Pandemic virus or diseases, including COVID-19, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and liquidity."
The following discussion is based on the business segments as discussed in Footnote 22 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Report.
Results of Operations
Results of operations include financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP and electric and gas margins, both of which are non-GAAP measures. Electric margin (electric revenues less fuel for electric generation and purchase power costs) and gas margin (gas revenues less cost of gas sold) are non-GAAP measures because they exclude items used in the calculation of the most comparable GAAP measure, operating income. These exclusions consist of nonregulated operating revenues, other operations and maintenance expense, depreciation and amortization expense, and other general taxes expense. Thus, electric and gas margin are not measures determined in accordance with GAAP.
Management believes that electric and gas margins provide a meaningful basis for evaluating and managing utility operations since fuel for electric generation, purchase power costs, and cost of gas sold are passed through without mark-up to customers in current rates. As a result, management uses electric and gas margins internally when assessing the operating performance of our segments. The presentation of utility electric and gas margins herein is intended to provide supplemental information for investors regarding operating performance. These electric and gas margins may not be comparable to how other entities calculate utility electric and gas margin or similar measures. Furthermore, these measures are not intended to replace operating income as determined in accordance with GAAP as an indicator of operating performance.
Year Ended December 31, 2020, Versus the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Operating income for 2020 compared to 2019 primarily reflects the effects of the following factors:
 Electric revenues and fuel costs
o A $14.6 million decrease in electric revenue driven by lower commercial sales as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and associated governmental regulations and restrictions on activity, partially offset by increased residential sales. Commercial retail sales decreased by 7.2% and residential sales increased by 5.9%, when compared to the prior year.
o A $10.3 million decrease in fuel for electric generation reflecting lower generation and market costs and a decrease in overall customer demand.
o A $1.4 million increase in purchased power costs costs primarily due to higher market purchases as a result of lower internal generation.
 Gas revenues and cost of gas sold
o A $15.6 million decrease in gas revenues driven by lower customer demand resulting from milder weather in the first and fourth quarters of 2020 and lower cost of gas, which is recovered on a pass-through basis in revenues.
o A $16.1 million decrease in cost of gas sold driven by lower cost per therm of gas. Average cost per therm decreased approximately 11%.
 A $6.9 million decrease in other operations and maintenance. See "Consolidated operations and maintenance expenses" section below for a description of the factors contributing to the decrease.
 A $2.6 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense driven by the timing of the commercial operation of Saratoga that took place in February 2019 as discussed in the "Consolidated depreciation expense" section below.
Electric sales and revenues
The following table compares MGE's electric revenues and electric kWh sales by customer class for each of the years indicated:
Electric Margin
Electric margin, a non-GAAP measure, decreased $5.7 million during 2020 compared to 2019, due to the following:
 Commercial, industrial, and other retail volume. During 2020, there was a 7.2% reduction in commercial sales compared to the same period in the prior year driven by impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and associated governmental regulations and restrictions on activity.
 Customer fixed and demand charges. During 2020, fixed and demand charges decreased $4.0 million primarily attributable to the decrease in demand charges for commercial customers. The COVID-19 pandemic and associated governmental regulations and restrictions on activity impacted commercial business operations leading to reduced sales.
 Rate changes. Rates charged to retail customers during 2020, were $3.6 million lower than those charged during the same period in the prior year. In December 2019, the PSCW approved the 2020 Fuel Cost Plan, which reflected lower fuel costs and authorized MGE to decrease 2020 rates for electric retail customers by 0.84%.
 Revenue subject to refund. For cost recovery mechanisms, any over-collection of revenues resulting from the amount of costs authorized to be collected from customers in rates exceeding actual costs is recorded as a reduction of revenue in the period incurred, as the over-collection is expected to be refunded to customers in a subsequent period.
 Residential volume. During 2020, there was a 5.9% increase in residential sales driven by the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and associated governmental regulations and restrictions on activity. As businesses shifted their workforce to a remote work environment, residential sales increased.
 Fuel costs. Fuel costs decreased during 2020, primarily as a result of lower costs to generate electricity and lower required generation due to lower customer demand.
Gas deliveries and revenues
The following table compares MGE's gas revenues and gas therms delivered by customer class during each of the years indicated:
Gas Margin
Gas margin, a non-GAAP measure, increased $0.5 million during 2020 compared to 2019, due to the following:
 Rate changes. In December 2018, the PSCW authorized MGE to increase 2020 rates for retail gas customers by 1.46%.
 Other. During 2020, other charges primarily increased as a result of increased revenue from fixed charges attributable to the increase in gas residential customers.
 Revenue subject to refund. For cost recovery mechanisms, any over-collection of revenues resulting from the amount of costs authorized to be collected from customers in rates exceeding actual costs is recorded as a reduction of revenue in the period incurred, as the over-collection is expected to be refunded to customers in a subsequent period.
 Volume. During 2020, retail gas deliveries decreased 9.5% compared to the same period in the prior year primarily related to less favorable weather conditions in the first and fourth quarters of 2020.
Consolidated operations and maintenance expenses
For 2020, operations and maintenance expenses decreased $6.9 million, compared to the same period in the prior year. The following contributed to the net change:
 Decreased administrative and general costs are primarily related to a decrease in stock price reducing the fair value associated with the outstanding performance unit awards, which are remeasured quarterly. See
Footnote 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Report for additional information on performance unit awards. Other drivers included a reduction in nonessential spending driven by the COVID-19 pandemic and associated governmental regulations and management efforts to control spending, which includes training, travel expenses, and other discretionary spending.
 Decreased electric production expenses are primarily related to decreased operations and maintenance costs at the Elm Road Units, Columbia, and Forward Wind facility. Scheduled maintenance outages were delayed or reduced in 2020.
 Decreased transmission costs are related to lower transmission rates in 2020. The 2020 transmission rates reflect adjustments from a lower return on equity, ordered in FERC proceedings, for prior year rates. The lower transmission rate is reflected in customer revenue as revenue subject to refund.
Consolidated depreciation expense
Electric depreciation expense increased $1.9 million and gas depreciation expense increased $0.7 million for 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year. MGE placed the Saratoga Wind Farm in service in February 2019. Timing of the in-service date contributed to the increase in electric depreciation expense.
Nonregulated Energy Operations - MGE Energy and MGE
The nonregulated energy operations are conducted through MGE Energy's subsidiaries: MGE Power Elm Road (the Elm Road Units) and MGE Power West Campus (WCCF), which have been formed to own and lease electric generating capacity to assist MGE. For 2020 and 2019, net income at the nonregulated energy operations segment was $20.8 million and $20.4 million, respectively.
Transmission Investment Operations - MGE Energy
The transmission investment segment holds our interest in ATC and ATC Holdco, and its income reflects our equity in the earnings of those investments. ATC Holdco was formed in December 2016 to pursue transmission development opportunities which typically have long development and investment lead times before becoming operational. ATC Holdco's future transmission development activities have been suspended for the near term. During 2020 and 2019, other income at the transmission investment segment primarily reflects ATC's operations and was $10.2 million and $9.5 million, respectively. In May 2020, the FERC issued an opinion further refining the methodology for setting the ROE that electric utilities are authorized to earn. See Footnote 7.b. of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Report and "Other Matters" below for additional information concerning ATC and summarized financial information regarding ATC.
Consolidated Income Taxes - MGE Energy and MGE
In 2020, the effective electric tax rate decreased as a result of higher AFUDC equity from Two Creeks and Badger Hollow I and II, which is not included in taxable income, and a tax credit generated by the Saratoga Wind Farm. See Footnote 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Report for details of effective income tax rates for continuing operations.
Noncontrolling Interest, Net of Tax - MGE
The noncontrolling interest, net of tax, reflects the accounting required for MGE Energy's interest in MGE Power Elm Road (the Elm Road Units) and MGE Power West Campus (WCCF). MGE Energy owns 100% of MGE Power Elm Road and MGE Power West Campus; however, due to the contractual agreements for these projects with MGE, the entities are considered VIEs with respect to MGE and their results are consolidated with those of MGE, the primary beneficiary of the VIEs. The following table shows MGE Energy's noncontrolling interest, net of tax, reflected on MGE's consolidated statement of income:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Subject to the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, MGE Energy and MGE expect to have adequate liquidity to support future operations and capital expenditures over the next twelve months. Available resources include cash and cash equivalents, operating cash flows, liquid assets, borrowing capacity under revolving credit facilities, and access to equity and debt capital markets. MGE Energy expects to generate funds from both long-term debt financing, including tax exempt debt and short-term debt financing, and, if needed, could issue new shares through its Direct Stock Purchase and Dividend Reinvestment Plan.
Cash Flows
The following summarizes cash flows for MGE Energy and MGE during 2020 and 2019:
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
MGE Energy
MGE Energy's consolidated net cash provided by operating activities is derived mainly from the electric and gas operations of its principal subsidiary, MGE.
Cash provided by operating activities for 2020 was $172.4 million, an increase of $41.9 million when compared to the prior year.
MGE Energy's net income increased $5.5 million for 2020 when compared to the prior year.
MGE Energy's federal and state taxes paid decreased $6.2 million during 2020, when compared to the prior year. The decrease in taxes paid is primarily related to increased production and investment tax credits.
Working capital accounts (excluding prepaid and accrued taxes) resulted in $0.1 million in cash used for operating activities for 2020, primarily due to decreased current liabilities, increased accounts receivable, and increased unbilled revenues, partially offset by increased accounts payable.
Working capital accounts (excluding prepaid and accrued taxes) resulted in $19.7 million in cash used for operating activities for 2019, primarily due to decreased accounts payable, decreased current liabilities, and increased inventories, partially offset by decreased unbilled revenues. The decrease in other current liabilities is attributable to a $3.2 million one-time tax bill credit and a $9.4 million one-time fuel credit to retail customers in 2019.
Hosted software asset expenditures during 2020 were $2.4 million. This amount represents a decrease of $4.2 million of cash used when compared to the prior year.
MGE
Cash provided by operating activities for 2020 was $166.3 million, an increase of $40.4 million when compared to the prior year.
Net income increased $4.7 million for 2020, when compared to the prior year.
MGE's federal and state taxes paid decreased $6.2 million during 2020, when compared to the prior year. The decrease in taxes paid is primarily related to increased production and investment tax credits.
Working capital accounts (excluding prepaid and accrued taxes) resulted in $2.1 million in cash provided by operating activities for 2020, primarily due to increased accounts payable, partially offset by decreased current liabilities, increased accounts receivable, and increased unbilled revenues.
Working capital accounts (excluding prepaid and accrued taxes) resulted in $19.4 million in cash used for operating activities for 2019, primarily due to decreased accounts payable, decreased current liabilities, and increased inventories, partially offset by decreased unbilled revenues. The decrease in other current liabilities is attributable to a $3.2 million one-time tax bill credit and a $9.4 million one-time fuel credit to retail customers in 2019.
Hosted software asset expenditures during 2020 were $2.4 million. This amount represents a decrease of $4.2 million of cash used when compared to the prior year.
Capital Requirements and Investing Activities
MGE Energy
MGE Energy's cash used for investing activities increased $38.1 million for 2020 when compared to the prior year.
Capital expenditures for 2020 were $203.1 million. This amount represents an increase of $39.1 million from the expenditures made in the prior year. This increase primarily reflects expenditures on the construction of Two Creeks and Badger Hollow I and II, which increased $25.3 million over the prior year.
Capital contributions in ATC and other investments decreased $2.2 million for 2020 when compared to the prior year.
MGE
MGE's cash used for investing activities increased $40.4 million for 2020 when compared to the prior year.
Capital expenditures for 2020 were $203.1 million. This amount represents an increase of $39.1 million from the expenditures made in the prior year. This increase primarily reflects expenditures on the construction of Two Creeks and Badger Hollow I and II, which increased $25.3 million over the prior year.
Capital expenditures
The following table shows MGE Energy's actual capital expenditures for both 2020 and 2019, and forecasted capital expenditures for 2021 through 2023:
MGE Energy used internally generated funds from operations, short-term borrowings under existing lines of credit, cash raised in the public markets from its May 2020 equity issuance, and long-term external financing to meet its 2020 capital requirements and cash obligations, including dividend payments. With respect to the next 12 months, MGE Energy expects to raise capital from both long-term debt and short-term debt financing, and, if needed, through the issuance of new shares under its Direct Stock Purchase and Dividend Reinvestment Plan. MGE's Energy 2030 framework details our plan for growth in generation for renewables. This growth is expected to continue as legacy fossil fuel-fired facilities are retired and replaced with renewables, such as wind and solar assets, and battery storage solutions are developed and implemented. Beyond 2030, MGE is targeting net-zero carbon electricity by 2050. These solar, wind, and battery storage projects are a major step toward deep decarbonization and greater use of clean energy sources in pursuit of our goal. MGE is seeking to address new generation needs through additional investments in renewable generation. MGE continues to evaluate solar, wind, and battery
storage projects that align with its goals. MGE also seeks to mitigate volatility in retail electric rates through the use of fuel savings and the tax benefits of renewables. In conjunction with project evaluation, MGE is exploring various ownership structures and ratemaking alternatives to mitigate rate impacts.
In November 2020, construction of the Two Creeks solar project was completed. Total cost excluding AFUDC was approximately $62.9 million. RER solar projects Morey Field serving the City of Middleton and Middleton-Cross Plains School District and Dane County Airport were completed in July and December 2020, respectively. These renewable generation projects represent progress towards our net-zero carbon goal.
Forecasted capital expenditures are based upon management's assumptions with respect to future events, including the timing and amount of expenditures associated with environmental compliance initiatives, legislative and regulatory action, customer demand and support for electrification and renewable energy resources, energy conservation programs, load growth, the timing of any required regulatory approvals, and the adequacy of rate recovery. Actual events may differ materially from these assumptions and result in material changes to those forecasted amounts.
Our forecasted capital expenditures reflect the following projects:
Badger Hollow I and II Solar Generation Project: Badger Hollow I and II, located in Wisconsin, are jointly owned. MGE's ownership share is 33%. Badger Hollow I is expected to be completed in April 2021 and Badger Hollow II is expected to be completed in December 2022. Each phase of the project is expected to be approximately $65 million. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, capital expenditures, excluding AFUDC, were $55.3 million and $6.8 million, respectively.
Service Area Renewable Solar Projects: The RER program allows MGE to partner with a large energy user to tailor a renewable energy solution and related project financing to meet a customer's specific energy needs. The forecasted capital expenditures related to these local solar projects are expected to be approximately $37 million for the years 2021 through 2023. Construction of a 20MW RER project (O'Brien Solar Fields, primarily serving governmental entities) has begun and is expected to be completed by mid-2021. MGE is currently awaiting PSCW approval for an additional 8MW RER project serving the City of Madison and Madison Metropolitan School District.
Generation Projects for Replacement of Columbia: In February 2021, MGE, along with its co-owners, announced plans to retire Columbia Unit 1 by the end of 2023 and Unit 2 by the end of 2024. MGE continues to evaluate additional investments to replace the generation from Columbia while maintaining electric service reliability. These investments include cost-effective, clean energy projects to help achieve MGE's carbon reduction goals, including the recent announcement of the Paris Solar-Battery Park (20 MW of solar generation capacity and 11 MW of battery storage) expected to be completed by 2023. Approximately $150 million has been included in forecasted capital expenditures for the years 2021 through 2023 for projects to replace Columbia's generation, which includes MGE's $43 million share of estimated capital expenditures for the Paris Solar-Battery Park. Additional capital expenditures are expected to continue beyond 2023.
Enterprise Forward: Enterprise Forward is a multi-year information technology project, which includes implementation of a new customer information system and other applications. MGE is currently half way through this transformational program. There is approximately $50 million of forecasted capital expenditures for the years 2021 through 2023.
Electric and Gas Distribution: In 2022 and 2023, electric and gas distribution include expenditures for enhanced metering solutions to provide customers with more timely and detailed energy use information. Investments in advanced metering infrastructure will provide additional benefits including outage and demand response and automated meter reading capabilities. Forecasted capital expenditures in those years is approximately $20 million.
Electric Production: MGE has consistently valued reliability for its electric and natural gas utility customers. MGE utilizes backup generation programs to provide significant capacity sources for overall system reliability and resiliency. Forecasted capital expenditures in 2021 and 2023 include additional projects of approximately $7 million related to these programs.
Financing Activities
MGE Energy
Cash provided by MGE Energy's financing activities was $59.2 million for 2020, compared to $17.2 million of cash used for financing activities in 2019.
For 2020, cash dividends paid were $51.7 million compared to $47.8 million in the prior year. This increase was a result of a higher dividend per share ($1.45 vs. $1.38) and a greater number of outstanding shares as a result of the May 2020 equity issuance.
During 2020, MGE Energy issued common stock for net proceeds of $79.6 million, which are being used for general corporate purposes including funding capital expenditures at MGE, such as Two Creeks, Badger Hollow I and II, Renewable Energy Rider solar projects, and other capital projects.
During 2020, MGE borrowed $19.3 million through the issuance of Industrial Development Revenue Refunding Bonds which was used to refinance $19.3 million of existing Industrial Development Revenue Refunding Bonds at a lower interest rate. During 2020, MGE made repayments of $15.0 million for a maturing long-term note. During 2019, MGE issued $50.0 million of senior unsecured notes, which was used to assist with financing additional capital expenditures, including Two Creeks and Badger Hollow I, maturing short-term debt, and other corporate obligations.
For 2020, net short-term debt borrowings were $52.5 million compared to net short-term debt repayments of $13.0 million in the prior year.
MGE
During 2020, cash provided by MGE's financing activities was $39.8 million, compared to $37.8 million of cash provided by financing activities in 2019.
Capital contributions made by MGE Energy to MGE were $30.0 million in 2020, compared to $30.5 million in 2019.
Distributions to parent (MGE Energy) from noncontrolling interest, which represent distributions from MGE Power Elm Road and MGE Power West Campus, were $21.5 million for 2020, compared to $23.5 million in the prior year. The noncontrolling interest arises from the accounting required for the entities, which are not owned by MGE but are consolidated as VIEs.
During 2020, MGE borrowed $19.3 million through the issuance of Industrial Development Revenue Refunding Bonds which was used to refinance $19.3 million of existing Industrial Development Revenue Refunding Bonds at a lower interest rate. During 2020, MGE made repayments of $15.0 million for a maturing long-term note. During 2019, MGE issued $50.0 million of senior unsecured notes, which was used to assist with financing additional capital expenditures, including Two Creeks and Badger Hollow I, maturing short-term debt, and other corporate obligations.
For 2020, net short-term debt borrowings were $52.5 million compared to net short-term debt repayments of $13.0 million in the prior year.
Dividend Restrictions
Dividend payments by MGE to MGE Energy are subject to restrictions arising under a PSCW rate order and, to a lesser degree, MGE's first mortgage bonds. The PSCW order restricts any dividends that MGE may pay MGE Energy if its common equity ratio, calculated in the manner used in the rate proceeding, is less than 55%. MGE's thirteen month rolling average common equity ratio as of December 31, 2020, is 60.2%, as determined under the calculation used in the rate proceeding. This restriction did not restrict MGE's payment of dividends in 2020. No cash dividends were paid by MGE to MGE Energy in 2020 or 2019 in light of the desire to fund planned capital expenditures with internally generated cash. The rate proceeding calculation includes indebtedness imputed amounts for MGE's outstanding purchase power capacity payments and other PSCW adjustments but does not
include the indebtedness associated with MGE Power Elm Road and MGE Power West Campus, which are consolidated into MGE's financial statements but are not direct obligations of MGE.
MGE has covenanted with the holders of its first mortgage bonds not to declare or pay any dividend or make any other distribution on or purchase any shares of its common stock unless, after giving effect thereto, the aggregate amount of all such dividends and distributions and all amounts applied to such purchases, after December 31, 1945, shall not exceed the earned surplus (retained earnings) accumulated subsequent to December 31, 1945. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $529.9 million was available for the payment of dividends under this covenant.
MGE Power West Campus has covenanted with the holders of its outstanding senior secured notes not to declare or make distributions to us in the event that, both before and after giving effect to such distribution, its total debt to total capitalization would exceed .65 to 1.00 or its projected debt service coverage ratio for the following four fiscal quarters would be less than 1.25 to 1.00. Projected debt service coverage considers the projected revenues available for debt service, after deducting expenses other than debt service, in relation to projected debt service on indebtedness.
MGE Power Elm Road has covenanted with the holders of its outstanding senior secured notes not to declare or make distributions to us in the event that, both before and after giving effect to such distribution, its projected debt service coverage ratio for the following four fiscal quarters would be less than 1.25 to 1.00. Projected debt service coverage considers the projected revenues available for debt service, after deducting expenses other than debt service, in relation to projected debt service on indebtedness.
Credit Facilities
As of December 31, 2020, MGE Energy and MGE had the following aggregate bank commitments and available capacity under their credit agreements:
Borrowings under the Credit Agreements may bear interest at a rate based upon either a "floating rate" or a "Eurodollar Rate" adjusted for statutory reserve requirements, plus an adder based upon the credit ratings assigned to MGE's senior unsecured long-term debt securities. The "floating rate" is calculated on a daily basis as the highest of a prime rate, a Federal Funds effective rate plus 0.5% per annum, or a Eurodollar Rate for a one-month interest period plus 1%. The "floating rate" adder ranges from zero to 0.125%. The "Eurodollar Rate" is calculated as provided in the Credit Agreements. The "Eurodollar Rate" adder ranges from 0.625% to 1.125%.
The credit agreements require the borrower to maintain a ratio of consolidated debt to consolidated total capitalization not to exceed a maximum of 65%. In the case of MGE, the ratio calculation excludes assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses included in MGE's financial statements as a result of the consolidation of VIEs, such as MGE Power Elm Road and MGE Power West Campus. As of December 31, 2020, the ratio of consolidated debt to consolidated total capitalization for each of MGE Energy and MGE, as calculated under the credit agreements' covenant, were 37.1% and 40.0%, respectively. See Footnote 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Report for additional information regarding the credit facilities.
Capitalization Ratios
MGE Energy's capitalization ratios were as follows:
(a)Includes the current portion of long-term debt.
Credit Ratings
MGE Energy's and MGE's access to the capital markets, including, in the case of MGE, the commercial paper market, and their respective financing costs in those markets, may depend on the credit ratings of the entity that is accessing the capital markets.
None of MGE Energy's or MGE's borrowing is subject to default or prepayment as a result of a downgrading of credit ratings, although a downgrading of MGE's credit ratings would increase fees and interest charges under both MGE Energy's and MGE's credit agreements.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments for MGE Energy and MGE
MGE Energy's and MGE's contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020, representing cash obligations that are considered to be firm commitments, are as follows:
(a)Long-term debt consisting of secured first mortgage bonds, unsecured medium-term notes, and Industrial Development Revenue Bonds issued by MGE, and private placement debt issued by MGE, MGE Power Elm Road, and MGE Power West Campus.
(b)Short-term debt consisting of commercial paper for MGE. See Footnote 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Report.
(c)Amount represents interest expense on long-term debt. See Footnote 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Report for further discussion of the long-term debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
(d)Leases. See Footnote 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Report.
(e)Purchase obligations for MGE Energy and MGE consist primarily of the purchase of electricity and natural gas, electric transmission,
natural gas storage capacity, natural gas pipeline transportation, and the purchase and transport of coal. See Footnote 16.c. of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Report.
(f)Construction obligations consist primarily of Badger Hollow I and II, other renewable solar projects, and software development related to the Enterprise Forward initiative that includes a new customer information and billing system.
(g)Other obligations are primarily related to investment commitments, chattel paper agreements, environmental projects, fuel credit, and uncertain tax positions.
The above amounts do not include any contributions for MGE's pension and postretirement plans. MGE does not expect to need to make any required contributions to the qualified plans for 2021. The contributions for years after 2021 are not yet currently estimated. Due to uncertainties in the future economic performance of plan assets, discount rates, and other key assumptions, estimated contributions are subject to change. MGE may also elect to make additional discretionary contributions to the plans.
The above amounts do not include future capital calls by ATC and ATC Holdco. The amount and timing of future capital calls to these entities is uncertain and primarily dependent on the operations and expansion of ATC and the resumption of development activities by ATC Holdco.
MGE Energy's and MGE's commercial commitments as of December 31, 2020, representing commitments triggered by future events and including financing arrangements to secure obligations of MGE Energy and MGE, are as follows:
(a)Amount includes the facilities discussed in (b) plus an additional line of credit. MGE Energy has available at any time a $50 million committed revolving credit agreement, expiring in February 2024. As of December 31, 2020, MGE Energy had no borrowings outstanding under this credit facility.
(b)Amount includes two committed revolving credit agreements totaling $100 million expiring in February 2024. These credit facilities are used to support commercial paper issuances. As of December 31, 2020, MGE had $52.5 million of commercial paper outstanding backed by the facilities but no borrowings outstanding. As of December 31, 2020, MGE had $0.7 million of letters of credit issued inside credit facilities.
Other Matters
Rate Matters
In December 2020, the PSCW approved a settlement agreement for MGE's 2021 rate case. The settlement agreement provides for a zero percent increase for electric rates and an approximately 4.0% increase for gas rates in 2021. The electric rate settlement includes an increase in rate base but the associated rate increase is primarily offset by lower fuel and purchase power costs and a one-time $18.2 million return to customers of the portion of excess deferred taxes related to the 2017 Tax Act not governed by IRS normalization rules. As part of the settlement, the fuel rules bandwidth will be set at plus or minus 1% for 2021. When compared to the 2020 rate case, the settlement includes lower forecasted electric sales for 2021 to reflect changes to customer usage during the COVID-19 pandemic. The gas rate increase covers infrastructure costs and technology improvements. The settlement agreement also includes escrow accounting treatment for pension and other postretirement benefit costs, bad debt expense, and customer credit card fees. Escrow accounting treatment allows MGE to defer any difference between estimated costs in rates and actual costs incurred until its next rate case filing. Any difference would be recorded as a regulatory asset or regulatory liability.
Details related to MGE's 2021 approved settlement agreement are as follows:
(a)Average rate base amounts reflect MGE's allocated share of rate base and do not include construction work in progress (CWIP) or a cash working capital allowance and were calculated using a forecasted 13-month average for the test periods. The PSCW provides a return on selected CWIP and a cash working capital allowance by adjusting the percentage return on rate base.
(b)Authorized returns on common equity may not be indicative of actual returns earned or projections of future returns, as actual returns will be affected by the volume of electricity or gas sold.
In January 2021, certain environmental groups filed a petition against the PSCW regarding MGE's 2021 rate settlement. MGE has intervened in the petition in cooperation with the PSCW. See Footnote 9.a. for more information regarding this matter.
ATC
2013 FERC Complaint - In 2013, several parties filed a complaint with the FERC seeking to reduce the base return on equity (ROE) used by MISO transmission owners, including ATC. The complaint provided for a statutory refund period of November 2013 through February 2015. The complaint asserted that the MISO ROE should not exceed 9.15%, that the equity components of hypothetical capital structures should be restricted to 50%, and that the relevant incentive ROE adders should be discontinued. At the time, MISO's base ROE was 12.38% and ATC's base ROE was 12.2%. On September 28, 2016, FERC issued an order, for the period November 2013 through February 2015, reducing ATC's base ROE to 10.32%. In November 2019, FERC issued an order to further reduce ATC's base ROE to 9.88%. In May 2020, the FERC issued an order further refining the methodology for setting the ROE that electric utilities are authorized to earn. This increased the ROE from 9.88% to 10.02%. This base ROE is effective for the 2013 FERC complaint period and for all periods following September 2016.
2015 FERC Complaint - In February 2015, several parties filed a complaint with the FERC seeking to reduce the base ROE used by MISO transmission owners, including ATC, to 8.67%. The complaint provided for a statutory refund period of February 2015 through May 2016 with a refund effective date retroactive to the complaint filing date. In June 2016, an administrative law judge issued an initial decision for the complaint that would reduce the transmission owner's base ROE to 9.7%. In November 2019, FERC issued an order dismissing the complaint with the determination that the ROE was reasonable. As a result of this order and the methodology FERC used to determine the applicable ROE in the 2013 FERC complaint, several parties have requested a rehearing by FERC. If FERC denies these requests, the complainants are likely to file an appeal with the appellate court. Any change to ATC's ROE could result in lower equity earnings and distributions from ATC in the future.
In January 2015, FERC accepted the transmission owners' request for a 50 basis-point incentive ROE adder for participating in MISO. The adder became effective January 6, 2015.
As of December 31, 2018, our share of the estimated refund recorded was $2.5 million, including interest. Following the November 2019 FERC order, our share of ATC's earnings reflects a pre-tax adjustment of $2.0 million, including interest, related to the 2013 complaint refund period and from September 28, 2016 through December 31, 2019. As a result of the May 2020 FERC order, our share of ATC's earnings reflects a $0.6 million reduction of our reserve. Additionally, our share of ATC's earnings reflects the derecognition of a possible refund related to the 2015 complaint as ATC considers such a refund to be no longer considered probable due to FERC's November 2019 dismissal of that complaint. However, due to pending requests for rehearing, a loss related to the 2015 complaint remains possible. Our share of the estimated refund for the 2015 complaint is approximately $2.3 million. As of December 31, 2020, our share of the estimated refund amount reflected a net increase in ATC's earnings with a pre-tax adjustment of $0.6 million, inclusive of interest. We derived approximately 8.0% of our net income for 2020 and 2019 and approximately 7.3% of our net income for 2018 from our investment in ATC.
Critical Accounting Estimates - MGE Energy and MGE
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to regulatory assets and liabilities, unbilled revenues, pension obligations, income taxes, and derivatives. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Those values may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting estimates affect our more significant judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Regulatory Assets/Liabilities
Regulatory assets represent costs that have been deferred to future periods when it is probable that the regulator will allow future recovery of those costs through rates. MGE bases its assessment of recovery on precedents established by the regulatory body. Regulatory liabilities represent previous collections from customers that are expected to be refunded to customers in future periods. Regulatory assets and regulatory liabilities typically include deferral of energy costs, the normalization of income taxes, the deferral of certain operating expenses, and non-ARO removal costs. The accounting for these regulatory assets and liabilities is in accordance with regulatory accounting standards.
MGE continually assesses whether the regulatory assets and liabilities meet the criteria for probability of future recovery or deferral. This assessment considers factors such as changes in the regulatory environment, recent rate orders to other regulated entities under the same jurisdiction, and the status of any pending or potential deregulation legislation. If future recovery of costs becomes no longer probable, the assets and liabilities would be recognized as current-period revenues or expenses.
Amortization of regulatory assets and liabilities is provided over the recovery or deferral period as allowed in the related regulatory agreement.
Unbilled Revenues
Revenues from the sale of electricity and gas are recorded when they are delivered to customers. Sales quantity is measured by customers' meters. Due to the large volume of those meters, it is impractical to read all of them at month end. Meters are read on a systematic basis throughout the month based on established meter-reading schedules. Consequently, at the end of any month, there exists a quantity of electricity and gas that has been delivered to customers but has not been captured by the meter readings. As a result, management must estimate revenue related to electricity and gas delivered to customers between meter-read dates and the end of the reporting period. These estimates include:
 The amount of electricity expected to be lost in the process of its transmission and distribution to customers (referred to as line loss) and the amount of electricity actually delivered to customers.
 The amount of gas expected to be lost in the process of distribution to customers and the amount of gas actually delivered to customers.
 The mix of sales between customer rate classes having different rates, which is based upon historical utilization assumptions.
MGE monitors the reasonableness of the unbilled revenue estimate through the review of ratios such as unbilled electric consumption compared to billed electric sales. To confirm the reasonableness of unbilled gas, the estimated unbilled consumption is compared to various other statistics, including percent of gas available for sale, change in unbilled month-to-month and change in unbilled compared to the prior year.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
MGE provides employees with certain retirement (pension) and postretirement (health care and life insurance) benefits. In order to measure the expense and obligations associated with these benefits, management must make a variety of estimates, including discount rates used to value certain liabilities, the expected return on plan assets set aside to fund these costs, the rate of compensation increase, employee turnover rates, retirement rates, health care trends, mortality rates, and other factors. These accounting estimates may change due to the uncertainty attached to the estimate as well as the fact that these estimates are difficult to measure. Different estimates used could result in recognizing different amounts of expense over different periods of time. Recovery in rates is expected.
MGE uses third-party specialists to assist it in evaluating its assumptions as well as to appropriately measure the costs and obligations associated with these retirement benefits. The discount rate and expected return on plan assets are based primarily on available investment yields and the historical performance of plan assets. They are critical accounting estimates because they are subject to management's judgment and can materially affect financial performance.
 Assumed return on assets. This assumption represents the rate of return on plan assets reflecting the average rate of earnings expected on the funds invested (or to be invested) to provide for the benefits included in the projected benefit obligation. For 2020, MGE used an assumed return on assets of 7.20% for pension and 6.76% for other postretirement benefits. In 2021, the pension asset assumption will decrease to 7.00% and the postretirement benefit assumption will decrease to 6.60%. The annual expected rate of return is based on projected long-term equity and bond returns, maturities and asset allocations. Holding other assumptions constant, for every 1% reduction in the expected rate of return on plan assets, annual pension and other postretirement cost would increase by approximately $4.3 million, before taxes.
 Discount rate. The discount rate represents the rate at which pension obligations could effectively be settled on a present-value basis. MGE uses high-grade bond yields as a benchmark for determining the appropriate discount rate. MGE uses individual spot rates rather than a weighted average of the yield curve spot rates to measure the service cost and interest cost components for net periodic benefit cost. Holding other assumptions constant, a 0.5% increase in the discount rate on the obligation balance as of December 31, 2020, would decrease annual pension and other postretirement cost by approximately $3.1 million, before taxes.
 Medical trend assumptions. The health care cost trend rate is the assumed rate of increase in per-capita health care charges.
 Mortality rate assumption. Expected mortality rates are used in the valuation to determine the expected duration of future benefit payments to the plan participants. MGE utilizes mortality tables and projection scales developed by the society of actuaries. These tables and scales were last updated in 2020.
See Footnote 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Report for additional discussion of these plans.
Income Tax Provision
MGE Energy's and MGE's income tax provisions, including both current and deferred components, are based on estimates, assumptions, calculations, and interpretation of tax statutes for the current and future years. Determination of current-year federal and state income tax will not be settled for years.
Management regularly makes assessments of tax return outcomes relative to financial statement tax provisions and adjusts the tax provisions in the period when facts become final.
Additionally, in determining our current income tax provision, we assess temporary differences resulting from differing treatments of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are recorded in our balance sheets. When we maintain deferred tax assets, we assess the likelihood that these assets will be recovered through adjustments to future taxable income. Future tax benefits are recognized to the extent that realization of such benefits is more likely than not. A valuation allowance is recorded for those benefits that do not meet this criterion. We record an allowance reducing the asset to a value
we believe will be recoverable based on our expectation of future taxable income. We believe the accounting estimate related to the valuation allowance is a critical accounting estimate because it is highly susceptible to change from period to period as it requires management to make assumptions about our future income over the lives of the deferred tax assets, and the impact of increasing or decreasing the valuation allowance is potentially material to our results of operations.
Derivative Instruments
MGE accounts for derivative financial instruments, except those qualifying for the normal purchase normal sale exception, at their fair value on the balance sheet. Fair value is determined using current quoted market prices, except for the PPA, which is valued utilizing an internally-developed pricing model. This model includes observable and unobservable inputs.
MGE received approval from the PSCW to establish a regulatory asset or liability for the deferral of the effects of mark-to-market accounting on contracts related to commodity hedging in MGE's regulated operations.
Adoption of Accounting Principles and Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements - MGE Energy and MGE
See Footnote 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Report for discussion of new accounting pronouncements.