ITEM 7:
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS (“MD&A”) OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
Through G.research, we act as an underwriter and provide institutional research services. Institutional research services revenues consist of brokerage commissions derived from securities transactions executed on an agency basis or direct payments from institutional clients as well as underwriting profits, selling concessions and management fees associated with underwriting activities. Commission revenues vary directly with the perceived value of the research provided, as well as account activity and new account generation.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) surfaced in China and has since spread quickly to numerous countries, including the U.S. On March 11, 2020, COVID-19 was identified as a global pandemic by the World Health Organization. In response to its spread, governmental authorities have imposed restrictions on travel and congregation and the temporary closure of many non-essential businesses in affected jurisdictions, including, beginning in March 2020, in the U.S. As world leaders focused on the unprecedented human and economic challenges of COVID-19, global equity markets plunged as the coronavirus pandemic spread. In March, the unfolding events led to the worst month for stocks since 2008 and the worst first quarter since 1937. In the remainder of the year, as a result of unprecedented fiscal and monetary stimulus and the fast tracking of potential COVID-19 vaccines, some of which have been approved and have begun to be distributed, the markets have rebounded strongly. The pandemic and resulting economic dislocations have resulted in lower transaction volumes, resulting in decreased revenues, partially offset by decreased variable operating and compensation expenses. As a result of this pandemic, most of our employees (“teammates”) continue to work remotely. However, there has been no material impact of remote work arrangements on our operations, including our financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting, and disclosure controls and procedures, and there has been no material challenge in implementing our business continuity plan.
Operating Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 as Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
Institutional research service revenues were $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, $4.7 million, or 51.8%, lower than total revenues of $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Institutional research services revenues by revenue component, excluding principal transactions, were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Index
Commissions and hard dollar payments in the 2020 period were $4.0 million, a $2.4 million or 38.0% decrease from $6.4 million. The decrease was primarily due to higher brokerage commissions from securities transactions executed on an agency basis. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, G.research earned $2.6 million and $4.9 million, or approximately 64% and 76%, of its commission revenue from transactions executed on behalf of funds advised by Gabelli Funds, LLC (“Gabelli Funds”) and clients advised by GAMCO Asset.
A significant portion of G.research institutional research services are provided to GAMCO and its affiliates pursuant to research services agreements. The agreements between G.research and Gabelli Funds and GAMCO Asset to provide institutional research services were terminated effective January 1, 2020. Research services were $1.5 million in 2019.
Underwriting fees decreased $0.4 million during 2020 over the prior year amount.
Principal Transactions
During 2020, net losses from principal transactions were negligible.
Interest and dividend income declined $.1 million to $0.1 million in 2020 from $.2 million in 2019 primarily due to the decline in short-term rates.
Expenses
Total expenses were $6.1 million during 2020, a decrease of $5.6 million, or 47.9%, from $11.7 million in the 2019 period. The decrease results primarily from lower compensation costs and a reduction of expenses across all categories.
Compensation costs, which includes salaries, bonuses and benefits, were $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $4.9 million from $8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and is due to headcount reductions related to the cessation of research services and the streamlining of operations.
Income Tax Benefit
We recorded income tax benefits of $0.2 million and $.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The ETR was 12.4% and 20.9% for the periods ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.4 million versus $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Summary cash flow data is as follows (in thousands):
Index
Net cash used by operating activities was $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting from a net loss of $1.4 million and net decrease in operating liabilities of $0.4 million. Net cash used by operating activities was $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, resulting from a net loss of $1.9 million and a net decrease of operating assets of $0.5 million.
There were no financing activities in 2020. Financing activities included stock issuances of $0.515 million for December 31, 2019. During 2019 other financing activities included a return of capital of $3.3 million and contributions of $0.41 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
In the ordinary course of business, we make a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of results of operations and financial condition in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). We base our estimates on historical experience, when available, and on other various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
We believe that the following critical accounting policies require management to exercise significant judgment:
Revenue Recognition
The Company provides institutional research services and earns brokerage commissions and sales manager fees from securities transactions executed on an agency basis on behalf of institutional clients and mutual funds, private wealth management clients and retail customers of affiliated companies. Commission revenue and related clearing charges are recorded on a trade-date basis and are included in institutional research services and other operating expenses, respectively, on the consolidated statements of operations.
The Company has also been involved in syndicated underwriting activities that included public equity and debt offerings managed by major investment banks. Underwriting fees include gains, losses, selling concessions and fees, net of syndicate expenses, arising from securities offerings in which the Company acts as underwriter or agent and are accrued as earned.
See Note C, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, in the consolidated financial statements.
Securities Owned, at Fair Value
Securities owned, at fair value, including common stocks, closed-end funds and mutual funds, are recorded at fair value with the resulting realized and unrealized gains and losses reflected in principal transactions in the Statements of Operations. Realized gains and losses from securities transactions are recorded on the identified cost basis. All securities transactions and transaction costs are recorded on a trade date basis. Dividends are recorded on the ex-dividend date. Interest income and interest expense are accrued as earned or incurred.
Allocated Expenses
The Company is charged or incurs certain overhead expenses that are included in general and administrative and occupancy and equipment expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. These overhead expenses are allocated to the Company by AC and other AC affiliates or allocated by the Company to other AC affiliates as the expenses are incurred, based upon methodologies periodically reviewed by the management of the Company and the AC affiliates. In addition, Gabelli & Company Investment Advisers, Inc. (“GCIA”), a wholly - owned subsidiary of AC, and GAMCO Investors, Inc. (“GBL”) serve as paymasters for the Company under compensation payment sharing agreements. This includes compensation expense and related payroll taxes and benefits which are allocated to the Company for professional staff performing duties related entirely to the Company and those compensation expenses and related payroll taxes and benefits which relate to professional staff who serve more than one entity and whose compensation is therefore allocated to the Company as well as to its affiliates. These compensation expenses are included in compensation and related costs in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Index
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts on the consolidated financial statements using the statutory tax rates in effect for the year when the reported amount of the asset or liability is expected to be recovered or settled, respectively. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce the carrying values of deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. For each tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return, the Company determines whether it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation. A tax position that meets the more likely than not recognition threshold is measured to determine the amount of benefit to recognize. The tax position is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. The Company recognizes the accrual of interest on uncertain tax positions and penalties in the income tax provision on the consolidated statements of operations.
See Note B, Significant Accounting Policies - Income Taxes and G. Income Taxes, in the consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Developments
See Note B, Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Developments, in the consolidated financial statements.
Seasonality and Inflation
We do not believe that our operations are subject to significant seasonal fluctuations. We do not believe inflation will significantly affect our compensation costs, as they are substantially variable in nature. The rate of inflation may affect certain other expenses, however, such as information technology and occupancy costs.