ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated due to various factors discussed below under Cautionary Statements Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and under the caption Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of this 2020 Form 10-K.
The comparisons presented in this discussion refer to the prior year, unless otherwise noted. For a discussion on the comparison between fiscal year 2019 and fiscal year 2018 results, see Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in MoneyGram’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the SEC. This discussion is organized in the following sections:
•Overview
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
•Cautionary Statements Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
OVERVIEW
MoneyGram is a global leader in cross-border P2P payments and money transfers. Our consumer-centric capabilities enable the quick and affordable transfer of money to family and friends around the world. Whether through online and mobile platforms, integration with mobile wallets, a kiosk, or any one of the hundreds of thousands of agent locations in over 200 countries and territories, with over 85 now digitally enabled, the innovative MoneyGram platform connects consumers in ways designed to be convenient for them. In the U.S. and in select countries and territories, we also provide bill payment services, issue money orders and process official checks. We primarily offer our services and products through third-party agents and through our direct-to-consumer digital business. Third-party agents include retail chains, independent retailers, post offices and financial institutions. Digital solutions include moneygram.com, mobile solutions, virtual agents, account deposit and kiosk-based services. MoneyGram also has a limited number of Company-operated retail locations.
We manage our revenue and related commissions expense through two reporting segments: Global Funds Transfer and Financial Paper Products. The Global Funds Transfer segment provides global money transfer services in more than 410,000 agent locations. Our global money transfer services are our primary revenue driver, accounting for 91% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Global Funds Transfer segment also provides bill payment services to consumers through substantially all of our money transfer agent locations in the U.S., at certain agent locations in select Caribbean and European countries and through our digital solutions. The Financial Paper Products segment provides money order services to consumers through retail locations and financial institutions located in the U.S. and Puerto Rico and provides official check services to financial institutions in the U.S. Corporate expenses that are not related to our segments’ performance are excluded from operating income for Global Funds Transfer and Financial Paper Products segments.
COVID-19 Update
General Economic Conditions and MoneyGram Impact
The global spread and unprecedented impact of COVID-19 is complex and ever-evolving. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic and recommended extensive containment and mitigation measures worldwide. The outbreak reached all of the regions in which we do business. Since the outbreak, we have seen the profound effect it is having on human health, the global economy and society at large. Public and private sector policies aimed at reducing the transmission of COVID-19 have varied significantly in different regions of the world, but have resulted in shelter-in-place orders and the mandatory closing of various businesses across many of the countries in which we operate.
MoneyGram experienced a decline in transaction volume and related revenue in its Retail Channel in March and April of 2020 as the impact of mandatory closures and stay-at-home orders took effect. Many of our agents around the world were forced to suspend operations due to mandatory government closure orders. In addition, demand for walk-in money transfer services decreased as restrictions on mobility, lower levels of economic activity and unemployment impacted consumers.
Starting in the second quarter of 2020, some progress in the containment of COVID-19 was made globally, and some governmental authorities removed or began rolling back some restrictions such as quarantines, shutdowns and some shelter-in-place orders. In addition, government rules generally included remittances as an "essential service," which gave agents the ability to reopen physical locations even when other businesses were closed. As restrictions eased, after the initial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the ability to physically transact on a more normal basis was restored in many markets but has continued with interruptions for limited periods of time in certain regions of the world. As the spread of COVID-19 infections caused major countries to reinstitute lockdowns and restrictions on travel throughout the year, the result has been lower levels of economic activity, and has significantly reduced migration throughout most of the world.
It is impossible to predict the scope and duration of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as the situation is ever evolving and there are a number of uncertainties related to this pandemic. The impact of COVID-19 for the coming year and beyond will depend on the duration and severity of economic conditions resulting from the crisis, public policy actions, expansion and duration of returns to lockdowns and shelter-in-place orders by governments, new initiatives undertaken by the Company and changes in consumer behavior over the long term.
MoneyGram Response to COVID-19
The Company continues to address the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact globally with an internal COVID Task Force composed of a cross-functional group of employees working to mitigate the potential impacts to our people and business. Shortly after the onset of the pandemic, MoneyGram took the following steps to preserve liquidity and value and maintain continuity of operations in response to the pandemic:
•Implemented a global Business Continuity Plan;
•Established employee support initiatives including work from home arrangements for the Company's entire workforce;
•Reduced expenses and preserved cash by:
◦Suspending significant discretionary expenses;
◦Reducing salaries of non-hourly employees, including executive officers and board of director cash retainers, by 20% for a limited time period;
◦Negotiating reduced supplier rates for many products and services;
◦Deferring employer Social Security tax payments as allowed by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security ("CARES") Act; and
◦Borrowing $23.0 million in the first quarter of 2020 under our revolving credit facility to improve our cash position and preserve financial flexibility.
•Conducted proactive outreaches to governmental and regulatory bodies;
•Proactively continued to manage our fraud prevention programs to protect consumers from COVID-19-related financial scams; and
•Alerted and directed consumers to our website and app, and encouraged direct-to-account transfers.
As transaction volume and revenue began to improve during the second quarter of 2020, the Company reversed certain of these actions. Specifically, we repaid the entire $23.0 million that we borrowed under the revolving credit facility, and we returned salaries to their normal levels. We also repaid the 20% reduction in salary back to our employees, making them whole for 2020.
We continue to place a priority on business continuity and contingency planning, including for potential extended closures of any key agents or disruptions related to our contractual counterparties that might arise as a result of COVID-19. While we have not experienced material disruptions in our service offerings aside from mandatory agent location closures, it is possible that further disruptions could occur as the pandemic continues. We cannot reasonably estimate the potential impact or timing of those events, and we may not be able to mitigate such impact.
Business Environment and Recent Developments
In 2020, worldwide political conditions became more volatile, and economic conditions weakened, as evidenced by the economic and political consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, continuing political unrest in certain markets, currency controls in select countries and a constricted immigration environment. Given the global extent of these events, money transfer volumes, and the average Face Value of money transfers continue to be highly variable, and can deviate from norms based on Corridor and country. The World Bank has predicted a significant global contraction in the amount of funds transferred in 2021, as employment, migration patterns and economic conditions continue to feel the impact of declining consumer confidence and government efforts to mitigate infections during the pandemic.
The competitive environment continues to change as both established players and new, digital-only entrants work to innovate and deliver an affordable and convenient customer experience to win market share. Our competitors include a small number of large money transfer and bill payment providers, financial institutions, banks and a large number of small niche money transfer service providers that serve select regions. We generally compete on the basis of customer experience, price, agent commissions, brand awareness, and convenience.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has digital capabilities through which consumers can send and receive money in more than 85 countries around the world. Digital revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $188.0 million, or 17% of money transfer revenue, compared to $114.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Total digital money transfer transactions represented 25% and 14% of money transfer transactions for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020, digital revenue and transaction volume represented the fastest growth market for the Company.
We continue to invest in innovative products and services, such as our leading mobile app and integrations with mobile wallets, and account deposit services, to position the Company to meet consumer needs. Furthermore, our partnership with Visa Direct provides consumers with additional choices on how to receive funds across a broader number of countries. We believe that combining our cash and digital capabilities enables us to differentiate against digital-only competitors who are not able to serve a significant portion of the remittance market that relies on cash.
In October 2020, the Company extended its agreement with Walmart, its largest agent, through March 2024. In 2018, the Company and Walmart announced the launch of Walmart2World, Powered by MoneyGram, a new white-label money transfer service that allows customers to send money from Walmart in the U.S. to any non-U.S. MoneyGram location. The lower foreign exchange margins of the white-label service negatively impacted our revenue and operating income in 2019 and 2020. On January 19, 2021, Walmart informed us of a new agreement that would enable Western Union money transfer, bill payment and money order services at U.S. Walmart locations. The MoneyGram "powered by" white-label Walmart2World product represented approximately 8% of total revenue. Currently, it is difficult to predict exactly how this new Walmart marketplace will impact current transaction volumes and profit margins. Any impact to financial results will depend on a variety of factors including the timing of the rollout of a new participant into Walmart Stores, how the products are placed at the point-of-sale and how aggressively each of the competitors chooses to price their foreign exchange.
In addition to the changes in the competitive environment, MoneyGram’s global compliance requirements have remained complex, which has affected our top line growth and profit margin. We continue to enhance and automate our compliance tools to comply with various government and other regulatory programs around the world, as well as address Corridor specific risks associated with fraud or money laundering.
In 2019, we announced a commercial agreement with Ripple Labs, Inc., which is scheduled to expire on July 1, 2023. The commercial agreement allows MoneyGram to utilize Ripple's ODL platform, as well as XRP, its cryptocurrency, for foreign exchange trading. The Company has been compensated by Ripple for developing and bringing trading volume and liquidity to foreign exchange markets, facilitated by the ODL platform, and providing a reliable level of foreign exchange trading activity. On December 22, 2020, the SEC filed a lawsuit against Ripple alleging that they raised over $1.3 billion through an unregistered, ongoing digital asset offering in violation of the registration provisions of the Securities Act of 1933. Subsequently, substantially all of the U.S.-based digital asset exchanges removed XRP from their platforms. MoneyGram ceased transacting with Ripple under the commercial agreement in early December 2020 and has not since resumed trading. It is possible that MoneyGram will not resume transacting with Ripple under the commercial agreement and will be unable to receive the related market development fees in 2021 and beyond. Per the terms of the commercial agreement, the Company does not pay fees to Ripple for its usage of the ODL platform or the related software and there are no clawback or refund provisions.
In 2019, the Company committed to an operational plan to reduce overall operating expenses, including the elimination of approximately 120 positions across the company (the "2019 Organizational Realignment"). In the the first half of 2020, this number was revised to approximately 100 positions as the operational plan drew closer to completion. The workforce reduction was designed to streamline operations and structure the Company in a way that will be more agile and aligned around our plan to execute market-specific strategies tailored to different segments. The workforce reduction was substantially completed in the first half of 2020 with $8.5 million of costs incurred consisting primarily of one-time termination benefits for employee severance and related costs, all of which resulted in cash expenditures that were paid out during 2020. We expect the 2019 Organizational Realignment to reduce annualized operating expenses by approximately $18.0 million.
On January 11, 2021, MoneyGram committed to an operational plan to reduce overall operating expenses, including the elimination of approximately 90 positions across the Company and certain actions to reduce other ongoing operating expenses, including real estate-related expenses (the “2021 Organizational Realignment”). The actions are designed to streamline operations and structure the Company in a way that will be more agile and aligned around its plan to execute market-specific strategies. The total expected cost of the 2021 Organizational Realignment is approximately $9.7 million, which includes approximately $6.2 million in one-time cash severance expenditures and $3.5 million in real estate-related and other cash expenditures. The Company expects the 2021 Organizational Realignment to reduce operating expenses by approximately
$18.0 million on an annualized basis. The Company anticipates the workforce reduction portion of the 2021 Organizational Realignment to be substantially completed in the first quarter of 2021 and related cash expenditures to be substantially paid out in 2021. The Company’s estimates are based on a number of assumptions. Actual results may differ materially, and additional charges not currently expected may be incurred in connection with, or as a result of, the 2021 Organizational Realignment.
Capital Structure Update
On June 26, 2019, we entered into an amended First Lien Credit Agreement (the "First Lien Credit Agreement") and a new Second Lien Credit Agreement (the "Second Lien Credit Agreement"), each with Bank of America, N.A. acting as administrative agent. These agreements extended and/or repaid in full all outstanding indebtedness under the Company's existing credit facility. The amended First Lien Credit Agreement provides for a $35.0 million senior secured three-year revolving credit facility (the "First Lien Revolving Credit Facility") and a senior secured four-year term loan in an aggregate principal amount of $645.0 million (the "First Lien Term Credit Facility" and, together with the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility, the "First Lien Credit Facility"). The Second Lien Credit Agreement provides $245.0 million of a secured five-year term loan. In connection with the termination of the previous credit facility, we recognized debt extinguishment costs of $2.4 million in the second quarter of 2019. For more information on the credit agreements, see Note 10 - Debt of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Liquidity and Capital Resources section below.
In connection with the closing of the Second Lien Term Credit Facility, the Company issued warrants representing the right to purchase 5,423,470 shares of common stock (representing approximately 8% of the then-outstanding fully diluted common stock of the Company) for $0.01 per share to the lenders under the Second Lien Term Credit Facility.
In June 2019, the Company entered into the SPA with Ripple, pursuant to which Ripple agreed to purchase and the Company agreed to issue up to $50.0 million of common stock and ten-year warrants to purchase common stock at $0.01 per underlying share of common stock ("Ripple Warrants"). In connection with the execution of the SPA, Ripple purchased, and the Company issued, (i) 5,610,923 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $4.10 per share and (ii) a Ripple Warrant to purchase 1,706,151 shares of common stock at a per share reference purchase price of $4.10 per share of common stock underlying the Ripple Warrant, exercisable at $0.01 per underlying share of common stock, for an aggregate purchase price of $30.0 million. The Company incurred direct and incremental costs of $0.5 million related to this transaction.
On November 22, 2019, in connection with an additional closing under the SPA, the Company issued and sold to Ripple (i) 626,600 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $4.10 per share and (ii) a Ripple Warrant to purchase 4,251,449 shares of common stock at a per share reference price of $4.10 per share of common stock underlying the Ripple Warrant, exercisable at $0.01 per underlying share of common stock, for an aggregate purchase price of $20.0 million representing the remaining amount of common stock and warrants that Ripple agreed to purchase under the SPA. For more information related to the SPA, see Note 20 - Related Parties of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
On November 25, 2020, Ripple held 6,237,523 shares of our common stock and initiated the sale of 4,000,000 shares through a series of open market transactions that occurred from November 27, 2020 to December 14, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, Ripple held 2,237,523 shares of our common stock.
Anticipated Trends
This discussion of trends expected to impact our business in 2021 is based on information presently available and reflects certain assumptions, including assumptions regarding future economic conditions. Differences in actual economic conditions compared with our assumptions could have a material impact on our results. See Cautionary Statements Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors of this 2020 Form 10-K for additional factors that could cause results to differ materially from those contemplated by the following forward-looking statements.
In 2020, MoneyGram focused on positioning the Company to better compete by building and expanding customer-direct capabilities, accelerating digital growth, expanding through partnerships, and modernizing operations.
Through 2021, we believe the industry will continue to see a number of trends: the growth of digital transactions, aggressive pricing strategies, the importance of customer experience, and continuing global economic weakness. To position the Company to respond to these trends, we are continuing to focus on our strategy to deliver a differentiated customer experience, scale our digital properties, be the preferred partner for agents in cross-border transactions, capture new revenue by monetizing our capabilities and have continuous improvement in the cost structure and efficiency of the Company.
In the second quarter of 2020, we announced partnerships with E9Pay and Global Money Express, two significant Korean fintech providers, which expanded MoneyGram digital send footprint. Additionally, in January 2021, we announced the expansion of our Visa Direct relationship through Checkout.com. The new partnership provides our consumers with near real-time deposit capabilities to Visa debit card holders in 25 countries and 575 Corridors. In 2021, we will continue to broaden our global digital footprint through innovative digital partnerships while continuing to focus on enhancing our direct to account reach and real-time deposit capabilities.
We expect pricing pressure and competition to be continuous challenges through 2021. Currency volatility, liquidity pressure on central banks and pressure on labor markets in specific countries may also continue to impact our business. On December 22, 2020, the SEC filed a lawsuit against Ripple alleging that they raised over $1.3 billion through an unregistered, ongoing digital asset securities offering in violation of the registration provisions of the Securities Act of 1933. Subsequently, substantially all of the U.S.-based digital asset exchanges removed XRP from their platforms. MoneyGram ceased transacting with Ripple under the existing commercial agreement in early December 2020 and has not since resumed trading. It is possible that MoneyGram will not resume transacting with Ripple under the commercial agreement and receive the related market development fees in 2021 and beyond.
For our Financial Paper Products segment, we expect the decline in overall paper-based transactions to continue primarily due to continued migration by customers to other payment methods. Our investment revenue, which consists primarily of interest income generated through the investment of cash balances received from the sale of our Financial Paper Products, is dependent on the interest rate environment. The Company would see a positive impact on its investment revenue if interest rates rise, and conversely, a negative impact if interest rates decline.
Financial Measures and Key Metrics
This 2020 Form 10-K includes financial information prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP as well as certain non-GAAP financial measures that we use to assess our overall performance.
U.S. GAAP Measures - We utilize certain financial measures prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP to assess the Company's overall performance. These measures include fee and other revenue, fee and other commissions expense, fee and other revenue less commissions, operating income and operating margin.
Non-GAAP Measures - Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of financial performance, financial position or cash flows that excludes (or includes) amounts that are included in (or excluded from) the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed as a supplement to, and not a substitute for, financial measures presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We strongly encourage investors and stockholders to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure. While we believe that these metrics enhance investors' understanding of our business, these metrics are not necessarily comparable with similarly named metrics of other companies. The following are non-GAAP financial measures we use to assess our overall performance:
EBITDA (Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, including agent signing bonus amortization).
Adjusted EBITDA (EBITDA adjusted for certain significant items) - Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our indebtedness or tax payments that may result in a reduction in cash available.
Adjusted Free Cash Flow (Adjusted EBITDA less cash interest, cash taxes, cash payments for capital expenditures and cash payments for agent signing bonuses) - Adjusted Free Cash Flow does not reflect cash payments related to the adjustment of certain significant items in Adjusted EBITDA.
Constant Currency - Constant currency metrics assume that amounts denominated in non-U.S. dollars are translated to the U.S. dollar at rates consistent with those in the prior year.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table is a summary of the results of operations for the years ended December 31:
NM = Not meaningful
Revenues
The following table is a summary of the Company's revenues for the years ended December 31:
In 2020, total revenue declined by $67.9 million. See the "Segments Results" section below for a detailed discussion of revenues by segment.
Operating Expenses
The following table is a summary of the operating expenses for the years ended December 31:
In 2020, total operating expenses declined by $118.9 million which is discussed in detail in this section and the "Segments Results" section below.
Total Commissions and Direct Transaction Expenses
In 2020, total commissions and direct transaction expenses decreased by $9.2 million primarily due to the decrease in commission rates. See the "Segments Results" section below for more information on commissions and direct transaction expense by segment.
Compensation and Benefits
In 2020, compensation and benefits decreased primarily due to the decrease in salaries and related payroll taxes as a result of a lower headcount from the 2019 Organizational Realignment, and an increase in employee capitalized software development, partially offset by the increase in cash incentive compensation.
Transaction and Operations Support
Transaction and operations support primarily includes marketing, professional fees and other outside services, telecommunications, agent support costs, including forms related to our products, non-compensation employee costs, including training, travel and relocation costs, non-employee director stock-based compensation expense, bank charges, the impact of non-U.S. dollar exchange rate movements on our monetary transactions and assets and liabilities denominated in a currency other than the U.S. dollar, and Ripple market development fees and related transaction and trading expenses.
The following table is a summary of the change in transaction and operations support from 2019 to 2020:
In 2020, transaction and operations support decreased primarily due to higher market development fees received from Ripple, and disciplined expense management in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Occupancy, Equipment and Supplies
Occupancy, equipment and supplies expense includes facilities rent and maintenance costs, software and equipment maintenance costs, freight and delivery costs and supplies. In 2020, occupancy, equipment and supplies expense remained relatively flat.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization includes depreciation on computer hardware and software, agent signage, point of sale equipment, capitalized software development costs, office furniture, equipment and leasehold improvements and amortization of intangible assets. In 2020, depreciation and amortization decreased by $9.4 million primarily due to a decrease in capital expenditures as a result of our migration to cloud computing and a decrease in agent signage.
Segments Results
Global Funds Transfer
The following table sets forth our Global Funds Transfer segment results of operations for the years ended December 31:
Money Transfer Revenue
In 2020, money transfer fee revenue decreased by $19.2 million primarily due to lower pricing per transaction in certain markets as a result of pricing pressure from increased competition and reduced Walmart2World foreign exchange spreads, partially offset by an increase in money transfer transaction volume driven by the growth of our Digital Channel.
Bill Payment Revenue
In 2020, bill payment revenue decreased by $13.2 million, or 22%, primarily due to the global economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Fee and Other Commissions Expense
In 2020, fee and other commissions expense of $603.5 million decreased by $8.9 million from prior year, primarily due to the decrease in money transfer revenue discussed above, partially offset by an increase in agent signing bonuses.
Direct Transaction Expense
In 2020, direct transaction expense of $45.8 million increased by $20.3 million from prior year, primarily due to higher volumes in transactions associated with our Digital Channel.
Financial Paper Products
The following table sets forth our Financial Paper Products segment results of operations for the years ended December 31:
In 2020, Financial Paper Products revenue decreased by $35.5 million, or 35%, primarily due to a decline in investment revenue as a result of substantially lower prevailing interest rates driven by a reduction in the federal funds rate in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Commissions expense for Financial Paper Products decreased by $20.6 million due to the decline in investment commissions expense driven by lower interest rates.
Operating Income and Operating Margin
The following table provides a summary overview of operating income and operating margin for the years ended December 31:
In 2020, operating income for the Global Funds Transfer and Financial Paper Products segments increased by $62.4 million and decreased by $13.3 million, respectively, as a result of the factors discussed in the "Segments Results" section above.
Other operating loss decreased in 2020 due to ongoing cost-savings initiatives.
Other Expenses
In 2020, total other expenses decreased by $19.4 million due to a non-cash settlement charge in 2019 related to our Pension Plan, partially offset by higher interest rates.
Income Taxes
The following table represents our provision for income taxes and effective tax rate for the years ended December 31:
In 2020, the Company recognized an income tax expense of $14.0 million on a pre-tax income of $6.1 million. Our income tax rate was higher than the statutory rate primarily due to an increase in valuation allowance, an increase in unrecognized tax benefits, non-deductible expenses, and international taxes, all of which were partially offset by U.S. general business credits and a change in U.S. tax law as further discussed in Note 14 - Income Taxes .
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Free Cash Flow and Constant Currency
The following table is a reconciliation of our non-GAAP financial measures to the related U.S. GAAP financial measures:
See "Results of Operations" and "Analysis of Cash Flows" sections for additional information regarding these changes.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We have various resources available for purposes of managing liquidity and capital needs, including our investment portfolio, credit facilities and letters of credit. We refer to our cash and cash equivalents, settlement cash and cash equivalents, interest-bearing investments and available-for-sale investments collectively as our "investment portfolio." The Company utilizes cash and cash equivalents in various liquidity and capital assessments.
Cash and Cash Equivalents, Settlement Assets and Payment Service Obligations
The following table shows the components of the Company's cash and cash equivalents and settlement assets as of December 31:
Our primary sources of liquidity include cash flows generated by the sale of our payment instruments, our cash and cash equivalents and interest-bearing investment balances, and proceeds from our investment portfolio. Our primary operating liquidity needs are related to the settlement of payment service obligations to our agents and financial institution customers, general operating expenses and debt service.
To meet our payment service obligations at all times, we must have sufficient highly-liquid assets and be able to move funds globally on a timely basis. On average, we receive in and pay out a similar amount of funds on a daily basis to collect and settle the principal amount of our payment instruments sold and related fees and commissions with our end-consumers and agents. This pattern of cash flows allows us to settle our payment service obligations through existing cash balances and ongoing cash generation rather than liquidating investments or utilizing our First Lien Revolving Credit Facility. We have historically generated, and expect to continue generating, sufficient cash flows from daily operations to fund ongoing operational needs.
We preposition cash in various countries and currencies to facilitate settlement of transactions. We also maintain funding capacity beyond our daily operating needs to provide a cushion through the normal fluctuations in our payment service obligations, as well as to provide working capital for the operational and growth requirements of our business. We believe we have sufficient liquid assets and funding capacity to operate and grow our business for the next 12 months. Should our liquidity needs exceed our operating cash flows, we believe that external financing sources, including availability under our credit facilities, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated funding requirements.
Cash and Cash Equivalents and Interest-bearing Investments
To ensure we maintain adequate liquidity to meet our payment service obligations at all times, we keep a significant portion of our investment portfolio in cash and cash equivalents and interest-bearing investments at financial institutions rated A- or better by two of the following three rating agencies: Moody's, S&P and Fitch; and in AAA rated U.S. government money market funds. If the rating agencies have split ratings, the Company uses the lower of the highest two out of three ratings across the agencies for disclosure purposes. If the institution has only two ratings, the Company uses the lower of the two ratings for disclosure purposes. As of December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents (including unrestricted and settlement cash and cash equivalents) and interest-bearing investments totaled $3.1 billion. Cash and cash equivalents consist of interest-bearing deposit accounts, non-interest-bearing transaction accounts and money market securities; interest-bearing investments consist of time deposits and certificates of deposit with maturities of up to 24 months.
Available-for-sale Investments
Our investment portfolio includes $3.5 million of available-for-sale investments as of December 31, 2020. U.S. government agency residential mortgage-backed securities comprise $3.0 million of our available-for-sale investments, while asset-backed and other securities compose the remaining $0.5 million.
Clearing and Cash Management Banks
We collect and disburse money through a network of clearing and cash management banks. The relationships with these banks are a critical component of our ability to maintain our global active funding requirements on a timely basis. In U.S., We have agreements with four active clearing banks that provide clearing and processing functions for official checks, money orders and other draft instruments. We believe that this network of banks provides sufficient capacity to handle the current and projected volumes of items for these services. We also maintain relationships with a variety of domestic and international cash management banks for electronic funds transfer and wire transfer services used in the movement of consumer funds and agent settlements.
Credit Facilities
The following is a summary of the Company's outstanding debt as of December 31:
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no borrowings and nominal outstanding letters of credit under its revolving credit facility and had $34.9 million of availability. The First Lien Credit Agreement provides that in the event the Company's cash balance exceeds $130.0 million at the end of any month, the Company would be required to use such excess cash to pay any outstanding obligations to the revolving lenders under the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility, and that the Company may not draw on the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility to the extent that the Company would have a cash balance in excess of $130.0 million after giving effect to such borrowing. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $196.1 million. The effective interest rate on the First Lien Credit Facility decreased from 7.80% as of December 31, 2019, to 7.00% as of December 31, 2020, due to a reduction in LIBOR. See Note 10 - Debt of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional disclosure related to the credit facilities.
Credit Ratings
As of December 31, 2020, our credit ratings from Moody's and S&P were B3 with a negative outlook and B with a negative outlook, respectively. The Company does not have rating triggers associated with its credit agreements or its regulatory capital requirements.
Regulatory Capital Requirements and Contractual Obligations
Regulatory Capital Requirements
We have capital requirements relating to government regulations in the U.S. and other countries where we operate. Such regulations typically require us to maintain certain assets in a defined ratio to our payment service obligations. Through our wholly-owned subsidiary and licensed entity, MPSI, we are regulated in the U.S. by various state agencies that generally require us to maintain a pool of liquid assets and investments in an amount generally equal to the regulatory payment service obligation measure, as defined by each state, for our regulated payment instruments, namely teller checks, agent checks, money orders and money transfers. The regulatory requirements do not require us to specify individual assets held to meet our payment service obligations, nor are we required to deposit specific assets into a trust, escrow or other special account. Rather, we must maintain a pool of liquid assets. Provided we maintain a total pool of liquid assets sufficient to meet the regulatory and contractual requirements, we are able to withdraw, deposit or sell our individual liquid assets at will, without prior notice, penalty or limitations. We were in compliance with all state and regulatory capital requirements as of December 31, 2020. We believe that our liquidity and capital resources will remain sufficient to ensure ongoing compliance with all regulatory capital requirements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table includes aggregated information about the Company's contractual obligations that impact our liquidity and capital needs. The table includes information about payments due under specified contractual obligations, aggregated by type of contractual obligation as of December 31, 2020:
1.Our Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2020 includes $857.8 million of debt, netted with unamortized debt issuance costs and debt discount of $32.1 million. The above table reflects the principal and interest that will be paid through the maturity of the debt using the rates in effect on December 31, 2020, and assuming no capitalization of in-kind interest and no prepayments of principal.
2.Noncancellable leases include operating leases for buildings, vehicles and equipment and other leases. For more detail see Note 19 - Leases of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
3.The Company has a remaining $55.0 million of payments related to the Amended DPA matter that must be paid by May 9, 2021. For more detail see Note 15 - Commitments and Contingencies of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
4.Signing bonuses are payments to certain agents and financial institution customers as an incentive to enter into long-term contracts. Signing bonuses include $1.0 million of transaction volume-related obligations for which it is not possible to reasonably estimate the timing of payments.
5.Marketing represents contractual marketing obligations with certain agents, billers and corporate sponsorships.
6.Timing of conclusion of the unrecognized tax benefits cannot be determined with certainty. As of December 31, 2020, it is not possible to reasonably estimate the expected change to the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits.
We have other commitments as described further below that are not included in this table as the timing and/or amount of payments are difficult to estimate.
We have a Pension Plan that is frozen to both future benefit accruals and new participants. It is our policy to fund at least the minimum required contribution each year plus additional discretionary amounts as available and necessary to minimize expenses of the plan. We made contributions of $4.0 million to the Pension Plan during 2020. Although the Company has no minimum contribution requirement for the Pension Plan in 2021, we expect to contribute $4.0 million to the Pension Plan in 2021. In 2019, the Company paid $1.2 million to a life insurance company for their assumption, without recourse, of a significant portion of its defined benefit Pension liability. The result of the sale was a reduction of Pension obligations by $74.3 million and the recognition of a non-cash charge of $31.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The transfer of the Pension obligations was completed exclusively with the use of Pension assets and did not impact the Company's cash balance or liquidity position.
The Company has certain unfunded defined benefit plans: supplemental executive retirement plans ("SERPs"), which are unfunded non-qualified defined benefit pension plans providing postretirement income to their participants, and a postretirement plan ("Postretirement Benefits") that provides medical and life insurance for its participants. These plans require payments over extended periods of time. The Company will continue to make contributions to the SERPs and the Postretirement Benefits to the extent benefits are paid. Aggregate benefits paid for the unfunded plans are expected to be $5.7 million in 2021.
As discussed in Note 15 - Commitments and Contingencies of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the IRS completed its examination of the Company's consolidated income tax returns through 2013 and issued Notices of Deficiency for 2005-2007 and 2009 and an Examination Report for 2008. The Notices of Deficiency and Examination Report disallow, among other items, approximately $900.0 million of ordinary deductions on securities losses in the 2007, 2008 and 2009 tax returns. In May 2012 and December 2012, the Company filed petitions in the U.S. Tax Court challenging the 2005-2007 and 2009 Notices of Deficiency, respectively. In 2013, the Company reached a partial settlement with the IRS allowing ordinary loss treatment on $186.9 million of deductions in dispute. In January 2015, the U.S. Tax Court granted the IRS's motion for summary judgment upholding the remaining adjustments in the Notices of Deficiency. During 2015, the Company made payments to the IRS of $61.0 million for federal tax payments and associated interest related to the matter. The Company believes that it has substantive tax law arguments in favor of its position. The Company filed a notice of appeal with the U.S. Tax Court on July 27, 2015 for an appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. Oral arguments were held before the Fifth Circuit on June 7, 2016, and on November 15, 2016, the Fifth Circuit vacated the Tax Court's decision and remanded the case to the Tax Court for further proceedings. The Company filed a motion for summary judgment in the Tax Court on May 31, 2017. On August 23, 2017, the IRS filed a motion for summary judgment and its response to the Company's motions for summary judgment. The Tax Court directed the parties to agree to a joint stipulation of facts, which the parties have filed with the court. Each party has filed a revised memorandum in support of its motion for summary judgment in the Tax Court. The Tax Court held oral arguments on this matter on September 9, 2019 and the Tax Court issued an opinion on December 3, 2019 denying the Company's motion for summary judgment and granting summary judgment to the IRS. If MoneyGram is successful in the litigation, it would be entitled to ordinary loss treatment on its federal tax returns for the amounts in question, which would entitle it to a refund of amounts already paid to the IRS related to this matter. Neither the Tax Court opinion nor the ultimate outcome of this action will require any additional tax payments to be made to the Internal Revenue Service by MoneyGram as the federal tax amounts at issue were paid in 2015. However, pending the outcome of the appeal, the Company may be required
to file amended state returns and make additional cash payments of up to $21.2 million. Amounts related to this matter have been fully accrued in previous periods.
Analysis of Cash Flows
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
In 2020, cash provided by operating activities increased primarily due to the realization of cost efficiencies from our 2019 Organizational Realignment, the benefit from Ripple market development fees and disciplined expense management in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
In 2020, cash used in investing activities decreased primarily in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
In 2020, net cash used in financing activities remained flat.
Stockholders' Deficit
Stockholders' Deficit - Under the terms of our outstanding credit facilities, we are restricted in our ability to pay dividends on, and repurchase shares of, our common stock. No dividends were paid on our common stock in 2020 and the Company did not repurchase any common stock, and we do not anticipate declaring any dividends on our common stock or repurchasing shares of common stock during 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts and related disclosures in the Consolidated Financial Statements. Actual results could differ from those estimates. On a regular basis, management reviews its accounting policies, assumptions and estimates to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical accounting policies are those policies that management believes are very important to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations, and that require management to make estimates that are difficult, subjective or complex. Based on these criteria, management has identified and discussed with the Audit Committee the following critical accounting policies and estimates, including the methodology and disclosures related to those estimates.
Goodwill - We have two reporting units: Global Funds Transfer and Financial Paper Products. Our Global Funds Transfer reporting unit is the only reporting unit that carries goodwill. We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually as of October 1, or more frequently upon occurrence of certain events. When testing goodwill for impairment, we may elect to perform either a qualitative test or a quantitative test to determine if it is more likely than not that the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value. During a qualitative analysis, we consider the impact of any changes to the following factors: macroeconomic, industry and market factors, cost factors and changes in overall financial performance, as well as any other relevant events and uncertainties impacting a reporting unit. If our qualitative assessment does not conclude that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is greater than the carrying value, we perform a quantitative analysis. In a quantitative test, the fair value of a reporting unit is determined based on a discounted cash flow analysis and further analyzed using other methods of valuation. A discounted cash flow analysis requires us to make various assumptions, including assumptions about future cash flows, growth rates and discount rates. The assumptions about future cash flows and growth rates are based on our long-term projections by reporting unit. In addition, an assumed terminal value is used to project future cash flows beyond base years. Assumptions used in our impairment testing are consistent with our internal forecasts and operating plans. Our discount rate is based on our debt and equity balances, adjusted for current market conditions and investor expectations of return on our equity. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, there is no impairment. If
not, we compare the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount. To the extent the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, a write-down of the reporting unit's goodwill would be necessary.
We did not recognize a goodwill impairment loss for 2020, 2019 or 2018. The carrying value of goodwill assigned to the Global Funds Transfer reporting unit at December 31, 2020 was $442.2 million. The annual impairment test indicated a fair value for the Global Funds Transfer reporting unit that was substantially in excess of the reporting unit's carrying value. In order to evaluate the sensitivity of the fair value calculations, we applied a hypothetical 10% decrease to the fair value of the Global Funds Transfer reporting unit. Had the estimated fair value been hypothetically lower by 10% as of December 31, 2020, the fair value of goodwill would still be substantially in excess of the reporting unit's carrying value.
Pension - Through the Company's Pension, we provide defined benefit Pension plan coverage to certain of our employees and certain employees of Viad Corporation, our former parent. Our Pension obligations under these plans are measured as of December 31, the measurement date. Pension benefit obligations and the related expense are based upon actuarial projections using assumptions regarding mortality, discount rates, expected long-term return on assets and other factors.
Our assumptions reflect our historical experience and management's best judgment regarding future expectations. Certain of the assumptions, particularly the discount rate and expected return on plan assets, require significant judgment and could have a material impact on the measurement of our Pension obligation.
In order to estimate the interest cost components of net periodic benefit expense for its Pension and Postretirement Benefits, the Company utilizes a full yield curve approach by applying the specific spot rates along the yield curve used in the determination of the benefit obligation to their underlying projected cash flows.
At each measurement date, the discount rate used to measure total benefit obligation for the Pension and Postretirement Benefits is based on the then current interest rate yield curves for long-term corporate debt securities with maturities rated AA comparable to our obligations.
Our Pension Plan assets are primarily invested in commingled trust funds. Our investments are periodically realigned in accordance with the investment guidelines. The expected return on Pension Plan assets is based on our historical market experience, asset allocations and expectations for long-term rates of return. We also consider peer data and historical returns to assess the reasonableness and appropriateness of our assumption. Our Pension Plan asset allocations are reviewed periodically and are based upon plan funded ratio, an evaluation of market conditions, tolerance for risk and cash requirements for benefit payments.
Lower discount rates increase the Pension and Postretirement Benefits obligation and subsequent year Pension expense, while higher discount rates decrease the Pension and Postretirement Benefits obligation and subsequent year Pension expense. Decreasing or increasing the discount rate by 50 basis points would have had an immaterial impact on the 2020 Pension and Postretirement Benefits net periodic benefit expense. Decreasing the expected rate of return by 50 basis points would have increased the 2020 Pension Plan net periodic benefit expense by $0.2 million and increasing the expected rate of return by 50 basis points would have decreased the 2020 Pension Plan net periodic benefit expense by $0.2 million.
Income Taxes, Tax Contingencies - We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and various foreign jurisdictions. In determining taxable income, income or loss before income taxes is adjusted for differences between local tax laws and U.S. GAAP.
We file tax returns in all U.S. states and various countries. Generally, our tax filings are subject to audit by tax authorities for three to five years following submission of a return. With a few exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to foreign or U.S. state and local income tax examinations for years prior to 2016. The U.S. federal income tax filings are subject to audit for fiscal years 2017 through 2019.
The benefits of tax positions are recorded in the income statement if we determine it is more likely than not, based on the technical merits of the position, that the tax position will be sustained upon examination, including any related appeals or litigation. The one exception to the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is the reliance on past administrative practices and precedents, where a taxing authority with full knowledge of all relevant facts will accept a position as filed. In these limited situations, the Company will recognize the associated tax benefit.
Changes in tax laws, regulations, agreements and treaties, non-U.S. dollar exchange restrictions or our level of operations or profitability in each taxing jurisdiction could have an impact on the amount of income taxes that we provide during any given year. The determination of taxable income in any jurisdiction requires the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations and the use of estimates and assumptions regarding significant future events, such as the amount, timing and character of deductions and the sources and character of income and tax credits.
These assumptions and probabilities are periodically reviewed and revised based upon new information.
Changes in our current estimates due to unanticipated events, or other factors, could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Actual tax amounts may be materially different from amounts accrued based upon the results of audits due to different interpretations by the tax authorities than those of the Company. While we believe that our reserves are adequate to cover reasonably expected tax risks, an unfavorable tax settlement generally requires the use of cash and an increase in the amount of income tax expense that we recognize. A favorable tax settlement generally requires a decrease in the amount of income taxes that we recognize.
Income Taxes, Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets - Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded based on the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences that exist between the financial statement carrying value of assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis, and operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards on a taxing jurisdiction basis. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted statutory tax rates that will apply in the years in which we expect the temporary differences to be recovered or paid.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets must be reduced through valuation allowances if it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will not be realized. In the period in which a valuation allowance is recorded, we would record tax expense, whereas a tax benefit would be recorded in the period a valuation allowance is released.
In assessing the need for valuation allowances, we consider both positive and negative evidence related to the likelihood that the deferred tax assets will be realized. Our assessment of whether a valuation allowance is required or should be adjusted requires judgment and is completed on a taxing jurisdiction basis. We consider, among other matters: the nature, frequency and severity of any cumulative financial reporting losses; the ability to carry back losses to prior years; future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences; tax planning strategies and projections of future taxable income. We also consider our best estimate of the outcome of any on-going examinations based on the technical merits of the position, historical procedures and case law, among other items.
As of December 31, 2020, we have recorded valuation allowances of $81.2 million against deferred tax assets of $137.0 million. The valuation allowances primarily relate to basis differences in revalued investments, capital loss carryover, U.S. tax credit carryovers, and certain state and foreign tax loss carryovers. While we believe that the basis for estimating our valuation allowances is appropriate, changes in our current estimates due to unanticipated events, or other factors, could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
The TCJA includes global intangible low-taxed income ("GILTI") provisions, which impose a U.S. income inclusion on foreign income in excess of a deemed return on tangible assets of foreign corporations. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 235-10-50, the Company elected in the fourth quarter of 2018 to treat GILTI inclusions as a current period expense when incurred under ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding recent accounting pronouncements.
CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This 2020 Form 10-K and the documents incorporated by reference herein may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the "Reform Act"), including statements with respect to, among other things, the financial condition, results of operations, plans, objectives, future performance and business of MoneyGram and its subsidiaries. Statements preceded by, followed by or that include words such as "believes," "estimates," "expects," "projects," "plans," "anticipates," "intends," "continues," "will," "should," "could," "may," "might," "would," "goals," “predicts,” “potential,” “target,” “forecast,” “outlook,” “currently,” and other similar expressions are intended to identify some of the forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Reform Act and are included, along with this statement, for purposes of complying with the safe harbor provisions of the Reform Act. These forward-looking statements are based on management's current expectations, beliefs and assumptions as of the date of this report, are not historical facts or guarantees of future performance, and are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict and many of which are outside of our control due to a number of factors. These factors include, but are not limited to:
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or future pandemics on our business, including the potential work stoppages, lockdowns, shelter-in-place or restricted movement guidelines, service delays and lower consumer and commercial activity;
•our ability to compete effectively;
•our ability to maintain key agent or biller relationships, or a reduction in business or transaction volume from these relationships, including with our largest agent, Walmart, through its introduction of additional competing white-label money transfer products or otherwise;
•a security or privacy breach in systems, networks or databases on which we rely;
•current and proposed regulations addressing consumer privacy and data use and security;
•our ability to manage fraud risks from consumers or agents;
•the ability of us and our agents to comply with U.S. and international laws and regulations;
•litigation and regulatory proceedings involving us or our agents and other commercial relationships, which could result in material settlements, fines or penalties, revocation of required licenses or registrations, termination of contracts, other administrative actions or lawsuits and negative publicity;
•uncertainties relating to compliance with the Amended DPA entered into with the Government and the effect of the Amended DPA on our reputation and business and our ability to make payments required under the Amended DPA;
•disruptions to our computer systems and data centers and our ability to effectively operate and adapt our technology;
•the ability of us and our agents to maintain adequate banking relationships;
•our ability to successfully develop and timely introduce new and enhanced products and services and our investments in new products, services or infrastructure changes;
•our high degree of leverage and substantial debt service obligations, significant debt covenant requirements and our ability to comply with such requirements;
•our below investment-grade credit rating;
•and our ability to maintain sufficient capital;
•weakness in economic conditions, in both the U.S. and global markets;
•the financial health of certain European countries or the secession of a country from the European Union;
•a significant change, material slow down or complete disruption of international migration patterns;
•our ability to manage risks associated with our international sales and operations, including exchange rates among currencies;
•our offering of money transfer services through agents in regions that are politically volatile or, in a limited number of cases, that may be subject to certain OFAC restrictions;
•major bank failure or sustained financial market illiquidity, or illiquidity at our clearing, cash management and custodial financial institutions;
•changes in tax laws or unfavorable outcomes of tax positions we take, or a failure by us to establish adequate reserves for tax events;
•our ability to manage credit risks from our agents and official check financial institution customers;
•our ability to adequately protect our brand and intellectual property rights and to avoid infringing on the rights of others;
•our ability to manage risks related to the operation of retail locations and the acquisition or start-up of businesses;
•any restructuring actions and cost reduction initiatives that we undertake may not deliver the expected results and these actions may adversely affect our business;
•our capital structure; and
•the risks and uncertainties described in the Risk Factors and Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations sections of our 2020 Form 10-K, as well as any additional risk factors that may be described in our other filings with the SEC from time to time.