Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
Following a review of its Bitcoin mining operations in early 2019, we determined to consolidate our activities in a Company-owned and managed facility. Central to this strategy was the purchase of land in LaFayette, GA and the entry into a favorable contract for electricity in the second quarter of 2019. Located adjacent to a utility substation, the several acre property has access to over 20 megawatts (MW) of low-cost power.
The Company owned approximately 669 and 649 Antminer S17 Pro Bitcoin miners located in LaFayette, GA as of December 31, 2020 and April 15, 2021, respectively. All miners were purchased from Bitmaintech Pte. Ltd., a Singapore limited company (“Bitmain”), and are collectively rated at approximately 30 Ph/s in computing power. Bitmain has acknowledged manufacturing defects, combined with inadequate repair facilities, rendering approximately one half of our miners in need of repair or replacement. The Company’s miners are housed in three modified shipping containers. The Company’s current electrical load is estimated at under 1.0 MW. The entire facility, including the land, two 2500 KVA 3-phase transformers, the mining containers, and miners, are owned by MGT. As the Company is presently using only a portion of the built-out available electrical load, it is exploring ways to grow and maintain its current operations including but not limited to further equipment sales, leasing space to other Bitcoin miners, and raising capital to acquire newest generation miners.
Prior to establishing our Company-owned and managed facility, we conducted our Bitcoin mining operations through third-party hosting arrangements. We also entered into management agreements with third party investors whereby the investors purchased the mining hardware, and we received both a fee to manage the mining operations plus one-half of the net operating profit. In March 2019, we entered into a settlement agreement to terminate our hosting agreement in Washington and conveyed ownership of its onsite mining assets for full satisfaction of $77 in outstanding hosting service fees. In August and September 2019, we terminated all our management agreements with third party investors, and in December 2019, we terminated our final remaining hosting arrangements in Colorado and Ohio.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The notes to the consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report describe our significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We continually evaluate our critical accounting policies and estimates.
We believe the critical accounting policies listed below reflect significant judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition
Our primary revenue stream is related to the mining of digital currencies. We derive our revenue by solving “blocks” to be added to the blockchain and providing transaction verification services within the digital currency network of Bitcoin, commonly termed “cryptocurrency mining.” In consideration for these services, we receive digital currency (“Coins”). The Coins are recorded as revenue, using the average spot price of Bitcoin on the date of receipt. The Coins are recorded on the balance sheet as an intangible digital asset valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Net realizable value adjustments, to adjust the value of Coins to market value, is included in cost of revenue on our consolidated statement of operations. Further, any gain or loss on the sale of Coins would be recorded to costs of revenue. Costs of revenue include hosting fees, equipment and infrastructure depreciation, net realizable value adjustments, and electricity costs.
We also recognized revenue from our management agreements through their termination in August and September 2019. We received a fee from each management agreement based on the amount of Bitcoin mined, half of profits and were reimbursed for any electricity costs incurred to run the Bitcoin mining machines they managed in their facilities. Additionally, we had machines located in hosted facilities in Ohio and Colorado. We received an allocation of profits from these facilities. We terminated both hosting arrangements in December 2019.
We also recognize a royalty participation upon the sale of modified shipping containers manufactured by Bit5ive LLC of Miami, Florida under the terms of a collaboration agreement entered in August 2018.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is calculated using the straight-line method on the various asset classes over their estimated useful lives, which range from one to ten years when placed in service. The cost of repairs and maintenance is expensed as incurred; major replacements and improvements are capitalized. When assets are retired or disposed of, the cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts, and any resulting gains or losses are included in income in the year of disposition. Deposits on property and equipment are initially classified as Other Assets and upon delivery, installation and full payment, the assets are classified as property and equipment on the consolidated balance sheet.
Stock-based compensation
We recognize compensation expense for all equity-based payments in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718 “Compensation - Stock Compensation”. Under fair value recognition provisions, the Company recognizes equity-based compensation net of an estimated forfeiture rate and recognizes compensation cost only for those shares expected to vest over the requisite service period of the award.
Restricted stock awards are granted at the discretion of the compensation committee of the board of directors of the Company (the “Board”). These awards are restricted as to the transfer of ownership and generally vest over the requisite service periods, typically over a 12 to 24 month period (vesting on a straight-line basis). The fair value of a stock award is equal to the fair market value of a share of the Company’s Common Stock on the grant date.
The fair value of an option award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. The Black-Scholes option valuation model requires the development of assumptions that are inputs into the model. These assumptions are the expected stock volatility, the risk-free interest rate, the expected life of the option, the dividend yield on the underlying stock and the expected forfeiture rate. Expected volatility is calculated based on the historical volatility of the Company’s common stock over the expected term of the option. Risk-free interest rates are calculated based on continuously compounded risk-free rates for the appropriate term.
Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards requires the input of the subjective assumptions described above. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. We are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest.
We account for share-based payments granted to non-employees in accordance with ASC 505-50, “Equity Based Payments to Non-Employees”. We determine the fair value of the stock-based payment as either the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, whichever is more readily determinable. If the fair value of the equity instruments issued is used, it is measured using the stock price and other measurement assumptions as of the earlier of either (1) the date at which a commitment for performance by the counterparty to earn the equity instruments is reached, or (2) the date at which the counterparty’s performance is complete.
Equity-linked instruments
The Company accounts for equity-linked instruments with certain anti-dilution provisions in accordance with ASC 815 and ASC 260. Under this guidance, the Company excludes instruments with certain down round features when determining whether a financial instrument (or embedded conversion feature) is considered indexed to the Company’s own stock. As a result, financial instruments (or embedded conversion features) with down round features are not required to be classified as derivative liabilities. The Company recognizes the value of a down round feature only when it is triggered and the exercise or conversion price has been adjusted downward. For equity-classified freestanding financial instruments, such as warrants, the Company treats the value of the effect of the down round, when triggered, as a deemed dividend and a reduction of income available to common stockholders in computing basic earnings per share. For convertible instruments with embedded conversion features containing down round provisions, the Company recognizes the value of the down round as a beneficial conversion discount to be amortized to earnings.
Any incentive-based compensation received by the Optionee from the Company hereunder or otherwise shall be subject to recovery by the Company in the circumstances and manner provided in any Incentive-based Compensation Recovery that may be adopted or implemented by the Company and in effect from time to time on or after the date hereof, and Optionee shall effectuate any such recovery at such time and in such manner as the Company may specify.
Derivative Instruments
Derivative financial instruments are recorded in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets at fair value in accordance with ASC 815. When the Company enters into a financial instrument such as a debt or equity agreement (the “host contract”), the Company assesses whether the economic characteristics of any embedded features are clearly and closely related to the primary economic characteristics of the remainder of the host contract. When it is determined that (i) an embedded feature possesses economic characteristics that are not clearly and closely related to the primary economic characteristics of the host contract, and (ii) a separate, stand-alone instrument with the same terms would meet the definition of a financial derivative instrument, then the embedded feature is bifurcated from the host contract and accounted for as a derivative instrument. The estimated fair value of the derivative feature is recorded in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets separately from the carrying value of the host contract. Subsequent changes in the estimated fair value of derivatives are recorded as a gain or loss in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
Impairment
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever facts or circumstances either internally or externally may suggest that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable, Should there be an indication of impairment, we test for recoverability by comparing the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset to the carrying amount of the asset or asset group. Any excess of the carrying value of the asset or asset group over its estimated fair value is recognized as an impairment loss.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Note 3 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this report includes Recent Accounting Pronouncements.
Results of operations
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $990, or 220%, to $1,440 as compared to $450 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our revenue is primarily derived from cryptocurrency mining which totaled $1,434 during 2020. The increase in revenues is a result of increased Bitcoin mining production and Bitcoin prices.
The Company is also entitled to a royalty from the sale of POD5 mining containers manufactured and sold by Bit5ive, LLC. During 2020 and 2019, the Company recognized $4 and $44, respectively, in royalties under this agreement due to a lower number of POD5 sales.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $3,640, or 46%, to $4,311 as compared to $7,951 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in operating expenses was comprised of lower general and administrative expenses of $4,857, offset by an increase in cost of revenue of $1,218.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $1,218, or 239%, to $1,728 as compared to $510 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary reasons for this increase included higher electricity usage of $560 from increased bitcoin mining, and higher depreciation expense of $932 resulting from recognition of a full year of service our bitcoin mining machines and related assets; these assets were placed in service in the fourth quarter of 2019, and were depreciated for just one quarter in 2019. These increases were offset by approximately $276 relating to other costs of revenue.
General and Administrative Expenses
The decrease in general and administrative expenses of $4,857 or 65% to $2,584 as compared to $7,441 for the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily caused by a decrease in stock-based compensation of $2,078 based on fewer shares issued or vested and a lower stock price in 2020 compared to 2019, a decrease in payroll and related expenses of $436, a decrease of consulting fees in the amount of $643, and a decrease in legal and professional fees of $208. These decreases were partly offset by an increase related to the Company’s mining facility of $104.
Other Income and Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, non-operating expense consisted of accretion of debt discount of $882, a loss on sale of property and equipment of $352, and interest expense of $347, partially offset by the change in fair value of the liability associated with the termination of management agreements of $26, the change in fair value of derivative liability of $309, funding from PPP Loan of $111, and other income of $119.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, non-operating expense consisted of accretion of debt discount of $5,605, partially offset by a gain on extinguishment of debt of $3,540, interest income of $10, a gain on sale of property and equipment of $599, and a change in the fair value of the liability associated with the termination of the management agreements of $176.
Liquidity and capital resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have historically financed our business through the sale of debt and equity interests. We have incurred significant operating losses since inception and continue to generate losses from operations and as of December 31, 2020 have an accumulated deficit of $418,389. At December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents were $236, and our working capital deficit was $1,527. As of December 31, 2020, we had one note payable outstanding with a principal amount of $230.
In January 2020, management completed the initial phase of its plan to consolidate its activities in Company-owned and managed facilities, executing on its expansion model to secure low cost power and grow its cryptocurrency assets. In connection with this plan, the Company terminated its management agreements and its third-party hosting arrangements in 2019. The Company will need to raise additional funding to grow its operations and to pay current maturities of debt. There can be no assurance however that the Company will be able to raise additional capital when needed, or at terms deemed acceptable, if at all. Such factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to sustain operations for at least one year from the issuance of these consolidated financial statements. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability and classification of asset amounts or the classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
The price of Bitcoin is volatile, and fluctuations are expected. Declines in the price of Bitcoin have had a negative impact in our operating results and liquidity and could harm the price of our Common Stock. Movements may be influenced by various factors, including, but not limited to, government regulation, security breaches experienced by service providers, as well as political and economic uncertainties around the world. Since we record revenue based on the price of earned Bitcoin and we may retain such Bitcoin as an asset or as payment for future expenses, the relative value of such revenues may fluctuate, as will the value of any Bitcoin we retain. The high and low exchange rate per Bitcoin for the year ending December 31, 2020, as reported by Blockchain.info, were approximately $5 and $29 respectively.
The supply of Bitcoin is finite. Once 21 million Bitcoin are generated, the network will stop producing more. Currently, there are approximately 19 million Bitcoin in circulation, or 90% of the total supply of Bitcoin. Within the Bitcoin protocol is an event referred to as Halving where the Bitcoin reward provided upon mining a block is reduced by 50%. Halvings are scheduled to occur once every 210,000 blocks, or roughly every four years, until the maximum supply of 21 million Bitcoin is reached. The most recent Halving occurred in May 2020, with a revised reward payout of 6.25 Bitcoin per block.
Given a stable hash rate, a Halving reduces the number of new Bitcoin being generated by the network. While the effect is to limit the supply of new coins, it has no impact on the quantity of total Bitcoin outstanding. As a result, the price of Bitcoin could rise or fall based on overall investor and consumer demand. Should the price of Bitcoin remain unchanged after the next Halving, the Company’s revenue would be reduced by 50%, with a much larger negative impact to profit.
The COVID-19 pandemic represents a fluid situation that presents a wide range of potential impacts of varying durations for different global geographies, including locations where we have offices, employees, customers, vendors and other suppliers and business partners. Like most US-based businesses, the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to mitigate the same began to have impacts on our business in March 2020. By that time, much of our first fiscal quarter was completed. In light of broader macro-economic risks and already known impacts on certain industries, we have taken, and continue to take targeted steps to lower our operating expenses because of the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue to monitor the impacts of COVID-19 on our operations closely and this situation could change based on a significant number of factors that are not entirely within our control and are discussed in this and other sections of this annual report on Form 10-K. To date, travel restrictions and border closures have not materially impacted our ability to operate. However, if such restrictions become more severe, they could negatively impact those activities in a way that would harm our business over the long term. Travel restrictions impacting people can restrain our ability to operate, but at present we do not expect these restrictions on personal travel to be material to our business operations or financial results. Like most companies, we have taken a range of actions with respect to how we operate to assure we comply with government restrictions and guidelines as well as best practices to protect the health and well-being of our employees. We have also undertaken measures to reduce our administrative and advisory costs required as a publicly reporting company. Actions taken to date include salary reductions for senior management and termination of certain consulting agreements. However, the impacts of COVID-19 and efforts to mitigate the same have remained unpredictable and it remains possible that challenges may arise in the future.
Our primary source of operating funds has been through debt and equity financing.
Equity Purchase Agreements
In June 2019, we entered into an equity purchase agreement pursuant to which we could issue and sell to an investor from time to time up to 76,558,643 shares of our common stock registered with the SEC under a Form S-1. Through October 2019, 52,000,000 shares were issued and sold under this registration statement for net proceeds of $1,654.
Sale of Preferred Stock
On April 12, 2019, our Board of Directors approved the authorization of 200 shares of Series C Convertible Preferred Stock with a par value of $0.001 and a stated value of $10,000 per share (“Preferred Shares”). The holders of the Preferred Shares are not entitled to voting rights or to receive dividends. At any time prior to the one-year anniversary from the issuance date, the Company may redeem the Preferred Shares at 1.4 times the Stated Value, following which we may redeem the Preferred Shares at 1.2 times the Stated Value.
Each Preferred Share is convertible into shares of our common stock in an amount equal to the greater of: (a) 200,000 shares of common stock or (b) the amount derived by dividing the Stated Value by the product of 0.7 times the market price of our common stock, defined as the lowest trading price of our common stock during the ten day period preceding the conversion date. The holder may not convert any Preferred Shares if the total amount of shares, together with holdings of its affiliates, following a conversion shall exceed 9.99% of our common stock. The common shares issued upon conversion have been registered under our registration statement on Form S-3. On April 12, 2019 and July 15, 2019, we sold 190 Preferred Shares for $1,890 and 10 Preferred Shares for $100, respectively.
Sale of Common Stock
On April 12, 2019, we entered into a purchase agreement with an accredited investor whereby we sold 17,500,000 shares of our common stock for $525 pursuant to our registration statement on Form S-3. The holder of these shares is also the holder of an unsecured promissory note in the amount of $3,600 (the “June 2018 Note”) and an affiliate of the acquirer of 160 shares of the Preferred Shares of which 115 are issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
On January 28, 2021 and February 18, 2021, we issued 2,597,403 and 27,272,727 shares of the Company’s common stock, respectively, to Chicago Venture Partners L.P., a Utah limited partnership, and Uptown Capital LLC, a Utah limited liability company, in connection with the conversion of 10 and 105 shares of the Company’s Series C Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series C Preferred”). Following these conversions, the Company has no Series C Preferred issued or outstanding.
Debt Financing
December 2020 Note
On December 8, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement pursuant to which we issued a convertible promissory note in the principal amount of $230 which is convertible, at the option of the holder, into shares of common stock at a conversion price equal to 70% of the lowest price for a share of common stock during the ten trading days immediately preceding the applicable conversion. The Company received consideration of $200 for the convertible promissory note. The note bears interest at a rate of 8% per annum and matures in twelve months.
On March 5, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) with Bucktown Capital, LLC (the “Investor”), pursuant to which the Company issued a convertible promissory note in the original principal amount of $13,210 (the “2021 Note”). The 2021 Note is convertible, at the option of the Investor, into shares of common stock of the Company at a conversion price equal to 70% of the lowest price for a share of common stock during the ten trading days immediately preceding the applicable conversion (the “Conversion Price”); provided, however, in no event shall the Conversion Price be less than $0.04 per share. The 2021 Note bears interest at a rate of 8% per annum and will mature in twelve months.
The 2021 Note will be funded in tranches, with the initial tranche of $1,210 funded by the Investor on March 5, 2021 for consideration of $1,000. Six subsequent tranches (five tranches, each for $1,200 and one tranche for $6,000) will be funded upon the notice of effectiveness of a Registration Statement on Form S-1 covering the common stock issuable in connection with the 2021 Note. Further, the final tranche requires the mutual agreement of the Company and Investor. Until such time as Investor has funded the subsequent tranches, the Company will hold a series of Investor Notes that offset any unfunded portion of the 2021 Note.
The PPP Loan
On April 16, 2020, we entered into a promissory note with Aquesta Bank for $111 in connection with the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) offered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “PPP Loan”). The PPP Loan bears interest at 1% per annum, with monthly installments of $6 commencing on November 1, 2021 for 18 months through its maturity on April 1, 2023. The principal amount of the PPP Loan will be forgiven if the loan proceeds are used to pay for payroll costs, rent and utilities costs over the 24-week period after the PPP Loan is made. Not more than 40% of the forgiven amount may be used for non-payroll costs. The amount of the loan forgiveness may be reduced if the Company reduces its full-time head count. On April 1, 2021, the Company received notice of forgiveness in the amount of $108 in relation to the PPP Loan. The Company used all proceeds from the PPP Loan to maintain payroll and other allowable expenses. As a result, management believes that the Company has met the PPP eligibility criteria for forgiveness for the remaining payable of $3 to the SBA and has concluded that the loan represents, in substance, a government grant that is expected to be forgiven in its entirety.
Property & Equipment Acquisitions and Commitments
In connection with consolidating our activities in a Company-owned and managed facility in LaFayette, Georgia, we acquired the following assets during 2019 and 2020:
● 6 acres of land in Lafayette, Georgia for $55
● 1,500 Bitcoin miners valued at $2,313
● Infrastructure costs totaling $905, including transformers and related equipment, land preparation, fencing, electrical contracting, permits, design and architectural fees
● 5 modified Bitcoin mining containers for $761
Phase I of the LaFayette site is structurally complete. The entire facility, including the land, electrical transformers, the mining containers and the miners, are owned by MGT. As we are presently using only a small percentage of the available electrical load, we are exploring ways to grow our current operations.
Cash Flows
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $650 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $3,960 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The amount in 2020 primarily consisted of a net loss of $3,887 offset by non-cash charges of $2,536 (including: stock-based compensation of $222, an impairment charge to the Company’s intangible cryptocurrency mining assets of $49, depreciation expense of $1,102, amortization of debt discount of $882, non-cash interest expense of $355 and loss on sale of property and equipment of $352), and reduced by other non-cash items, including funding from the PPP Loan recognized as income in the amount of $111, the change in the fair value of the liability associated with the termination of the management agreements of $26, the change in the fair value of the derivative liability of $309, and a change in working capital excluding cash of $701.
Investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $359 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to net cash used in investing activities of $3,314 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The amount in 2020 primarily consisted of purchases of property and equipment of $376, offset by proceeds from the sale of property and equipment of $686.
Financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities totaled $311 which includes $200 in net proceeds from the issuance of notes payable and $111 of proceeds from the PPP Loan.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.