Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated and combined financial statements and the related notes thereto.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview
Magnolia Oil & Gas Corporation (the “Company” or “Magnolia”) is an independent oil and natural gas company engaged in the acquisition, development, exploration, and production of oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquid (“NGL”) reserves that operates in one reportable segment located in the United States. The Company's oil and natural gas properties are located primarily in Karnes County and the Giddings area in South Texas, where the Company primarily targets the Eagle Ford Shale and the Austin Chalk formations.
Magnolia’s objective is to generate stock market value over the long term through consistent organic production growth, high full cycle operating margins, an efficient capital program with short economic paybacks, significant free cash flow after capital expenditures, and effective reinvestment of free cash flow. Magnolia’s business model prioritizes free cash flow, financial stability, and prudent capital allocation, and is designed to withstand challenging environments such as the one the Company is currently experiencing.
COVID-19 Pandemic and Market Conditions Update
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) outbreak a pandemic. Governments have tried to slow the spread of the virus by imposing social distancing guidelines, travel restrictions, and stay-at-home orders, which have caused a significant decrease in activity in the global economy and the demand for oil and natural gas. The implications of the decrease in global demand for oil, which, if coupled with the general oversupply, may have further negative effects on the Company’s business, such as production curtailment and reductions to its operating plans as a result of decreased prices and reduced storage capacity, similar to the first half of 2020. Demand and pricing may again decline if there is a resurgence of the outbreak across the U.S. and other locations across the world and the related social distancing guidelines, travel restrictions, and stay-at-home orders. The extent of the additional impact on the industry and Magnolia’s business cannot be reasonably predicted at this time.
Magnolia’s business, like many oil and natural gas producers, has been, and is expected to continue to be, negatively affected by the crisis described above, which is ongoing and evolving. Magnolia’s revenues have significantly declined as a result of the sharp decline in commodity prices. The prices ultimately realized for oil, natural gas, and NGLs are based on a number of variables, including prevailing index prices attributable to the Company’s production and certain differentials to those index prices. Magnolia is unable to reasonably predict when, or to what extent, commodity prices and the overall markets and global economy will stabilize, and the pace of any subsequent recovery for the oil and gas industry. Further, the ultimate impact that these events will have on Magnolia’s business, liquidity, financial condition, and results of operations is highly uncertain and dependent on numerous evolving factors that cannot be predicted, including the duration of the pandemic.
Magnolia has taken steps and continues to actively work to mitigate the evolving challenges and growing impact of both the COVID-19 pandemic and the industry downturn on its operations, financial condition, and people. Magnolia’s business model prioritizes free cash flow, financial stability, and prudent capital allocation, and is designed to withstand challenging environments. The Company’s ongoing plan is to spend within cash flow on drilling and completing wells while maintaining low leverage. In the fourth quarter of 2020, Magnolia operated one rig in the Giddings area. The Company is well positioned to reduce or increase operations given the significant flexibility within its capital program, as its operated drilling rig is on a short-term contract and the Company has no long-term service obligations. Moreover, Magnolia does not have any contractual drilling obligations and nearly all of the Company’s acreage is held by production. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and industry downturn, Magnolia has initiated a corporate-wide cost reduction program to help decrease costs throughout every aspect of the Company. The Company has made reductions in general and administrative expense by reducing corporate salaries, renegotiating the fee under the Services Agreement, and working with many of its other vendors and suppliers to reduce the cost of their services. Magnolia believes these measures, taken together with its significant liquidity and lack of near term debt maturities, will provide additional flexibility in navigating the current volatile environment; however, given the tremendous uncertainty and turmoil, there is no certainty that the measures Magnolia takes will be sufficient.
As a producer of oil and natural gas, Magnolia is recognized as an essential business and has continued to operate while taking steps to protect the health and safety of its workers. Magnolia and its contractors have implemented protocols to reduce the risk of an outbreak within its operations, and these protocols have not reduced production or efficiency in a significant manner. At the beginning of the pandemic, the Company implemented remote working procedures for a significant portion of its workforce for health and safety reasons and/or to comply with applicable national, state, and/or local government requirements. As a result, the Company relied on such persons having sufficient access to its information technology systems, including through telecommunication hardware, software, and networks. Magnolia's board of directors continues to monitor the unfolding COVID-19 pandemic very closely, including the effect on internal controls over financial reporting and information technology security. Magnolia has been able to maintain a consistent level of effectiveness through these arrangements, including maintaining day-to-day operations, financial reporting systems, and internal control over financial reporting. On October 1, 2020, the substantial majority of Magnolia’s employees returned to the office.
Business Overview
As of December 31, 2020, Magnolia’s assets in South Texas included 42,972 gross (23,513 net) acres in the Karnes area and 634,861 gross (436,885 net) acres in the Giddings area. As of December 31, 2020, Magnolia held an interest in approximately 1,796 gross (1,160 net) wells, with total production of 61.8 thousand barrels of oil equivalent per day (“Mboe/d”) for the year ended December 31, 2020. In the fourth quarter of 2020, Magnolia operated one rig in the Giddings area.
Magnolia recognized a net loss attributable to Class A Common Stock of $1.2 billion, or $7.27 diluted common share, for the year ended December 31, 2020. Magnolia also recognized a net loss of $1.9 billion, which includes noncontrolling interest of $0.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result of the sharp decline in commodity prices during the year ended December 31, 2020, Magnolia recorded impairments of $1.9 billion related to proved and unproved properties. Proved property impairment of $1.4 billion is included in “Impairment of oil and natural gas properties” and unproved property impairment of $0.6 billion is included in “Exploration expense” on the Company’s consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In July 2019, the Company exchanged all of its warrants for an aggregate of 9.2 million shares of Class A Common Stock. For more information, see Note 13 - Stockholders’ Equity in the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On August 5, 2019, the Company’s board of directors authorized a share repurchase program of up to 10 million shares, and, in February 2021, the Company’s board of directors increased the share repurchase authorization by an additional 10 million shares. The program does not require purchases to be made within a particular timeframe. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company repurchased 4.5 million shares at a weighted average price of $6.41, for a total cost of approximately $28.7 million.
On December 18, 2019, outside of the share repurchase program, Magnolia LLC repurchased and subsequently canceled 6.0 million Magnolia LLC Units with an equal number of shares of corresponding Class B Common Stock for $69.1 million of cash consideration (the “Class B Common Stock Repurchase”).
On August 1, 2020, the Company provided written notice to EVOC of its intent to terminate the Services Agreement. Pursuant to the Services Agreement, EVOC will continue to provide services during the transition, which Magnolia expects to complete on or before August 1, 2021.
In the third quarter of 2020, the Company entered into costless collars for a portion of its expected natural gas production volumes to reduce the Company’s exposure to natural gas price volatility. The Company has elected not to designate any of its derivative instruments as hedging instruments. Accordingly, changes in the fair value of the Company's derivative instruments are recorded immediately to earnings as “Gain (loss) on derivative instruments, net” on the Company’s consolidated statements of operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized a gain of $0.6 million related to its derivative instruments.
Results of Operations
Factors Affecting the Comparability of the Historical Financial Results
Magnolia’s historical financial condition and results of operations for the periods presented may not be comparable, either from period to period or going forward, as a result of the following factors:
•During the first quarter of 2020, the Company incurred impairments of $1.9 billion related to proved and unproved oil and natural gas properties as a result of the sharp decline in commodity prices;
•On February 21, 2020, the Company completed the acquisition of certain non-operated oil and natural gas assets located in Karnes and DeWitt Counties, Texas, for approximately $69.7 million in cash;
•On May 31, 2019, the Company completed the acquisition of certain oil and natural gas assets primarily located in Karnes County for approximately $36.3 million in cash and approximately 3.1 million shares of the Company’s Class A Common Stock; and
As a result of the factors listed above, the combined historical results of operations and period-to-period comparisons of these results and certain financial data may not be comparable or indicative of future results.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Oil, Natural Gas and NGL Sales Revenues. The following table provides the components of Magnolia’s revenues for the periods indicated, as well as each period’s respective average prices and production volumes. This table shows production on a boe basis in which natural gas is converted to an equivalent barrel of oil based on a ratio of six Mcf to one barrel. This ratio may not be reflective of the current price ratio between the two products.
Oil revenues were 78% and 82% of the Company’s total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Oil production was 51% and 53% of total production volume for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Oil revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $354.1 million lower than the year ended December 31, 2019. A 40% decrease in average prices reduced revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 by $308.9 million compared to the same period in the prior year, while a 10% decrease in oil production reduced revenue $45.2 million.
Natural gas revenues were 13% and 10% of the Company’s total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Natural gas production was 29% and 28% of total production volume for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Natural gas revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $26.5 million lower than the year ended December 31,
2019. A 25% decrease in average prices reduced revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 by $23.4 million compared to the same period in the prior year, while a 4% decrease in natural gas production reduced revenue $3.1 million
NGL revenues were 9% and 8% of the Company’s total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. NGL production was 20% and 19% of total production volume for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. NGL revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $21.0 million lower than the year ended December 31, 2019. A 27% decrease in average prices reduced revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 by $18.9 million compared to the same period in the prior year, while a 4% decrease in NGL production reduced revenue $2.1 million.
Operating Expenses and Other Income (Expense). The following table summarizes the Company’s operating expenses and other income (expense) for the periods indicated.
Lease operating expenses are the costs incurred in the operation of producing properties, including expenses for utilities, direct labor, water disposal, workover rigs, workover expenses, materials, and supplies. Lease operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $14.6 million, or $0.35 per boe, lower than the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the reduction of operating expenses associated with bringing fewer new wells online.
Gathering, transportation, and processing costs are costs incurred to deliver oil, natural gas, and NGLs to the market. Cost levels of these expenses can vary based on the volume of oil, natural gas, and NGLs produced as well as the cost of commodity
processing. The gathering, transportation, and processing costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $6.3 million, or $0.16 per boe, lower than the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to lower natural gas production and prices.
Taxes other than income include production and ad valorem taxes. These taxes are based on rates primarily established by state and local taxing authorities. Production taxes are based on the market value of production. Ad valorem taxes are based on the fair market value of the mineral interests or business assets. Taxes other than income for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $22.5 million, or $0.82 per boe, lower than the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a decrease in revenues following a decline in commodity prices.
Exploration costs are geological and geophysical costs that include seismic surveying costs, costs of unsuccessful exploratory dry wells, costs of expired or abandoned leases, and delay rentals. The exploration costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $554.6 million, or $24.55 per boe, higher than the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of an impairment related to Magnolia’s unproved oil and natural gas properties due to the sharp decline in commodity prices primarily driven by the COVID-19 pandemic and oversupply by producers relating to oil price and production controls. For more information, please see Note 5-Fair Value Measurements in the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, Magnolia recognized $1.4 billion of impairment included in “Impairment of oil and natural gas properties” in the consolidated statements of operations related to its proved oil and natural gas properties. The impairment was driven by the sharp decline in commodity prices. For more information, please see Note 5-Fair Value Measurements in the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization (“DD&A”) during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $240.2 million, or $8.95 per boe, lower than the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily as a result of lower asset property balances associated with proved property impairments recorded in the first quarter of 2020.
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 were $0.5 million lower than the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily driven by a decrease in professional service fees and a reduction in the fee under the Services Agreement as a result of corporate-wide cost cutting initiatives offset by costs associated with the termination of the Services Agreement.
Gain (loss) on derivatives, net was a $0.6 million gain related to the Company’s natural gas costless collar entered into during the third quarter of 2020. There was no derivative activity in the corresponding 2019 period.
Other income (expense), net during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.4 million of income compared to $0.2 million of expense during the year ended December 31, 2019. The income in 2020 was a primarily due to a $5.1 million gain on sale of the Company’s 35% membership interest in Ironwood Eagle Ford Midstream, LLC, partially offset by a $1.4 million inventory write-down.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Magnolia’s primary sources of liquidity and capital have been from cash flows from operations. The Company’s primary uses of cash have been for acquisitions of oil and natural gas properties and related assets, development of the Company’s oil and natural gas properties, share repurchases, and general working capital needs.
The Company may also utilize borrowings under other various financing sources available to Magnolia, including its RBL Facility and the issuance of equity or debt securities and the timing of these offerings will depend upon various factors, including prevailing market conditions and the Company’s financial condition.
Material cash commitments include $24.0 million in interest payments paid each year through 2026. The Company anticipates its current cash balance, cash flows from operations, and its available sources of liquidity to be sufficient to meet the Company’s cash requirements. However, as the impact of recent declines in worldwide crude oil and natural gas prices and the impact of COVID-19 on the economy evolves, the Company will continue to assess its liquidity needs. In the event of a sustained market deterioration, Magnolia may need additional liquidity, which would require the Company to evaluate available alternatives and take appropriate actions.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $400.0 million of principal debt related to the 2026 Senior Notes outstanding and no outstanding borrowings related to the RBL Facility. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has $642.6 million of liquidity comprised of the $450.0 million of borrowing base capacity of the RBL Facility, which was reaffirmed on October 15, 2020, and $192.6 million of cash and cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Asset, as calculated in accordance with the Company’s Indenture relating to its 2026 Senior Notes, was approximately $1.5 billion.
On August 1, 2020, the Company provided written notice to EVOC of its intent to terminate the Services Agreement. Pursuant to the Services Agreement, EVOC will continue to provide services during the transition, which Magnolia expects to complete on or before August 1, 2021. The Company is still evaluating the impact to G&A associated with the termination of the Services Agreement.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
At December 31, 2020, Magnolia had $192.6 million of cash and cash equivalents. The Company’s cash and cash equivalents are maintained with various financial institutions in the United States. Deposits with these institutions may exceed the amount of insurance provided on such deposits. However, the Company regularly monitors the financial stability of its financial institutions and believes that the Company is not exposed to any significant default risk.
Sources and Uses of Cash and Cash Equivalents
The following table presents the sources and uses of the Company’s cash and cash equivalents for the periods presented:
Sources of Cash and Cash Equivalents
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Operating cash flows are the Company’s primary source of liquidity and are impacted, in the short term and long term, by oil and natural gas prices. The factors that determine operating cash flows are largely the same as those that affect net earnings or net losses, with the exception of certain non-cash expenses such as DD&A, the non-cash portion of exploration expense, impairment of oil and natural gas properties, asset retirement obligation accretion, and deferred income tax expense.
Net cash provided by operating activities totaled $310.1 million and $647.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was negatively impacted by the sharp decline of oil and natural gas prices partially offset by a decrease in expenses associated with bringing fewer new wells online.
Uses of Cash and Cash Equivalents
Acquisitions
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company completed various leasehold and property acquisitions, primarily comprised of a $69.7 million acquisition of certain non-operated oil and natural gas assets located in Karnes and DeWitt Counties, Texas. During the year ended December 31, 2019 the Company incurred $93.2 million of acquisition costs, comprised of the
acquisition of a 72% working interest in the Eocene-Tuscaloosa Zone, Ultra Deep Structure natural gas well located in St. Martin Parish, Louisiana and other acquisitions of additional oil and natural gas assets in Karnes County.
Additions to Oil and Natural Gas Properties
The following table sets forth the Company’s capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, Magnolia was running a one-rig program for the Giddings Assets. The activity during the year ended December 31, 2020 was largely driven by the number of operated and non-operated drilling rigs. The number of operated drilling rigs is largely dependent on commodity prices and the Company’s strategy of maintaining spending to accommodate the Company’s business model.
Capital Requirements
Repurchase of Class A Common Stock
On August 5, 2019, the Company’s board of directors authorized a share repurchase program of up to 10.0 million shares, and, in February 2021, the Company’s board of directors increased the share repurchase authorization by an additional 10 million shares. The program does not require purchases to be made within a particular timeframe and whether the Company undertakes these additional repurchases is ultimately subject to numerous considerations, market conditions, and other factors. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company repurchased 4.5 million and 1.0 million shares, for a total cost of approximately $28.7 million and $10.3 million, respectively.
Repurchase and Cancellation of Magnolia LLC Units and Class B Common Stock
On December 18, 2019, Magnolia LLC repurchased and subsequently canceled 6.0 million Magnolia LLC Units with an equal number of shares of corresponding Class B Common Stock for $69.1 million of cash consideration.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Magnolia prepares its financial statements and the accompanying notes in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which require management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the reported amounts in the financial statements and the accompanying notes. Magnolia identifies certain accounting policies as critical based on, among other things, their impact on the portrayal of Magnolia’s financial condition, results of operations, or liquidity and the degree of difficulty, subjectivity, and complexity in their deployment. Critical accounting policies cover accounting matters that are inherently uncertain because the future resolution of such matters is unknown. Management routinely discusses the development, selection, and disclosure of each of the critical accounting policies. The following is a discussion of Magnolia’s most critical accounting policies and estimates.
Reserves Estimates
Proved oil and natural gas reserves are those quantities of oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquids which, by analysis of geoscience and engineering data, can be estimated with reasonable certainty to be economically producible-from a given date forward, from known reservoirs, and under existing economic conditions, operating methods, and government regulations-prior to the time at which contracts providing the right to operate expire, unless evidence indicates that renewal is reasonably certain, regardless of whether deterministic or probabilistic methods are used for the estimation. The project to extract the hydrocarbons must have commenced, or the operator must be reasonably certain, that it will commence within a reasonable time. Estimated proved developed oil and natural gas reserves can be expected to be recovered through existing wells with existing equipment and operating methods or where the cost of the required equipment is relatively minor compared to the cost of a new well.
Proved undeveloped reserves are proved reserves that are expected to be recovered from new wells on undrilled acreage or from existing wells where a relatively major expenditure is required for recompletion. Reserves on undrilled acreage are limited to
those that are directly offsetting development spacing areas that are reasonably certain of production when drilled, unless evidence using reliable technology exists that establishes reasonable certainty of economic producibility at greater distances. Undrilled locations can be classified as undeveloped reserves only if a plan has been adopted indicating that they are scheduled to be drilled within five years, unless the specific circumstances justify a longer time. All of Magnolia’s proved undeveloped reserves as of December 31, 2020, that are included in this Annual Report, are planned to be developed within one year.
Despite the inherent imprecision in these engineering estimates, Magnolia’s reserves are used throughout the Company’s financial statements. For example, since Magnolia uses the unit-of-production method to amortize its oil and natural gas properties, the quantity of reserves could significantly impact Magnolia’s DD&A expense. A material adverse change in the estimated volumes of reserves could result in property impairments. Finally, these reserves are the basis for Magnolia’s supplemental oil and natural gas disclosures.
Reserves are calculated using an unweighted arithmetic average of commodity prices in effect on the first day of each of the previous 12 months, held flat for the life of the production, except where prices are defined by contractual arrangements. These historical prices often do not approximate the average price that the Company expects to receive for its oil and natural gas production in the future. Operating costs, production and ad valorem taxes, and future development costs are based on current costs with no escalation. Actual costs may be materially higher or lower than the costs utilized in the estimate.
Magnolia has elected not to disclose probable and possible reserves or reserve estimates in this filing.
Long-lived Asset Impairments
Long-lived assets used in operations are assessed for impairment whenever changes in facts and circumstances indicate a possible significant deterioration in future cash flows expected to be generated by an asset group. Individual assets are grouped for impairment purposes based on a judgmental assessment of the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets. If there is an indication that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recovered, the asset is assessed by management through an established process in which changes to significant assumptions such as prices, volumes, and future development plans are reviewed. If, upon review, the sum of the undiscounted pre-tax cash flows is less than the carrying value of the asset group, the carrying value is written down to estimated fair value. Because there usually is a lack of quoted market prices for long-lived assets, the fair value of impaired assets is assessed by management using the income approach.
Under the income approach, the fair value of each asset group is estimated based on the present value of expected future cash flows. The income approach is dependent on a number of factors including estimates of forecasted revenue and operating costs, proved reserves, the success of future exploration for and development of unproved reserves, discount rates, and other variables. Key assumptions used in developing a discounted cash flow model described above include estimated quantities of crude oil and natural gas reserves; estimates of market prices considering forward commodity price curves as of the measurement date; and estimates of operating, administrative, and capital costs adjusted for inflation. The resulting future cash flows are discounted using a discount rate believed to be consistent with those applied by market participants. Although the fair value estimate of each asset group is based on assumptions the Company believes to be reasonable, those assumptions are inherently unpredictable and uncertain, and actual results could differ from the estimate.
During the first quarter of 2020, Magnolia recorded impairments of $1.9 billion related to proved and unproved properties as a result of a sharp decline in commodity prices. Proved property impairment of $1.4 billion is included in “Impairment of oil and natural gas properties” and unproved property impairment of $0.6 billion is included in “Exploration expense” on the Company’s consolidated statements of operations. Proved and unproved properties that were impaired had aggregate fair values of $0.8 billion and $0.3 billion, respectively. The fair values of these oil and natural gas properties were measured using the income approach calculated using a discounted future cash flow model. Significant inputs associated with the calculation of discounted future net cash flows include estimates of future commodity prices based on NYMEX strip pricing adjusted for price differentials, estimates of proved oil and natural gas reserves and risk adjusted probable and possible reserves, estimates of future expected operating and capital costs, and a market participant based weighted average cost of capital of 10% for proved property impairments and 12% for unproved property impairments. Negative revisions of estimated reserves quantities, increases in future cost estimates, or sustained decreases in oil or natural gas prices could lead to a reduction in expected future cash flows and possibly an additional impairment of long-lived assets in future periods.