ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions as described under the heading “Forward-Looking Statements” included in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview:
We are a provider of Digital Transformation IT Services to mostly large and medium-sized organizations.
Our portfolio of offerings includes data management and analytics services; other digital transformation services such as digital learning services; and IT staffing services.
We operate in two reporting segments - Data and Analytics Services and IT Staffing Services. Our data and analytics services are marketed on a global basis under the brand Mastech InfoTrellis and are delivered largely on a project basis with on-site and off-shore resources. These capabilities and expertise were acquired through our acquisition of InfoTrellis and enhanced and expanded subsequent to the acquisition. In October 2020, we acquired AmberLeaf Partners, Inc. (“AmberLeaf”), a Chicago-based customer experience consulting firm. This acquisition enhances our capabilities in customer experience strategy and managed services offerings for a variety of Cloud-based enterprise applications across sales, marketing and customer services organizations. Our IT staffing business combines technical expertise with business process experience to deliver a broad range of staffing services in digital and mainstream technologies, as well as our other digital transformation services.
Both business segments provide their services across various industry verticals, including: financial services; government; healthcare; manufacturing; retail; technology; telecommunications; and transportation. In our Data and Analytics Services segment we evaluate our revenues and gross profits largely by service line. In our IT Staffing Services segment, we evaluate our revenues and gross profits largely by sales channel responsibility. This analysis within both our reporting segments is multi-purposed and includes technologies employed, client relationships, and geographic locations.
Economic Trends and Outlook
Generally, our business outlook is highly correlated to general North American economic conditions, particularly with respect to our IT Staffing Services segment. During periods of increasing employment and economic expansion, demand for our services tends to increase. Conversely, during periods of contracting employment and / or a slowing global economy, demand for our services tends to decline. As the economy slowed in 2007 and recessionary conditions emerged in 2008 and 2009, we experienced less demand for our IT staffing services. With economic expansion in 2010 through 2019 activity levels improved. However, as the recovery strengthened, we experience increased tightness in the supply-side (skilled IT professionals) of our businesses. These supply-side challenges pressured resource costs and to some extent gross margins. As we entered 2020, we were encouraged by continued growth in the domestic job markets and expanding U.S. and global economies. However, with the COVID-19 pandemic surfacing in the first quarter of 2020, we realized the economic growth would quickly turn into recessionary conditions, which had a material impact on activity levels in both of our business segments. As we enter 2021, we are encouraged by the global roll-out of vaccination programs and some signs of economic expansion. While there is still uncertainty in the global markets, we are hopeful that economic conditions will improve throughout the year as the impact of the pandemic subsides.
In addition to tracking general economic conditions in the markets that we service, a large portion of our revenues is generated from a limited number of clients (see Item 1A, the Risk Factor entitled “Our revenues are highly concentrated, and the loss of a significant client would adversely affect our business and revenues”). Accordingly, our trends and outlook are additionally impacted by the prospects and well-being of these specific clients. This “account concentration” factor may result in our results of operations deviating from the prevailing economic trends from time to time.
Within our IT Staffing Services segment, a larger portion of our revenues has come from strategic relationships with systems integrators and other staffing organizations. Additionally, many large end users of IT staffing services are employing MSP’s to manage their contractor spending. Both of these dynamics may pressure our IT staffing gross margins in the future.
Recent growth in advanced technologies (social, cloud, analytics, mobility, automation) is providing opportunities within our IT Staffing Services segment. However, supply side challenges have proven to be acute with respect to many of these technologies.
Results of Operations
We operate in two reporting segments - Data and Analytics Services and IT Staffing Services. The 2020 results of operations for our Data and Analytics Services segment include the operating results of AmberLeaf from the October 1, 2020 acquisition date through December 31, 2020.
Below is a tabular presentation of revenues and gross profit margins by segment for the periods discussed:
Revenues & Gross Margin by Segment
(Revenues in millions)
Below is a tabular presentation of operating expenses by sales and marketing operations, amortization of acquired intangible assets, acquisition transaction expenses, revaluation of contingent consideration, goodwill impairment and general and administrative categories for the periods discussed:
Selling, General & Administrative (“S,G&A”) Expense Details
(Amounts in millions)
2020 Compared to 2019
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $194.1 million, compared to $193.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This slight increase in revenues reflected revenue growth of 13% (approximately 6% organic) in our Data and Analytics Services segment and a 2% revenue decline in our IT Staffing Services segment. In our Data and Analytics Services segment, existing client projects continued largely uninterrupted, resulting in revenue growth during the year. However, the pandemic clearly impacted new assignments and pipeline opportunities with project start delays, which resulted in curtailed revenue growth in 2020. Revenue declined in our IT Staffing Services segment resulting in a 104-consultant decline during the year, as we ended 2020 with 1,063 consultants-on-billing. This decline in IT Staffing Services segment revenues was the direct result of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on activity levels and early assignment ends, particularly in the first-half of the year. Our average IT staffing bill rate for 2020 increased to $76.60 per hour compared to $74.97 per hour in 2019 - an increase of about 2%. This bill rate increase was primarily the result of our continued focus on advanced technology skill-sets.
In both 2020 and 2019, we had one client that exceeded 10% of total revenues (CGI = 15.0% and 11.3%, respectively). Our top ten clients represented 47% of total revenues in 2020 compared to 45% of total revenues in 2019.
Gross Margin
Gross profit increased to $51.5 million in 2020 compared to $48.0 million in 2019. Gross profit as a percentage of revenue totaled 26.6% in 2020 compared to 24.8% in 2019. The improvement in our gross margin
percentage reflected margin expansion in both of our business segments. In our Data and Analytics Services segment, gross margins increased by 380-basis points to a record 50.5%. This increase was due to higher-valued assignments, improved utilization and very little reimbursable travel expense revenues due to the pandemic (pass-through revenues with no gross margin content). Gross margins in our IT Staffing Services segment were 22.1% in 2020 compared to 21.3% in 2019. This 80-basis point improvement was largely due to better margins on new assignments and reflected our continued focus on advanced technology skill-sets.
Selling, General and Administrative (“S,G&A”) Expenses
S,G&A expenses in 2020 totaled $38.1 million and represented 19.6% of total revenues, compared to $31.0 million or 16.0% of revenues in 2019. When excluding acquisition transaction expenses; the revaluation of contingent consideration; goodwill impairment; and the amortization of acquired intangible assets, adjusted S,G&A expenses related to operations, as a percentage of revenues was 17.9% in 2020 versus 17.8% in 2019. The slight increase in S,G&A as a percentage of revenues excluding these items was largely due to investments made to our Data and Analytics Services segment, including expenses related to the integration of the AmberLeaf business following the acquisition.
Fluctuations within S,G&A expense components during 2020 compared to 2019 included the following:
•
Sales expense was flat compared to the previous year. In the Data and Analytics Services segment sales expense increased by $1.5 million in 2020 due to investments made to the sales organization of $1.2 million and $0.3 million related to integrating the AmberLeaf sales expense. IT staffing sales expense declined by $1.5 million in 2020 due to austerity measures and lower activity-based expenses.
•
Operations expense decreased by $1.2 million compared to 2019. Expense reductions in the IT Staffing Services segment totaled $2.1 million largely due to austerity measures around recruiting staff and lower activity-based expenses. Partially offsetting these declines were increases of $0.9 million related to investments made to our Data and Analytics Services segment in the areas of delivery and analytics.
•
Amortization of acquired intangible assets was $2.8 million in 2020 versus $2.7 million in 2019. The slight increase related to amortization associated with the AmberLeaf acquisition.
•
Acquisition transaction expenses were $0.6 million in 2020 and reflected transaction expenses related to the AmberLeaf acquisition. This compared to negative transaction expense of $0.1 million in 2019 related to a reversal of investment banking fees due to the contingent consideration in the InfoTrellis acquisition not being earned.
•
The revaluation of a contingent consideration liability totaled a credit of $6.1 million in 2019 related to the InfoTrellis acquisition. No contingent consideration revaluations occurred in 2020.
•
General & administrative expenses increased by $1.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Our Data and Analytics Services segment was responsible for $0.5 million of this increase due to higher executive leadership compensation expense, stock-based compensation expenses and the AmberLeaf acquisition and integration in 2020, partially offset by lower travel expense. The IT Staffing Services segment had higher general and administrative expenses in 2020 of $0.9 million due to higher stock-based compensation expense, event costs (incurred pre-COVID-19 in January and February 2020) and outside services expense, partially offset by lower travel expense.
Other Income / (Expense) Components
In 2020, other income / (expense) consisted of interest expense of ($866,000) and foreign exchange gains of $96,000. In 2019, other income / (expense) consisted of interest expense of ($1.8 million) and foreign exchange gains of $11,000. The decline in interest expense was due to lower average outstanding borrowings resulting from debt repayments made during the year and a lower effective interest rate. Net foreign exchange gains in 2020 and 2019 largely reflected exchange rate variations between the Indian rupee and the Canadian dollar compared to the U.S. dollar.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense for 2020 was $2.8 million and represented an effective tax rate on pre-tax income of 21.9% compared to $4.1 million in 2019, which represented an effective tax rate on pre-tax income of 26.8%. The lower 2020 effective tax rate was largely due to excess tax benefits related to the exercise of stock options and the vesting of restricted shares.
2019 Compared to 2018
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $193.6 million, compared to $177.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This 9% increase in revenues reflected revenue growth of 12% in our Data and Analytics Services segment and approximately 9% revenue growth in our IT Staffing Services segment. In our Data and Analytics Services segment, new service- offerings helped drive 2019 revenues, particularly during the second half of the year. Revenue growth in our IT Staffing Services segment reflected a 65-consultant expansion of our billable consultant-base and a higher average bill rate. Utilization in 2019 was slightly below 2018 levels due to more downtime related to the fourth quarter holiday season. Our average IT staffing bill rate for 2019 increased to $74.97 per hour in 2019 from $73.01 per hour in 2018 - an increase of about 3%. This bill rate increase was reflective of the types of skill sets that we deployed on new assignments during 2019.
In 2019 and 2018, we had one client that exceeded 10% of total revenues (CGI = 11.3% and 12.8%, respectively). Our top ten clients represented 45% of total revenues in 2019 compared to 47% of total revenues in 2018.
Gross Margin
Gross profit increased to $48.0 million in 2019 compared to $42.5 million in 2018. Gross profit as a percentage of revenue totaled 24.8% in 2019 compared to 24.0% in 2018. The increase in gross profit dollars reflected higher revenues in 2019. The improvement in our gross margin percentage reflected margin expansion in both of our business segments. In our Data and Analytics Services segment, gross margins increased by 270-basis points to 46.7%, due to lower bench costs and higher margins on new assignments secured during the year. In our IT Staffing Services segment, gross margins increased by 40-basis points to 21.3% largely due to higher margins on digital technology assignments.
Selling, General and Administrative (“S,G&A”) Expenses
S,G&A expenses in 2019 totaled $31.0 million and represented 16.0% of total revenues, compared to $30.9 million or 17.4% of revenues in 2018. When excluding acquisition transaction expenses; the revaluation of contingent consideration; goodwill impairment; and the amortization of acquired intangible assets, adjusted S,G&A expenses related to operations, as a percentage of revenues was 17.8% in 2019 versus 16.7% in 2018. The increase in adjusted S,G&A as a percentage of revenues was largely due to investments made to our Data and Analytics Services segment’s sales and delivery organizations and higher recruitment and general & administrative expenses in our IT staffing services business.
Fluctuations within S,G&A expense components during 2019 compared to 2018 included the following:
•
Sales expense increased by $0.7 million compared to the previous year. The entire increase related to investments made to our data and analytic services business during the year. IT staffing sales expenses were flat compared to 2018, with higher commission expenses offset by lower headcount.
•
Operations expense increased by $2.1 million compared to 2018. Approximately $0.7 million was related to investments made to our Data and Analytics Services segment in the areas of delivery and analytics. The increased expense in our IT staffing services business in 2019 totaled $1.4 million and was due to staff expansion at our offshore recruitment center, higher recruiter commissions, an increase in H1-B processing fees, and higher facility expenses.
•
Amortization of acquired intangible assets was $2.7 million in 2019 versus $2.8 million in 2018. The slight decline was related to certain intangibles from our 2015 acquisition becoming fully amortized.
•
Acquisition transaction expenses were negative $0.1 million in both 2019 and 2018 and related to a reversal of investment banking fees due to acquisition related contingent consideration not being earned.
•
The revaluation of a contingent consideration liability, net of goodwill impairment charges was a $6.1 million credit to S,G&A expenses in 2019 compared to a $1.4 million credit to S,G&A expense in 2018. This was driven by the difference between short-term results, which impacted the attainment of contingent consideration, and long-term forecasts and assumptions used in assessing goodwill impairment.
•
General & administrative expenses increased by $2.1 million in 2019 compared to 2018. Our Data and Analytics Services segment was responsible for $0.7 million of this increase which include higher executive leadership compensation expense and stock-based compensation expenses in 2019 versus 2018. Our IT Staffing Services segment had higher general and administrative expenses in 2019 of $1.4 million due to higher compensation expense, system support costs, depreciation expense and higher travel and event expenses.
Other Income / (Expense) Components
In 2019, other income / (expense) consisted of interest expense of ($1.8 million) and foreign exchange gains of $11,000. In 2018, other income / (expense) consisted of interest expense of ($2.2 million) and foreign exchange losses of ($40,000). The decline in interest expense was due to lower average outstanding borrowings resulting from debt repayments made during the year and a lower effective interest rate. Net foreign exchange gains / (losses) in 2019 and 2018 largely reflected exchange rate variations between the Indian rupee and the Canadian dollar compared to the U.S. dollar.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense for 2019 was $4.1 million and represented an effective tax rate on pre-tax income of 26.8% compared to $2.7 million in 2018, which represented an effective tax rate on pre-tax income of 28.9%. The 2019 effective tax rate was lower than 2018 because 2018 income tax expense included U.S. tax reform transition taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Financial Conditions and Liquidity
At December 31, 2020, we had outstanding bank debt, net of cash balances on hand, of $9.8 million and approximately $22 million of borrowing capacity under our existing credit facility. During 2020, our outstanding bank debt, net of cash balances on hand, declined by approximately $13 million, despite $10 million of term-loan borrowings to support our AmberLeaf acquisition. This reduction in debt was reflective of net cash flows provided by operating activities. Reductions in operating working capital levels provided $7.3 million of cash, of which $4.6 million was related to the COVID-19 payroll tax deferment program. (see Note 8 for further details).
Historically, we have funded our business needs with cash generation from operating activities. In the data and analytics services and IT staffing services industries, investment in operating working capital levels (defined as current assets excluding cash and cash equivalents minus current liabilities, excluding short-term borrowings) is a significant use of cash. Controlling our operating working capital levels by closely managing our accounts receivable balance is an important element of cash preservation. Our accounts receivable “days sales outstanding” measurement (“DSO”) was 60-days at year-end 2020 and 55-days at year-end 2019. The higher DSO measurement in 2020 reflected some cash conversion disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash provided by operating activities, our cash and cash equivalent balances on hand at December 31, 2020 and current availability under our existing credit facility are expected to be adequate to fund our business needs over the next 12 months, absent any acquisition-related activities.
Below is a tabular presentation of cash flow activities for the periods discussed:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by (used in) operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 totaled $21.2 million, $16.1 million, and ($0.5 million), respectively. In 2020, cash flows from operating activities included net income of $9.9 million, non-cash charges of $4.0 million and reductions in operating working capital of $7.3 million. In 2019, cash flows from operating activities included net income of $11.1 million, non-cash charges of ($0.1 million) and reductions in operating working capital of $5.1 million. In 2018, cash flows from operating activities included net income of $6.7 million and non-cash charges of $2.7 million, offset by an increase in operating working capital of ($9.9 million). The 2020 reduction in operating working capital was due to lower accounts receivable, reflecting revenue declines in the second half of the year and $4.6 million related to the COVID-19 payroll tax deferment program. The 2019 decline in operating working capital was reflective of the resolution of cash conversion disruptions related to our 2018 Cloud-based ERP platform implementation.
We would expect operating working capital levels to increase should revenue grow in 2021. Accordingly, an increase in operating working capital would result in a reduction in cash generated from operating activities. We believe DSO’s will remain at current levels or improve modestly during 2021. Additionally, the $4.6 million payroll tax deferment will be required to be repaid, $2.3 million in 2021 and $2.3 million in 2022, which will negatively impact cash flows from operations in those years.
Investing Activities
Cash (used in) investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 totaled ($9.6 million), ($0.9 million), and ($1.1 million), respectively. In 2020, cash (used in) investing activities related to the acquisition of AmberLeaf of ($9.3 million) and capital expenditures of ($0.3 million). In 2019, cash (used in) investing activities included capital expenditures of ($1.0 million), partially offset by $0.1 million of recoveries of non-current deposits (office lease deposits). In 2018, cash (used in) investing activities included capital expenditures of ($0.8 million) and increases in non-current deposits of ($0.3 million). In 2020, capital expenditures consist of general items. In 2019 and 2018, capital expenditures were largely related to system upgrade expenditures.
Financing Activities
In 2020, cash (used in) financing activities totaled ($6.7 million) and consisted of debt repayments, net of term-loan refinancing associated the AmberLeaf acquisition of ($8.0 million) and the payment of deferred financing costs of ($0.3 million), partially offset by $1.4 million proceeds from the exercise of stock options and the issuance of common stock related to the Company’s employee stock purchase plan of $0.2 million. In 2019, cash (used in) financing activities totaled ($13.4 million) and largely consisted of net debt repayments of ($13.6 million), partially offset by $0.2 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock. In 2018, cash provided
by financing activities totaled $0.6 million and consisted of net borrowings under the Company’s revolving credit facility of 4.5 million, and $0.1 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by ($4.0 million) of term loan repayments.
“Shelf” Registration Statement
We have on file with the SEC an effective shelf registration statement that allows us to offer and sell common stock, preferred stock, debt and other securities, either individually or in combination, up to a total dollar amount of $35 million in one or more offerings. These securities may be issued, from time to time, at our discretion based on our needs and market conditions. We believe that this shelf registration statement currently provides us flexibility with regard to potential financings that we may undertake when market conditions permit or as our financial condition may require. As of the date of this Form 10-K, we have not completed any offerings under our shelf registration statement, and we make no assurance that we can or will issue and sell any securities under our shelf registration statement.
Other than the factors discussed in this section and the potential further impacts of the pandemic on our business, we are not aware of any other trends, demands or commitments that would materially affect liquidity or our financial resources.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a significant impact on our results of operations for the periods presented. On an ongoing basis, we attempt to minimize any effects of inflation on our operating results by controlling operating costs and, whenever possible, seek to ensure that billing rates reflect increases in costs due to inflation.
Seasonality
Our operations are generally not affected by seasonal fluctuations. However, our consultants’ billable hours are affected by national holidays and vacation patterns. Accordingly, we typically have lower utilization rates and higher benefit costs during the fourth quarter. Additionally, assignment completions tend to be higher near the end of the calendar year, which largely impacts our revenue and gross profit performance during the subsequent quarter.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Certain accounting policies are particularly important to the portrayal of our financial position, results of operations and cash flows and require the application of significant judgment by management, and as a result, are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. In applying these policies, our management uses judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. These estimates are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, observances of industry trends and other available information from outside sources, as appropriate. The following explains our most critical accounting policies. See the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, contained in Item 8, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a complete description of our significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue on time-and-material contracts as services are performed and expenses are incurred. Time-and-material contracts typically bill at an agreed-upon hourly rate, plus out-of-pocket expense
reimbursement. Out-of-pocket expense reimbursement amounts vary by assignment, but historically on average represent less than 2% of total revenues. Revenue is earned when the Company’s consultants are working on projects. Revenue recognition is negatively impacted by holidays and consultant vacation and sick days.
The Company recognizes revenue on fixed price contracts as services are rendered and uses a cost-based input method to measure progress. Determining a measure of progress requires management to make judgments that affect the timing of recognizing revenue. Under the cost-based input method, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation. Revenues, including estimated fees or profits, are recorded proportionally as costs are incurred. The Company has determined that the cost-based input method provides a faithful depiction of the transfer of goods or services to the customer. Estimated losses are recognized immediately in the period in which current estimates indicate a loss. We record deferred revenues when cash payments are received or due in advance of our performance, including amounts which may be refundable.
The Company’s time-and-material and fixed price revenue streams are recognized over time as the customer receives and consumes the benefits of the Company’s performance as the work is performed.
In certain situations related to client direct hire assignments, where the Company’s fee is contingent upon the hired resources’ continued employment with the client, revenue is not fully recognized until such employment conditions are satisfied.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts
The Company extends credit to clients based upon management’s assessment of their creditworthiness. A substantial portion of the Company’s revenue, and the resulting accounts receivable, are from Fortune 1000 companies, major systems integrators and other staffing organizations. The Company does not generally charge interest on delinquent accounts receivable.
Unbilled receivables represent amounts recognized as revenues based on services performed and, in accordance with the terms of the client contract, will be invoiced in a subsequent period.
Accounts receivable are reviewed periodically to determine the probability of loss. The Company records an allowance for uncollectible accounts when it is probable that the related receivable balance will not be collected based on historical collection experience, client-specific collection issues, and other matters the Company identifies in its collection monitoring.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Identifiable intangible assets are recorded at fair value as of the closing date when acquired in a business combination. Identifiable intangible assets related to acquisitions consisted of client relationships, covenants not-to-compete, trade names and technology, which are being amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives ranging from three years to twelve years, as more fully described in Note 3 “Business Combinations” and Note 4 “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, net” to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Excess purchase price over the fair value of net tangible assets and identifiable intangible assets acquired are recorded as goodwill. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least on an annual basis. If impairment is indicated, a write-down to fair value is recorded based on the excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit over its fair market value.
We review goodwill and intangible assets for impairment annually as of October 1st or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. The impairment test is performed at the reporting unit (business segment) level. Determination of recoverability is
based on the lowest level of identifiable estimated future discounted cash flows resulting from use of the assets and their eventual disposition. Measurement of any impairment loss is based on the excess carrying value of the reporting unit over their fair market value.
In conducting our annual impairment testing, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not (more than 50%) that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If not, no further goodwill impairment testing is required. If it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount, we are then required to perform a quantitative impairment test. We also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment, and instead, proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test.
Leases
The Company adopted ASU No. 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)” on January 1, 2019 using the additional transition method noted in ASU 2018-11. The adoption of the new standard resulted in the Company recording a lease right-of-use asset and related lease liability of $5.7 million as of January 1, 2019. The cumulative effect of initially applying the new guidance had an immaterial impact on the opening balance of our retained earnings. The Company does not expect the guidance to have a material impact on its consolidated net earnings in future periods. We elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within the new standard, which allowed us to carry-forward the historical lease classification, among other things.
Business Combinations
The Company accounts for acquisitions in accordance with guidance found in ASC 805, Business Combinations (“ASC 805”). This guidance requires consideration given (including contingent consideration), assets acquired and liabilities assumed to be valued at their fair market values at the acquisition date. The guidance further provides that: (1) in-process research and development will be recorded at fair value as an indefinite-lived intangible asset; (2) acquisition-related transaction costs will generally be expensed as incurred; (3) restructuring costs associated with a business combination will generally be expensed subsequent to the acquisition date; and (4) changes in deferred tax asset valuation allowances and income tax uncertainties after the acquisition date generally will effect income tax expense.
ASC 805 requires that any excess purchase price over fair value of assets acquired (including identifiable intangibles) and liabilities assumed be recognized as goodwill. Additionally, any excess fair value of acquired net assets over acquisition consideration results in a bargain purchase gain. Prior to recording a gain, the acquiring entity must reassess whether all acquired assets and assumed liabilities have been identified and must perform re-measurements to verify that the consideration paid, assets acquired and liabilities assumed have all been properly valued.
The AmberLeaf financial results are included in the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements from the October 1, 2020 acquisition date.
Stock-Based Compensation
Effective October 1, 2008, the Company adopted a Stock Incentive Plan (the “Plan”) which, as amended, provides that up to 4,900,000 shares of the Company’s common stock shall be allocated for issuance to directors, executive management and key personnel. Grants under the Plan can be made in the form of stock options, stock appreciation rights, performance shares or stock awards. The Plan is administered by the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors. Stock options are granted at an exercise price equal to the closing share price of the Company’s common stock at the grant date and generally vest over a three to five-year period.
In October 2018, the Board of Directors of the Company approved the Mastech Digital, Inc. 2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (the “Stock Purchase Plan”). The Stock Purchase Plan is intended to meet the requirements of Section 423 of the Code and required the approval of the Company’s shareholders to be qualified under Section 423 of the Code. On May 15, 2019, the Company’s shareholders approved the Stock Purchase Plan. Under the Stock Purchase Plan, 600,000 shares of Common Stock (subject to adjustment upon certain changes in the Company’s capitalization) are available for purchase by eligible employees who become participants in the Stock Purchase Plan. The purchase price per share is 85% of the lesser of (1) the fair market value per share of Common Stock on the first day of the offering period, or (ii) the fair market value per share of Common Stock on the last day of the offering period.
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation expense in accordance with ASC Topic 718 “Share-based Payments” which requires us to measure all share-based payments based on their estimated fair value and recognize compensation expense over the requisite service period. The fair value of our stock options and shares issued under the Company’s Stock Purchase Plan is determined at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Income Taxes
The Company records an estimated liability for income and other taxes based on what management determines will likely be paid in the various tax jurisdictions in which we operate. Management uses its best judgment in the determination of these amounts. However, the liabilities ultimately realized and paid are dependent on various matters, including the resolution of the tax audits in the various affected tax jurisdictions, and may differ from the amounts recorded. An adjustment to the estimated liability would be recorded through income in the period in which it becomes probable that the amount of the actual liability differs from the amount recorded.
Management determines the Company’s income tax provision using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred income taxes are provided for the temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and the tax basis of the Company’s assets and liabilities. The Company measures deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect to recover or settle the temporary differences. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred taxes is recognized in the period that the change is enacted. The Company evaluates its deferred tax assets and records a valuation allowance when, in management’s opinion, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company provided a valuation allowance of $179,000 and $7,000, respectively, related to the uncertainty of the realization of foreign net operating losses (“NOL”).
In 2017, the Company incurred an estimated one-time charge of $372,000 related to the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (“TCJA”). This charge is related to the re-measurement of the Company’s deferred tax assets arising from a lower U.S. corporate tax rate of $294,000 and a $78,000 charge related to a one-time transition tax applicable to the new dividend exemption system related to foreign earnings. In 2018, the Company finalized this estimate and recorded an additional expense of $86,000 related to the re-measurement of the Company’s deferred tax assets and a $165,000 charge related to a one-time transition tax applicable to the new dividend exemption system related to foreign earnings. No transition tax charges were incurred in 2020 and 2019.
The TCJA also created a new requirement that certain income earned by foreign subsidiaries, known as global intangible low-tax income (“GILTI”), must be included in the gross income of their U.S. shareholder. The FASB allows an accounting policy election of either recognizing deferred taxes for temporary differences expected to reverse as GILTI in future years or recognizing such taxes as a current-period expense when incurred. We have elected to treat the tax effect of GILTI as a current-period expense as incurred.
The Company accounts for uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC Topic 740-10, “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes”. Accordingly, the Company has reported a liability for unrecognized tax benefits
resulting from uncertain tax positions taken, or expected to be taken, in a tax return. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company provided $0 and $20,000 for uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, related to various federal and state income tax matters.
Contingent Consideration Liability
In connection with the AmberLeaf acquisition, the Company has an obligation to pay consideration that is contingent upon the achievement of specified earnings before interest and taxes objectives (“EBIT”). As of the acquisition date, the Company recorded a contingent consideration liability of $2.9 million representing the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration that is expected to be paid. The fair value of the contingent consideration liability was estimated by utilizing a probability weighted simulation model to determine the fair value of contingent consideration.
In connection with the InfoTrellis acquisition, the Company had an obligation to pay consideration that was contingent upon the achievement of specified earnings before interest and taxes objectives (“EBIT”). As of the acquisition date, the Company recorded a contingent consideration liability representing the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration that was expected to be paid. The fair value of the contingent consideration liability was estimated by utilizing a probability weighted simulation model to determine the fair value of contingent consideration. We re-measured this liability and recorded changes in the fair value when it was more likely than not that the future payments based on EBIT estimates had changed. Increases or decreases in the fair value of contingent consideration can result from changes in timing and amounts of revenue and earnings estimates.
In 2019 and 2018, the Company revalued the contingent consideration liability of the InfoTrellis acquisition after determining that relevant conditions for payment of such liability were not satisfied. The revaluation resulted in a $6.1 million and $11.1 million reduction to the contingent consideration liability in 2019 and 2018, respectively, which is reflected in selling, general and administrative expenses in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations, in Item 8, herein. No contingent consideration liability remained outstanding as of December 31, 2019. A contingent consideration liability of $2.9 million related to AmberLeaf remains outstanding as of December 31, 2020. No contingent consideration revaluation was recorded in 2020.
Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities-Interest Rate Swap Contracts
Concurrent with the Company’s borrowings on July 13, 2017 under its new credit facility, the Company entered into an interest-rate swap to convert the debt’s variable interest rate to a fixed rate of interest. These swap contracts, which mature on April 1, 2021, have been designated as a cash flow hedging instrument and qualified as effective hedges at inception under ASC Topic 815 “Derivatives and Hedging”. These contracts are recognized on the balance sheet at fair value. The effective portion of the changes in fair value on these contracts is recorded in other comprehensive income (loss) and is reclassified into the Consolidated Statements of Operations as interest expense in the same period in which the underlying transaction affects earnings.
With respect to derivatives designated as hedges, the Company formally documents all relationships between hedging instruments and hedged items, as well as its risk management objective and strategy for undertaking such transactions. The Company evaluates hedge effectiveness at the time a contract is entered into and on an ongoing basis. If a swap contract is deemed ineffective, the change in the fair value of the derivative is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Operations as interest expense.
Foreign Currency Translation
The reporting currency of the Company and its subsidiaries is the U.S. dollar. The functional currency of the Company’s subsidiary in Canada is the U.S. dollar because the majority of its revenue is denominated in U.S. dollars. The functional currency of the Company’s Indian and European subsidiaries is their local currency. The
results of operations of the Company’s Indian and European subsidiaries are translated at the monthly average exchange rates prevailing during the period. The financial position of the Company’s Indian and European subsidiaries is translated at the current exchange rates at the end of the period, and the related translation adjustments are recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) within Shareholders’ Equity. Gains and losses resulting from foreign currency transactions are included as a component of other income (expense), net in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, and have not been material for all periods presented.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Recent accounting pronouncements are described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8, herein.