Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s Results of Operations includes a comparison of fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2019. A similar discussion and analysis that compares fiscal 2019 to fiscal 2018 may be found in Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” of the Company’s Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
During the past two decades, the Company has grown significantly. Its current geographic breadth and diverse product offering are reflected in three reporting segments: Global Ceramic; Flooring North America (“Flooring NA”); and Flooring Rest of the World (“Flooring ROW”). The Global Ceramic Segment designs, manufactures, sources and markets a broad line of ceramic tile, porcelain tile, natural stone tile and other products including natural stone, quartz and porcelain slab countertops, which it distributes primarily in North America, Europe, Brazil and Russia through various selling channels, which include company-owned stores, independent distributors and home centers. The Flooring NA Segment designs, manufactures, sources and markets its floor covering products, including broadloom carpet, carpet tile, rugs, carpet cushion, laminate and vinyl products, including luxury vinyl tile (LVT) and sheet vinyl, and wood flooring, all of which it distributes through its network of regional distribution centers and satellite warehouses using Company-operated trucks, common carriers or rail transportation. The Segment’s product lines are sold through various channels, including independent floor covering retailers, independent distributors, home centers, mass merchandisers, department stores, shop at home, online retailers, buying groups, commercial contractors and commercial end users. The Flooring ROW Segment designs, manufactures, sources, licenses and markets laminate, vinyl products, including LVT and sheet vinyl, wood flooring, roofing panels, insulation boards, medium-density fiberboard (“MDF”) and chipboards, which it distributes primarily in Europe, Russia, Australia and New Zealand through various channels, including independent floor covering retailers, independent distributors, company-owned distributors, home centers, commercial contractors and commercial end users.
Mohawk is a significant supplier of every major flooring category with manufacturing operations in 18 nations and sales in more than 170 countries. Based on its annual sales, the Company believes it is the world’s largest flooring manufacturer. A majority of the Company’s long-lived assets are located in the United States and Europe, which are also the Company’s primary markets. Additionally, the Company maintains operations in United Kingdom, Russia, Mexico, Australia, New Zealand, Brazil and other parts of the world. The Company is a leading provider of flooring for residential and commercial markets and has earned significant recognition for its innovation in design and performance as well as sustainability.
Due to its global footprint, Mohawk’s business is sensitive to macroeconomic events in the United States and abroad. The current environment has placed unprecedented demands on the Company’s operations as the COVID-19 pandemic has caused disruptions to the Company's markets and operations around the world. While the near-term economic and financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is improving in its residential markets, the Company expects that it will continue to see fluctuating demand across a number of its markets. In order to mitigate the impact of lower demand during the initial stages of the pandemic, the Company was able to utilize retention related tax credits and certain tax deferrals for employers where the Company has significant operations. During the year, the Company also completed actions prompted by the evolving health crisis to enhance future performance including site closings, other facility and product rationalizations and workforce reductions. The Company anticipates these global actions will deliver savings of approximately $100 to $110 million of which approximately $50 million was realized in 2020, with 2020 cost of $150 million.
The Company believes it has the experience and resources necessary to capitalize on opportunities that will arise as employees return to work around the world and macroeconomic conditions improve. The Company also believes it is well positioned with a strong balance sheet and limited debt. During 2020, the Company issued over $1 billion of long-term bonds to strengthen its ability to strategically invest and better position itself for the future. Finally, the Company is following the recommendations of local health authorities to minimize exposure risk for its employees, suppliers, customers and other stakeholders. For information on risk factors that could impact the Company’s results, please refer to “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
In 2018, the Company completed five acquisitions: two that expanded the Company’s global footprint with leadership positions in major markets and three that extended the Company’s product offering and distribution in Europe. The Godfrey Hirst acquisition established the Company as the largest flooring manufacturer in Australia and New Zealand, with leading carpet and hard surface positions in both countries when combined with the Company’s existing regional flooring distribution business. Godfrey Hirst’s prestigious wool carpet collections are exported to numerous international markets and have been integrated into the U.S. soft surface product portfolio to expand sales. The acquisition of Brazil-based Eliane provided the Company with a leading ceramic tile position, the most appealing brand in one of the world’s largest ceramic tile markets and a gateway into the overall South American market as Eliane is Brazil’s largest ceramic exporter. The Company has made significant investments in both Godfrey Hirst and Eliane to upgrade product offerings, expand capacity and improve processes. The acquisition of Berghoef, a leading European mezzanine flooring company, created a leading position in a category that is rapidly expanding due to increased construction of e-commerce warehousing across the continent. The acquisition of Swiss and Italian hard surface distributors expanded the Company’s direct distribution of flooring sales in Europe, and two more hard surfaces distributors in The Netherlands and the Czech Republic were added in 2019.
In 2020, the Company invested $425.6 million in capital projects to introduce new product categories, enter new markets, expand capacity of constrained premium products and improve productivity. In 2021, the Company plans to invest approximately an additional $570-$590 million to complete existing projects and commence new initiatives. The Company plans to invest in cost reduction initiatives, upgrades in recent acquisitions and previously initiated expansion projects as well as maintenance across the businesses. The main investment areas include the Company’s recently acquired ceramic tile business in Brazil and the Godfrey Hirst Group in Australia and New Zealand where the Company is investing to upgrade its product offering and improve profitability; premium water-proof laminate in the U.S.; outdoor porcelain pavers manufacturing in Europe; and premium sanitary ware manufacturing in Russia.
Net earnings attributable to the Company were $515.6 million, or diluted EPS of $7.22 for 2020 compared to net earnings attributable to the Company of $744.2 million, or diluted EPS of $10.30 for 2019. The Company’s operations and net earnings for the period were unfavorably affected by disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The change in EPS was primarily attributable to the unfavorable net impact of lower volumes, the unfavorable net impact of price and product mix, costs due to reducing production, higher restructuring, acquisition and integration-related costs, and costs associated with investments in new product development, partially offset by productivity gains and lower inflation costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company generated $1,769.8 million of cash from operating activities. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $768.6 million, of which $331.7 million was in the United States and $436.9 million was in foreign countries, in addition to $571.7 million in short-term investments. On May 14, 2020, the Company issued $500.0 million of 3.625% senior notes due May 15, 2030, which the Company used to pay off existing short-term debt. On June 12, 2020, a subsidiary of the Company issued €500.0 million of 1.750% senior notes due June 12, 2027, which the Company has used to strengthen its balance sheet in light of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Results of Operations
Following are the results of operations for the last two years:
Year Ended December 31, 2020, as Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net sales
The Company’s global sales were affected by broader economic issues related to the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in decreased demand during the period. Net sales for 2020 were $9,552.2 million, reflecting a decrease of $418.5 million, or 4.2%, from the $9,970.7 million reported for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to the lower sales volume of approximately $240 million, the unfavorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $119 million, and the unfavorable net impact from foreign exchange rates of approximately $59 million.
Global Ceramic Segment-Net sales decreased $198.3 million, or 5.5%, to $3,432.8 million for 2020, compared to $3,631.1 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower sales volume of approximately $89 million, the unfavorable net impact from foreign exchange rates of approximately $77 million, and the unfavorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $33 million.
Flooring NA Segment-Net sales decreased $249.6 million, or 6.5%, to $3,594.1 million for 2020, compared to $3,843.7 million for 2019. The decrease was attributable to lower volumes of approximately $200 million, and the unfavorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $49 million.
Flooring ROW Segment-Net sales increased $29.6 million, or 1.2%, to $2,525.4 million for 2020, compared to $2,495.8 million for 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to higher sales volume of approximately $49 million, and favorable net impact from foreign exchange rates of approximately $18 million, partially offset by the unfavorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $37 million.
Quarterly net sales and the percentage changes in net sales by quarter for 2020 versus 2019 were as follows (dollars in millions):
Gross profit
The Company experienced increased costs associated with short-term reductions in manufacturing output in addition to decreased demand as a result of the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Gross profit for 2020 was $2,430.7 million (25.4% of net sales), a decrease of $245.3 million or 9.2%, compared to gross profit of $2,676.0 million (26.8% of net sales) for 2019. As a percentage of net sales, gross profit decreased 140 basis points. The decrease in gross profit dollars was primarily attributable to the lower sales volume of approximately $128 million, the unfavorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $122 million, costs due to temporarily reduced production of approximately $116 million, the impact of restructuring, acquisition and integration-related costs of approximately $29 million, and the unfavorable net impact from foreign exchange rates of approximately $20 million, partially offset by productivity gain of approximately $88 million, lower inflation of approximately $75 million and approximately $9 million of lower startup cost.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for 2020 were $1,794.7 million (18.8% of net sales), an decrease of $54.1 million or (2.9)% compared to $1,848.8 million (18.5% of net sales) for 2019. As a percentage of net sales, selling, general and administrative expenses increased 30 basis points. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses in dollars was primarily attributable to productivity gain of approximately $93 million, favorable foreign exchange rates of approximately $9 million, partially offset by the impact of restructuring, acquisition and integration-related costs of approximately $23 million, higher inflation costs of approximately $19 million, and approximately $10 million of costs associated with investments in new product development, sales personnel and marketing.
Operating income
As previously discussed, the Company’s operations for the year were negatively impacted by disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in decreased demand and increased costs associated with short-term reductions in manufacturing output. Operating income for 2020 was $636.0 million (6.7% of net sales) reflecting a decrease of $191.2 million, or 23.1%, compared to operating income of $827.2 million (8.3% of net sales) for 2019. The decrease in operating income was primarily attributable to approximately $133 million due to lower sales volume, the unfavorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $122 million, approximately $116 million of costs due to temporarily reduced production, the impact of restructuring, acquisition and integration-related costs of approximately $52 million, and approximately $10 million of costs associated with investments in new product development, partially offset by higher productivity gain of approximately $180 million, lower inflation costs of approximately $56 million, and lower startup costs of approximately $15 million.
Global Ceramic Segment-Operating income was $167.7 million (4.9% of segment net sales) for 2020 reflecting a decrease of $167.9 million, or 50.0%, compared to operating income of $335.6 million (9.2% of segment net sales) for 2019. The decrease in operating income was primarily attributable to approximately $69 million of costs due to temporarily reduced production, the impact of restructuring, acquisition and integration-related costs of approximately $57 million, the unfavorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $52 million, approximately $49 million due to lower sales volume, higher inflation costs of approximately $7 million, and approximately $5 million of costs associated with investments in new product development, sales personnel and marketing, partially offset by higher productivity gain of approximately $70 million.
Flooring NA Segment-Operating income was $147.4 million (4.1% of segment net sales) for 2020 reflecting a decrease of $30.2 million, or 17.0%, compared to operating income of $177.6 million (4.6% of segment net sales) for 2019. The decrease in operating income was primarily attributable to approximately $81 million in decreased sales volume, the unfavorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $40 million, approximately $31 million of costs due to temporarily reduced production, partially offset by higher productivity gain of approximately $61 million, the impact of lower restructuring, acquisition and integration-related costs of approximately $29 million, lower inflation costs of approximately $28 million and lower startup costs of approximately $4 million.
Flooring ROW Segment-Operating income was $366.9 million (14.5% of segment net sales) for 2020 reflecting an increase of $13.2 million, or 3.7%, compared to operating income of $353.7 million (14.2% of segment net sales) for 2019. The increase in operating income was primarily attributable to higher productivity gain of approximately $48 million, lower inflation costs of approximately $38 million, partially offset by unfavorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $30 million, the impact of restructuring, acquisition and integration-related costs of approximately $20 million, approximately $16 million of costs due to temporarily reduced production, and the unfavorable net impact from foreign exchange rates of approximately $9 million.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $52.4 million for 2020, reflecting an increase of $11.1 million compared to interest expense of $41.3 million for 2019. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company issued new long-term debt to strengthen its liquidity position during the early months of the COVID pandemic. The new debt issuance shifted the Company from a mix of fixed and floating rate debt, with a lower average interest rate, to more fixed rate debt, which carries a higher average interest rate.
Other expense (income)
Other income was $0.8 million for 2020, reflecting a favorable change of $37.2 million compared to other expense of $36.4 million for 2019. The change was primarily attributable to a net impairment charge of $59.9 million related to the Company’s net investment in a manufacturer and distributor of ceramic tile in China in 2019, partially offset by unfavorable FX and other miscellaneous items.
Income tax expense
For 2020, the Company recorded income tax expense of $68.6 million on earnings before income taxes of $584.4 million for an effective tax rate of 11.7%, as compared to an income tax expense of $5.0 million on earnings before income taxes of $749.5 million, resulting in an effective tax rate of 0.7% for 2019. In 2020, the Company realized a $33.8 million carryback rate differential in the U.S. and had a $10.3 million tax benefit from a foreign exchange loss on previously taxed earnings distributed during the year. In 2019, the Company implemented select operational, administrative and financial restructurings that centralized certain business processes and intangible assets in various European jurisdictions into a new entity. This implementation resulted in a net tax benefit of $136.2 million. In both 2020 and 2019, the Company was favorably impacted by its geographic mix of earnings.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s primary capital requirements are for working capital, capital expenditures and acquisitions. The Company’s capital needs are met primarily through a combination of internally generated funds, commercial paper, bank credit lines, term and senior notes and credit terms from suppliers. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a total of $1,799.2 million available under its Senior Credit Facility. The Company also maintains local currency revolving lines of credit and other credit facilities to provide liquidity to its businesses around the world. None of such local facilities are material in amount.
Management has and will continue to evaluate its liquidity needs and strategy regarding capital resources as the economic crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic evolves. In the second quarter of 2020, the Company issued $500.0 million of 3.625% senior notes, and a subsidiary of the Company issued €500.0 million of 1.750% senior notes, with ten and seven-year terms, respectively. The Company has taken multiple actions including managing inventory and production capacity, and reduced headcount through furloughs and layoffs. Management believes these actions along with cash secured from increased borrowing and continuing operations will allow the Company to take advantage of new opportunities.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended 2020 was $1,769.8 million, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $1,418.8 million for the year ended 2019. This increase of $351.1 million was primarily attributable to changes in working capital, partially offset by lower net earnings. The increase in cash provided by operating activities for 2019 as compared to 2018 of $237.4 million was primarily attributable to changes in working capital, partially offset by lower net earnings.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended 2020 was $954.8 million compared to net cash used in investing activities of $616.0 million for the year ended 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in the purchases of short-term investments of $539.7 million (net of redemption of short-term investments), partially offset by reduced capital expenditures of $119.9 million and a decrease in acquisition costs of $81.1 million. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended 2019 was $616.0 million compared to net cash used in investing activities of $1,332.2 million for the year ended 2018. The decrease was primarily due to a $487.9 million reduction in acquisitions and a $248.6 million reduction in capital expenditures.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended 2020 was $188.2 million compared to net cash used in financing activities of $789.9 million for the year ended 2019. The change in cash used in financing is primarily attributable to the proceeds from the Senior Notes of $735.3 million (net of repayments of $326.9 million), partially offset by the increase in purchases of the Company’s shares of $88.5 million. Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended 2019 was $789.9 million compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $198.0 million for the year ended 2018. The change in cash used in financing is primarily attributable to lower borrowings of commercial paper of $860.6 million.
On October 26, 2020, after considering the Company’s liquidity position and strong cash flows, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a new share repurchase program, authorizing the Company to repurchase up to $500 million of its common stock. This was incremental to the previously approved 2018 Share Repurchase Program. In the fourth quarter 2020, the Company purchased $120.0 million of its common stock, exhausting the $57.1 million remaining under the 2018 Program as of October 26, 2020, and utilizing $62.8 million under the 2020 Program. As of December 31, 2020, there remains $437.2 million authorized under the 2020 Program.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had cash of $768.6 million, of which $436.9 million was held outside the United States. In addition to its cash on hand, the Company also had short-term investments of $571.7 million as of December 31, 2020. The Company plans to permanently reinvest the cash held outside the United States. The Company believes that its cash and cash equivalents, and short-term investments on hand, cash generated from operations and availability under its Senior Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet its planned capital expenditure, further working capital investment and debt servicing requirements over the next twelve months.
See Note 10. Long-Term Debt, of the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further discussion of the Company’s long-term debt. The Company may continue, from time to time, to retire its outstanding debt through cash purchases in the open market, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, the Company’s liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amount involved may be material.
Contractual obligations and commitments
The following is a summary of the Company’s future minimum payments under contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 (in millions):
(1)For fixed rate debt, the Company calculated interest based on the applicable rates and payment dates. For variable rate debt, the Company estimated average outstanding balances for the respective periods and applied interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2020 to these balances.
(2)Includes volume commitments for primarily raw material purchases.
(3)Includes the estimated pension contributions for 2021 only, as the Company is unable to estimate the pension contributions beyond 2021. The Company’s projected benefit obligation and plan assets as of December 31, 2020 were $86.7 million and $68.4 million, respectively. The projected benefit obligation liability has not been presented in the table above due to uncertainty as to amounts and timing regarding future payments.
(4)Excludes $44.7 million of non-current accrued income tax liabilities and related interest and penalties for uncertain tax positions. These liabilities have not been presented in the table above due to uncertainty as to amounts and timing regarding future payments.
(5)Includes bank guarantees and letters of credit.
Critical Accounting Policies
In preparing the consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, the Company must make decisions which impact the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures. Such decisions include the selection of appropriate accounting principles to be applied and the assumptions on which to base accounting estimates. In reaching such decisions, the Company applies judgment based on its understanding and analysis of the relevant circumstances and historical experience. Actual amounts could differ from those estimated at the time the consolidated financial statements are prepared.
The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Some of those significant accounting policies require the Company to make subjective or complex judgments or estimates. Critical accounting estimates are defined as those that are both most important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results and require management’s most difficult, subjective, or complex judgment, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods.
The Company believes the following accounting policies require it to use judgments and estimates in preparing its consolidated financial statements and represent critical accounting policies.
•Accounts receivable and revenue recognition. The Company recognizes revenues when it satisfies performance obligations as evidenced by the transfer of control of the promised goods to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods. The nature of the promised goods are ceramic, stone, carpet, resilient, laminate, wood and other flooring products. Payment is typically received 90 days or less from the invoice date. The Company adjusts the amounts of revenue for expected cash discounts, sales allowances, returns, and claims, based upon historical experience. The Company adjusts accounts receivable for doubtful account allowances based upon relevant information about past events, including historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts that affect the collectability of the reported amount, periodic evaluation of specific customer accounts, and the aging of accounts receivable. If the Company expects the financial condition of the Company’s customers to deteriorate based on current conditions or reasonable and supportable forecasts, additional allowances may be required. A 10% change in the Company’s allowance for discounts, returns, claims and doubtful accounts would have affected net earnings by approximately $7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
•Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market (net realizable value). Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market (net realizable value). Cost has been determined using the first-in first-out method (“FIFO”). Costs included in inventory include raw materials, direct and indirect labor and employee benefits, depreciation, general manufacturing overhead and various other costs of manufacturing. Market, with respect to all inventories, is replacement cost or net realizable value. Inventories on hand are compared against anticipated future usage, which is a function of historical usage, anticipated future selling price, expected sales below cost, excessive quantities and an evaluation for obsolescence. Actual results could differ from assumptions used to value obsolete inventory, excessive inventory or inventory expected to be sold below cost, and a 10% change in the Company’s assumptions for excess or obsolete inventory would have affected net earnings by approximately $18 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
•Acquisition Accounting. The fair value of the consideration the Company pays for each new acquisition is allocated to tangible assets and identifiable intangible assets, liabilities assumed, any noncontrolling interest in the acquired entity and goodwill. The accounting for acquisitions involves a considerable amount of judgment and estimate, including the fair value of certain forms of consideration; fair value of acquired intangible assets involving projections of future revenues and cash flows that are then either discounted at an estimated discount rate or measured at an estimated royalty rate; fair value of other acquired assets and assumed liabilities, including potential contingencies; and the useful lives of the acquired assets. The assumptions used are determined at the time of the acquisition in accordance with accepted valuation models. Projections are developed using internal forecasts, available industry and market data and estimates of long-term rates of growth for the business. The impact of prior or future acquisitions on the Company’s financial position or results of operations may be materially impacted by the change in or initial selection of assumptions and estimates. See Note 2, Acquisitions included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further discussion of business combination accounting valuation methodology and assumptions.
•Goodwill and other intangibles. Goodwill is tested annually for impairment in the fourth quarter or earlier upon the occurrence of certain events or substantive changes in circumstances. The Company considers the relationship between its market capitalization and its book value, among other factors, when reviewing for indicators of impairment. The goodwill impairment tests are based on determining the fair value of the specified reporting units based on management judgments and assumptions using the discounted cash flows and comparable company market valuation approaches. The Company has identified Global Ceramic, Flooring NA and Flooring ROW as its reporting units for the purposes of allocating goodwill and intangibles as well as assessing impairments. The valuation approaches are subject to key judgments and assumptions that are sensitive to change such as judgments and assumptions about appropriate sales growth rates, operating margins, weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”), and comparable company market multiples. When developing these key judgments and assumptions, the Company considers economic, operational and market conditions that could impact the fair value of the reporting unit. However, estimates are inherently uncertain and represent only management’s reasonable expectations regarding future developments. These estimates and the judgments and assumptions upon which the estimates are based will, in all likelihood, differ in some respects from actual future results. Should a significant or prolonged deterioration in economic conditions occur, such as declines in spending for new construction, remodeling and replacement activities; the inability to pass increases in the costs of raw materials and fuel on to customers; or a decline in comparable company market multiples, then key judgments and assumptions could be impacted. Generally, a decline in estimated after tax cash flows greater than approximately10% to 33% or a percentage increase of approximately 7% to 38% in WACC or a significant or prolonged decline in market capitalization could result in an additional indication of impairment.
The impairment test for intangible assets not subject to amortization involves a comparison of the estimated fair value of the intangible asset with its carrying value. If the carrying value of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. Significant judgments inherent in this analysis include assumptions about appropriate sales growth rates, royalty rates, WACC and the amount of expected future cash flows. These judgments and assumptions are subject to the variability discussed above.
The impairment evaluation for indefinite lived intangible assets, which for the Company are its trademarks, is conducted on the first day of the fourth quarter of each year, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that an asset might be impaired. The determination of fair value used in the impairment evaluation is based on discounted estimates of future sales projections attributable to ownership of the trademarks. Significant judgments inherent in this analysis include assumptions about appropriate sales growth rates, royalty rates, WACC and the amount of expected future cash flows. The judgments and assumptions used in the estimate of fair value are generally consistent with past performance and are also consistent with the projections and assumptions that are used in operating plans. Such assumptions are subject to change as a result of changing economic and competitive conditions. The determination of fair value is highly sensitive to differences between estimated and actual cash flows and changes in the related discount rate used to evaluate the fair value of the trademarks. Estimated cash flows are sensitive to changes in the economy among other things.
The Company reviews its long-lived asset groups, which include intangible assets subject to amortization, which for the Company are its patents and customer relationships, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such asset groups may not be recoverable. Recoverability of asset groups to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of long-lived assets to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by these asset groups. If such asset groups are considered to be impaired, the impairment recognized is the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds the fair value of the asset group. Assets held for sale are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less estimated costs of disposal and are no longer depreciated.
The Company conducted its annual assessment of goodwill and indefinite lived intangibles on the first day of the fourth quarter and no impairment was indicated for 2020. While the Company has concluded that neither goodwill nor any of its indefinite-lived intangible assets were impaired during the year ended December 31, 2020, a prolonged pandemic could impact the Company’s assumptions utilized in the determination of the estimated fair values of the Company’s reporting units and indefinite-lived intangible assets significantly enough to trigger an impairment. Hence, the Company continues to monitor the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and may be required to reassess impairment of goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets in future interim periods.
•Income taxes. The Company’s effective tax rate is based on its income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available in the jurisdictions in which it operates. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. Significant judgment is required in determining the Company’s tax expense and in evaluating the Company’s tax positions. Deferred tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in a future period. The Company evaluates the recoverability of these future tax benefits by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies. These sources of income inherently rely on estimates, including business forecasts and other projections of financial results over an extended period of time. In the event that the Company is not able to realize all or a portion of its deferred tax assets in the future, a valuation allowance is provided. The Company would recognize such amounts through a charge to income in the period in which that determination is made or when tax law changes are enacted. For further information regarding the Company’s valuation allowances, see Note 15, Income Taxes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
In the ordinary course of business there is inherent uncertainty in quantifying the Company’s income tax positions. The Company assesses its income tax positions and records tax benefits for all years subject to examination based upon the Company’s evaluation of the facts, circumstances and information available as of the reporting date. For those tax positions where it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, the Company has recorded the largest amount of tax benefit with a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information, as required by the provisions of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) FASB Accounting Standards Codification Topic (“ASC”) 740-10. For those income tax positions where it is not more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, no tax benefit has been recognized in the consolidated financial statements. For further information regarding the Company’s uncertain tax positions, see Note 15, Income Taxes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
•Environmental and legal accruals. Environmental and legal accruals are estimates based on judgments made by the Company relating to ongoing environmental and legal proceedings, as disclosed in the Company’s consolidated financial statements. In determining whether a liability is probable and reasonably estimable, the Company consults with its internal experts. The Company believes that the amounts recorded in the accompanying financial statements are based on the best estimates and judgments available to it.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1(y), “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, of the Company’s accompanying audited Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements including the dates, or expected dates of adoption, and effects, or expected effects, on the Company’s disclosures, results of operations and financial condition.
Impact of Inflation
Inflation affects the Company’s manufacturing costs, distribution costs and operating expenses. The Company expects raw material prices, many of which are petroleum based, to fluctuate based upon worldwide supply and demand of commodities utilized in the Company’s production processes. Although the Company attempts to pass on increases in raw material, energy and fuel-related costs to its customers, the Company’s ability to do so is dependent upon the rate and magnitude of any increase, competitive pressures and market conditions for the Company’s products. There have been in the past, and may be in the future, periods of time during which increases in these costs cannot be fully recovered. In the past, the Company has often been able to enhance productivity and develop new product innovations to help offset increases in costs resulting from inflation in its operations.
Seasonality
The Company is a calendar year-end company. With respect to its Global Ceramic segment, the second quarter typically sees highest net sales, followed by the third and fourth quarters while the first quarter shows weakest net sales. For the segment’s operating income, generally, the second quarter shows the strongest earnings, followed by third and first quarters, and the fourth quarter shows weakest earnings. The Flooring NA segment’s third quarter typically produces the highest net sales and earnings followed by moderate second and fourth quarters, and a weakest first quarter. The Flooring ROW segment’s fourth quarter historically typically produces the highest net sales followed by moderate third and second quarters, and a weakest first quarter. For the segment’s operating income, generally, the second quarter shows the strongest earnings, followed by third and first quarters, and the fourth quarter shows weakest earnings.
The COVID-19 pandemic has created significant volatility in the global economy and has led to reduced economic activity, employment disruptions and supply chain constraints. The Company expects the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to continue to impact normal seasonality trends into 2021, but the extent and duration of such impact cannot be predicted.