ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements and Notes thereto. Our fiscal year ends March 31. This document contains certain forward-looking statements regarding anticipated trends in our financial condition and results of operations and our business strategy. (See Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors “). These forward-looking statements are based largely on our current expectations and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from these forward-looking statements. Important factors to consider in evaluating such forward-looking statements include (i) changes in external factors or in our internal budgeting process which might impact trends in our results of operations; (ii) unanticipated working capital or other cash requirements; (iii) changes in our business strategy or an inability to execute our strategy due to unanticipated changes in the industries in which we operate; and (iv) various competitive market factors that may prevent us from competing successfully in the marketplace.
Statements included in this Annual Report that do not relate to present or historical conditions are called “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Such forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks and uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results or outcomes to differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements may include, without limitation, statements relating to our plans, strategies, objectives, expectations and intentions. Words such as “believes,” “forecasts,” “intends,” “possible,” “estimates,” “anticipates,” “expects,” “plans,” “should,” “could,” “will,” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Our ability to predict or project future results or the effect of events on our operating results is inherently uncertain. Forward-looking statements should not be read as a guarantee of future performance or results, and will not necessarily be accurate indications of the times at, or by which, such performance or results will be achieved.
OVERVIEW
Our primary objectives for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 (“Fiscal 2021”) were to:
● increase our revenues by expanding our product lines and customer base;
● maintain the general and administrative costs while increasing revenue;
● decrease ending inventory on hand;
● improve profitability;
Revenues increased by approximately $7.3 million or approximately 19.0% primarily due to a significant sales increase of the Carpool Karaoke product and increased demand in home entertainment products primarily due to school closures, lockdowns and quarantines caused by COVID-19. There were no one-time reductions in revenue as in the prior fiscal year when revenue was reduced by approximately $1.7 million from chargebacks from one major customer due to water damaged goods received. Gross profit margins increased by approximately 5.6 margin points to 26.8% primarily due to the high margin yield contribution from the Carpool Karaoke product and a significant reduction in co-op promotion incentives as several major customers did not offer their usual holiday campaigns. Operating expenses decreased approximately $0.6 million primarily due a decrease in discretionary marketing expenses as the Company did not incur costs associated with the one-time promotion rollout of the new Carpool Karaoke that were incurred in the prior fiscal year. Inventory on hand decreased by approximately $2.1 million primarily due the sale of excess inventory from the prior fiscal year due to the significant sales increase in the Carpool Karaoke product and increased demand in home entertainment products associated COVID 19 activity restrictions. Net income increased by approximately $5.0 million primarily due to the increase in net income from operations and one-time gains associated with the insurance recovery and vendor settlement of losses incurred in the prior fiscal year from the water damaged goods incident.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain income and expense items expressed as a percentage of the Company’s total revenues:
FISCAL YEAR ENDED MARCH 31, 2021 COMPARED WITH FISCAL YEAR ENDED MARCH 31, 2020
NET SALES
Net sales for the year ended March 31, 2021 (“Fiscal 2021”) were approximately $45.8 million. This represents an increase of approximately $7.3 million as compared to approximately $38.5 million in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 (“Fiscal 2020”). There was an increase in sales of our Carpool Karaoke Product (“CPK”) of approximately $2.7 million as the product gained popularity on social media. There was an increase in product demand and a decrease in overstock returns of approximately $2.0 million due to the increase in demand for home entertainment products like karaoke related to COVID 19 activity restrictions. There was no one-time revenue loss as in the prior fiscal year when we experienced a loss of revenue of approximately $1.6 million of chargebacks from a major customer due to a water damaged goods incident. There was a decrease in co-op promotion incentives of approximately $0.9 million as several major customers did not run customary holiday promotions.
GROSS PROFIT
Gross profit for Fiscal 2021 was approximately $12.3 million or 26.8% of total revenues compared to approximately $8.2 million or 21.2% of sales for Fiscal 2020, an increase of approximately $4.1 million as compared to the same period in the prior year. The increase in net sales and decrease in co-op promotion incentives as explained above accounted for approximately $1.6 million and $0.8 million, respectively of the increase in gross profit. The remaining increase of approximately $1.6 million was primarily due to an increase in profit margin primarily from the increased sales of CPK product which yield significantly higher gross profit margin.
Gross profit margin for Fiscal 2021 was 26.8% compared to 21.2% for Fiscal 2020, an increase of 5.6 margin points. The decrease in in co-op promotion incentives of approximately $0.9 million as explained above accounted for approximately 3.3 points of the increase in gross profit margin. There was an increase in gross profit margin of approximately $1.6 million or 1.5 margin points due to increased sales of our CPK product which yielded average gross profit margins of 59.8%. The remaining 0.8 margin point increase was primarily due to the mix of products sold.
OPERATING EXPENSES
In fiscal year 2021, our operating expenses decreased from approximately $11.5 million to approximately $10.9 million, a decrease of approximately $0.6 million compared to the same period last year. Selling expenses decreased by approximately $0.3 million due to a decrease in discretionary marketing expenses of approximately $0.5 million associated with one-time expenses associated with the rollout of the new CPK Product in the prior year and offset by an increase of approximately in $0.2 million in royalty expense associated with the increase in licensed CPK product.
There was a decrease in bad debt expense of approximately $0.2 million as only one smaller customer filed for bankruptcy in fiscal 2021 compared to the bankruptcy filing of two customers of approximately $0.3 million in fiscal 2020.
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSES)
Other income and (expenses), net increased by approximately $1.5 million to approximately $1.2 in other income, net for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 compared to approximately $0.3 million in other expenses, net for the same period ended March 31, 2020. This increase in other income, net was primarily due to one-time gains associated with the recovery of approximately $1.1 million in out-of-pocket expenses relating to a prior year damaged goods insurance claim and a vendor settling accounts payable of $0.4 million from the factory that caused the damage. There was an additional one-time gain of approximately $0.2 million from Cosmo, a related party, related to payment in fiscal 2021 of prior year sales which were reversed and the related receivable was initially deemed uncollectible and written off in the prior fiscal year. These increases in other income were offset by an increase in interest expense and amortization of deferred financing costs of approximately $0.2 million associated with the financing terms of the Crestmark Facility and IHC Facility.
INCOME (LOSS) BEFORE INCOME TAX (PROVISION) BENEFIT
We had income before income tax provision of approximately $2.6 million in Fiscal 2021 compared to a loss before tax benefit of approximately $3.5 million in Fiscal 2020 for a total increase in income before income tax provision of approximately $6.1 million. Net income from operations contributed approximately $4.6 million of the increase due increases in net sales and gross profit and decreased operating expenses as explained above. The increase in other income and expenses, net of $1.5 million as explained above accounted for the remaining increase in income before income tax provision.
INCOME TAX BENEFIT (PROVISION)
Significant management judgment is required in developing our provisions for income taxes, including the determination of foreign tax liabilities, deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowances that might be required against deferred tax assets. Management evaluates its ability to realize its deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis and adjusts its valuation allowance when it believes that it is not likely to be realized. On March 31, 2021 and 2020, we had net deferred tax assets of approximately $0.9 million and approximately $1.3 million, respectively. The deferred tax assets on March 31, 2021 and 2020 were net of a valuation allowance of approximately $23,000 and approximately $88,000, respectively due to management’s belief that certain tax assets will more than likely expire prior to the Company’s these assets being realized.
In Fiscal 2021 we recognized an income tax provision of approximately $0.5 million compared to an income tax benefit of approximately $0.6 million in Fiscal 2020. The Company’s effective tax rate for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 was approximately 17.4% as compared to 18.1% for Fiscal 2020.
We operate within multiple taxing jurisdictions and are subject to audit in those jurisdictions. Because of the complex issues involved, any claims can require an extended period to resolve. In management’s opinion, adequate provisions for income taxes have been made.
NET INCOME
As a result of the foregoing, we had net income of approximately $2.2 million and a net loss of approximately $2.9 million for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
On March 31, 2021, we had cash on hand of approximately $0.4 million as compared to cash on hand of approximately $0.3 million on March 31, 2020. The increase of cash on hand of approximately $0.1 million was primarily due to approximately $0.2 million provided by operating activities and approximately $0.1 million in net cash provided by financing activities offset by approximately $0.2 million used for the purchase of fixed assets. As of March 31, 2021 our working capital was approximately $5.9 million.
During the next twelve-month period, we plan on financing our working capital needs primarily from:
1) Vendor financing - All our key vendors in China have agreed to manufacture on behalf of the Company without advanced payments and have extended payment terms to the Company. The terms with the factories are sufficient to cover the factory direct import sales which are expected to account for approximately 50% of the total revenues in Fiscal 2022.
2) Line of Credit - The Company now has an Intercreditor Revolving Credit Facility expiring on June 15, 2022 with Crestmark Bank for a $10.0 million facility (decreasing to $5.0 million in off-peak season) on eligible accounts receivable and a $2.5 million facility on eligible inventory with Iron Horse Credit expiring on June 15, 2022. As both the Crestmark Facility and the IHC Facility are set to expire on June 15, 2022, the Company expects to negotiate a revision or extension of these debt facilities upon their maturity however, there can be no assurance that such revision or extension will occur or at what terms. Approximately $2.0 million of borrowings are available under all our credit facilities as of the date of this filing.
The Company believes that our working capital, available borrowings and cash flows from operating activities are sufficient to meet our cash flow needs for at least the next twelve months from the date of this Form 10K filing.
Cash provided by operating activities in Fiscal 2021 was approximately $0.2 million. There was net income of approximately $2.2 million. There was a decrease in inventory of approximately $2.1 million primarily due to increased demand for our CPK product through social media awareness and increased demand for our home-based entertainment products during the COVID pandemic which allowed us to sell through most of the excess inventory from the prior fiscal year. There was a decrease in insurance receivable of approximately $1.3 million associated with the recovery of a pending insurance claim associated with water damaged goods in the prior fiscal year. These increases in cash provided by operations were offset by a reduction in accounts payable of approximately $3.2 million primarily due to the payment of significant amounts held back from the factory that caused the damaged goods issue in the prior fiscal year upon receipt of the related insurance claim proceeds. There was an increase in amounts due from banks of approximately $2.2 million due to excess cash collected over amounts due on the lines of credit associated with the operating cash generated from the reduction in inventory. There was a decrease in refunds due to customers of approximately $0.7 million associated with the settlement of the unpaid portion of chargebacks for damaged goods due to one customer from the prior fiscal year.
Cash provided by operating activities in Fiscal 2020 was approximately $0.4 million. There was a net loss of approximately $2.9 million. There was an increase in insurance receivable of approximately $1.3 million and an increase in inventory of approximately $1.8 million primarily due to significant overstock returns and excess Carpool Karaoke inventory as sales of this did not meet estimates. These decreases in net cash provided by operating activities were offset by an increase in accounts payable of approximately $4.2 million due to significant hold back of payments from the factory that caused the damaged goods issue pending collection of insurance proceeds, an increase in accrued expenses of approximately $0.7 million associated with estimated remaining co-op promotion incentives not yet deducted by customers, an increase in refunds due to customers of approximately $0.8 million primarily due to the unpaid portion of chargebacks for damaged goods due to one customer, and approximately $0.7 million due to related parties for services provided by the parent company and licensing fees for use of pedestal model molds and tooling belonging to the parent company.
Cash used by investing activities for Fiscal 2021 of approximately $0.2 million were primarily due to the purchase of molds and tooling for new karaoke models. Cash used by investing activities for Fiscal 2020 of approximately $0.5 million were primarily due to the purchase of a new business reporting system for approximately $0.3 million and the purchase of molds and tooling for new karaoke models of approximately $0.2
million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for Fiscal 2021 was approximately $0.1 million. We received loan proceeds from Crestmark in the amount of approximately $0.4 million under the Paycheck Protection Program. We received additional proceeds from our inventory line of credit of approximately $0.1 million. These proceeds were offset by principal payments made on subordinated related party debt of $0.3 million and payments on financed leases and installment notes of approximately $0.1 million.
Cash provided by financing activities for Fiscal 2020 was approximately $0.2 million. Proceeds of approximately $0.4 million from installment notes for financing the new business reporting system were offset by approximately $0.2 million in scheduled payments on the remaining portion of the bank term note and payments on financed leases and installment notes.
On June 16, 2020, the Company executed an Intercreditor Revolving Credit Facility with Crestmark and IHC on eligible accounts receivable and inventory which replaced the Company’s previous revolving credit facility with PNC Bank which was terminated on June 16, 2020 (See Note 5 - BANK FINANCING). As of this filing, we have borrowed approximately $0.8 million on the IHC Facility, which provides for a maximum loan amount of $2.5 million on eligible inventory approximately $0.4 million on our Crestmark Facility which will make available up to $10.0 million of eligible accounts receivable as the next twelve months progress. As of this filing the Company has approximately $1.0 million currently available from these two credit facilities based on eligible inventory with IHC and eligible accounts receivable with Crestmark.
In August 2019, a major customer received goods that were significantly water damaged due to excess moisture absorbed in pallets shipped by the factory. As a result, we incurred a loss in cash flow of approximately $1.6 million in lost revenue and approximately $0.8 million in additional out of pocket expenses to retrieve, inspect, warehouse and properly destroy the goods in the prior fiscal year. As of this filing we have we recovered approximately $2.3 million from our cargo insurance coverage which settled approximately $1.3 million in insurance claim receivable with the remaining proceeds reflected in other income and (expenses) as a gain from damaged goods insurance claim in the consolidated statement of operations. For the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, the gain from damaged goods insurance claim was approximately $1.1 million and $0.0 million, respectively. We also secured vendor invoice credits of approximately $0.4 million from the factory that caused the damage which is reflected as gain from extinguishment of accounts payable in the consolidated statement of operations.
On May 5, 2020, the Company received loan proceeds from Crestmark Bank in the amount of approximately $0.4 million under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The PPP was established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), which provides for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times of the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The loans and accrued interest may be forgivable to the extent the Company uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels. The amount of loan forgiveness may be reduced if the borrower terminates employees or reduces salaries during the eligible period. The unforgiven portion of the PPP loan is payable over two years at an interest rate of 1%, with a deferral of payments until a forgiveness application has been accepted and reviewed by the SBA, and the SBA has provided Crestmark with the loan forgiveness amount. For the year ended March 31, 2021 the Company incurred interest expense of approximately $4,000. June 2021, the Company was notified by the Small Business Administration that the loan had been forgiven in its entirety.
EXCHANGE RATES
We sell most of our products in U.S. dollars with some sales to certain Canadian customers in Canadian Dollars and pay for all of our manufacturing costs in either U.S. or Hong Kong dollars. We are subject to risks involved in the exchange rate between the Canadian and US dollar however, even though exchange rate has fluctuated between $1.21 to $1.33 CAD to the U.S. Dollar during peak selling and collection season in Fiscal 2021 sales volume sold in Canadian dollars was not significant and the associated exchange rates did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial results. Operating expenses of the Macau office are paid in either Hong Kong dollars or Macau Pataca (MOP). The exchange rate of the Hong Kong dollar to the U.S. dollar has been relatively stable at approximately HK $7.75 to U.S. $1.00 since 1983 and, accordingly, has not represented a currency exchange risk to the U.S. dollar. The exchange rate of the MOP to the U.S. dollar is approximately MOP $8.00 to U.S. $1.00. While exchange rates have been stable for several years, we cannot assure you that the exchange rate between the United States, Macau, Hong Kong and Canadian currencies will continue to be stable and exchange rate fluctuations may have a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations.
SEASONAL AND QUARTERLY RESULTS
Historically, our operations have been seasonal, with the highest net sales occurring in the second and third quarters (reflecting increased orders for equipment and music merchandise during the Christmas selling months) and to a lesser extent the first and fourth quarters of the fiscal year. Sales in our fiscal second and third quarter, combined, accounted for approximately 86% and 85% of net sales in Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively.
Our results of operations may also fluctuate from quarter to quarter as a result of the amount and timing of orders placed and shipped to customers, as well as other factors. The fulfillment of orders can therefore significantly affect results of operations on a quarter-to-quarter basis.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
We prepared our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. As such, management is required to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions that it believes are reasonable based on the information available. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses for the periods presented. The significant accounting policies which management believes are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results included accounts receivable allowance for doubtful accounts and reserves on inventory.
ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE AND COLLECTIBILITY
The Singing Machine’s accounts receivable consist of amounts due from customers in the ordinary course of business. Accounts receivable are carried at cost, net of allowances for uncollectible amounts. Provisions for losses are charged to operations in amounts sufficient to maintain an allowance for losses at a level considered adequate to cover probable losses inherent in the Company’s accounts receivable. The Singing Machine’s allowance for doubtful accounts is based on management’s estimates of the creditworthiness of its customers, current economic conditions and historical information, and, in the opinion of management, is believed to be an amount sufficient to respond to normal business conditions. Management sets 100% reserves for customers in bankruptcy and other reserves based upon historical collection experience. Should business conditions deteriorate or any major customer default on its obligations to the Company, this allowance may need to be significantly increased, which would have a negative impact on operations. The Company is subject to chargebacks from customers for co-op promotion incentives, defective returns, return freight and handling charges that are deducted from open invoices and reduce collectability of open invoices.
RESERVES ON INVENTORIES
The Singing Machine establishes a reserve on inventory based on the expected net realizable value of inventory on an item-by-item basis when it is apparent that the expected realizable value of an inventory item falls below its original cost. A charge to cost of sales results when the estimated net realizable value of specific inventory items declines below cost. Management regularly reviews the Company’s investment in inventories for such declines in value. On March 31, 2021 and 2020 the Company had inventory reserves of approximately $0.6 million and $0.4 million, respectively.
REVENUE RECOGNITION AND RESERVE FOR SALES RETURNS
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”. All revenue is generated from contracts with customers. The Company recognizes revenue when control of the goods sold is transferred to the customer, in an amount, referred to as the transaction price, that reflects the consideration to which the Company is expected to be entitled in exchange for those goods. The Company determines revenue recognition utilizing the following five steps: (1) identification of the contract with a customer, (2) identification of the performance obligations in the contract (promised goods or services that are distinct), (3) determination of the transaction price, (4) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations, and (5) recognition of revenue when, or as, the Company transfers control of the product or service for each performance obligation.
The Company’s contracts with customers consist of one performance obligation (the sale of the Company’s products). The Company’s contracts have no financing elements, payment terms are less than 120 days and have no further contract asset or liability obligations once control of goods is transferred to the customer. Revenue is recorded in the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive for the sale of these goods.
Costs incurred in fulfilling contracts with customers include administrative costs associated with the procurement of goods are included in general and administrative expenses, in-bound freight costs are included in the cost of goods sold and accrued sales representative commissions are included in selling expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations as our underlying customer agreements are less than one year.
The Company selectively participates in a retailer’s co-op promotion incentives to maximize sales of the Company’s products on the retail floor or to assist in developing consumer awareness of new product launches, by providing marketing fund allowances to our customers. As these co-op promotion incentives are not a distinct good or service and the Company cannot reasonably estimate the fair value of the benefit it receives from these arrangements, the cost of these allowances at the time they are offered to the customers are recorded as a reduction to net sales. For the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, co-op promotion incentives were approximately $2.0 million and $2.9 million, respectively.
The Company disaggregates revenues by product line and major geographic region as most of its revenue is generated by the sales of karaoke hardware and the Company has no other material business segments (See NOTE 9 - SEGMENT INFORMATION).
While the Company generally does not allow products to be returned, the Company does provide for variable consideration contingent upon the occurrence of uncertain future events. Variable consideration is estimated at the expected value or at the most likely amount depending on the type of consideration. Estimated amounts are included in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. The Company estimates variable consideration under our return allowance programs for goods returned from the customer for various reasons, whereby a sales return reserve is recorded based on historic return amounts, specific events as identified and management estimates.
For the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 the Company received sales returns of approximately $4.1 million and $5.4 million, respectively. The return of products is due to a variety of reasons including defective units, customers’ overstock and buyer’s remorse. The primary reason for the decrease of approximately $1.3 million in returns was primarily due a decrease in overstock returns of licensed goods from one major customer and overstock returns of non-licensed products from three other major customers.
The Company’s reserve for sales returns were approximately $1.0 million and $1.2 million as of March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. (See Note 13 - RESERVE FOR SALES RETURNS).
INCOME TAXES
We operate within multiple taxing jurisdictions and are subject to audit in those jurisdictions. Because of the complex issues involved, any claims can require an extended period to resolve. In management’s opinion, adequate provisions for potential income taxes in the jurisdictions have been made. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. If it is more likely than not that some portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized, a valuation allowance is recognized.
OTHER ESTIMATES
We make other estimates in the ordinary course of business relating to sales returns and allowances, warranty reserves, and reserves for promotional incentives. Historically, past changes to these estimates have not had a material impact on our financial condition. However, circumstances could change which may alter future expectations.
ADOPTION OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
In December 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2019-12, “Income Taxes (Topic 740). Among several issues addressed in this ASU, there was one area that may potentially affect the Company’s calculations of interim income tax provision or benefit. The guidance specifies that an entity should apply the annual effective tax rate to the year-to date income or loss as long as the tax benefits for any losses are expected to be realized during the year or would be recognizable as a deferred tax asset at the end of the year eliminating the requirement of a valuation allowance for that interim period. There is specific guidance for circumstances in which an entity incurs a loss on a year-to-date basis that exceeds the anticipated ordinary loss for the year, which is an exception to the general guidance in Subtopic 740-270. The Company adopted the standard for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. The adoption of this standard did not have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, “Financial Instruments-Credit Losses” (Topic 326). This ASU represents a significant change in the current accounting model by requiring immediate recognition of management’s estimates of current expected credit losses. Under the prior model, losses were recognized only as they were incurred, which delayed recognition of expected losses that might not yet have met the threshold of being probable. The amendments in ASU 2016-03 are effective for our fiscal year beginning April 1, 2023 including interim periods within that fiscal year. Early adoption is permitted. We are currently evaluating the potential effects of this updated guidance on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.