Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
Prior to the Merger, we operated primarily through our Israel-based subsidiary, Micronet. Micronet operates in the growing commercial MRM market. Micronet, through both its Israeli and U.S. operational offices, is a developer, manufacturer and a global provider of mobile computing platforms, designed for integration into fleet management and mobile workforce management solutions. The products and solutions designed, developed and manufactured by Micronet include rugged mobile computing devices (tablets and on-board-computers) that provide fleet operators and field workforces with computing solutions for challenging work environments, such as extreme temperatures, repeated vibrations or dirty and wet or dusty conditions.
In 2020, Micronet entered into the video analytics device market by launching its innovating smart camera all in-one video telematics device known as Micronet SmartCam, which incorporates and is powered by third party video analytics software applications. Micronet SmartCam is based on the powerful and flexible Android platform, and is intended to be a ruggedized, integrated, and ready-to-go smart camera supporting complete telematics features designed for in-vehicle use. Coupled with vehicle-connected interfaces, state of the art diagnostic capabilities, and two smart cameras, it offers video analytics and telematics services capabilities, addressing safety and tracking needs of commercial fleets. MICT believes that Micronet SmartCam provides a versatile, advanced, and affordable mobile computing platform for a variety of fleet management and video analytics solutions. The powerful computing platform, coupled with the Android operating system, allows its customers to run their applications or pick and choose a set of applications and services from the Micronet marketplace. Micronet’s customers consist primarily of solution providers specializing in the MRM market and potentially Original Equipment Manufacturer (“OEM”) truck and vehicle manufacturers including as part of the aftermarket sales. These companies sell Micronet’s products as part of their MRM systems and solutions. Currently, Micronet does not sell directly to end users. Micronet products are used by customers operating vehicle fleets around the world with primary markets in North America and Europe.
In July 2020, we completed the acquisition of Intermediate pursuant to the Merger Agreement. Intermediate believes it is well positioned to establish itself, through its operating subsidiaries, as a financial technology company with significant focus on the China market and in other areas of the world.
Intermediate, through its operating subsidiaries, seeks to service Chinese and other global investors and customers by offering services in stock brokerage and wealth management, oil and gas trading, and insurance brokerage. Intermediate has been in the process of building various platforms for business opportunities in various verticals and technology segments it can capitalize on, and it will continue to add to the capabilities of such platforms through acquisitions or licensing of technologies to support these efforts in the different market segments as more fully described below. By building secure, reliable and scalable platforms with high volume processing capability, Intermediate believes it is able to provide customized solutions that address the needs of a very diverse client base.
Intermediate through its operating subsidiaries, seeks to secure material contracts in valuable market segments in China and develop market opportunities, which will allow Intermediate to access and grow its business in the market segments of stock trading and wealth management, oil and gas trading, and insurance brokerage through its operating subsidiaries.
Significant transactions during the period:
As of December 31, 2018, the Company held 49.89% of Micronet’s issued and outstanding shares, and together with an irrevocable proxy in our benefit from Mr. David Lucatz, the Company’s former President and Chief Executive Officer, we held 50.07% of the voting interest in Micronet as of such date. On February 24, 2019, Micronet closed a public equity offering on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange (the “TASE”). As a result of Micronet’s offering, our ownership interest in Micronet was diluted from 49.89% to 33.88%. On September 5, 2019, Micronet closed a subsequent public equity offering on the TASE. As a result, our ownership interest in Micronet was further diluted from 33.88% to 30.48%, which was later increased as described herein. The initial decrease in the Company’s voting interest in Micronet resulted in the deconsolidation of Micronet’s operating results from our financial statements as of February 24, 2019. Therefore, commencing on February 24, 2019, the Company accounted for its ownership in Micronet in accordance with the equity method. As a result of the deconsolidation, the Company recognized a net gain of $299,000 in February 2019.
On June 10, 2020, MICT Telematics Ltd, subsidiary of the company, purchased 5,999,996 of Micronet’s ordinary shares for aggregate proceeds of NIS 1,800,000 (or $515,000) through tender offer and increased the ownership interest in Micronet to 45.53% of Micronet’s issued and outstanding ordinary shares.
Subsequently, on June 23, 2020 the Company purchased through public offering 10,334,000 of Micronet’s ordinary shares for total consideration of NIS 3,100,200 (or $887,000), and increased the ownership interest in Micronet to 53.39% of Micronet’s outstanding ordinary shares.
On October 11, 2020, Micronet closed a public equity offering on the TASE, in which the Company purchased 520,600 of Micronet’s ordinary shares and 416,480 of Micronet’s stock options convertible into 416,480 Micronet ordinary shares (at a conversion price of NIS 3.5 per share), for total consideration of NIS 4,961,202 (or $1,417,486). Following the Micronet’s offering, the purchase of share and the exercise of our stock options, our ownership interest in Micronet was diluted from 53.39% to 50.31% of the Micronet outstanding share capital.
Management has considered the consequences of COVID 19 and other events and conditions, and it has determined that they do not create a material uncertainty that casts significant doubt upon the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern.
The impact of COVID 19 on future performance and therefore on the measurement of some assets and liabilities or on liquidity might be significant and might therefore require disclosure in the financial statements.
Acquisition Agreement with BNN Technology PLC
On December 18, 2018, we, Global Fintech Holdings Ltd., a British Virgin Islands corporation, or GFH, GFH Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of GFH, or Merger Sub, BNN, Brookfield Interactive (Hong Kong) Limited, a Hong Kong company and a subsidiary of BNN, or BI China, ParagonEx LTD, a British Virgin Islands company, or ParagonEx, certain holders of ParagonEx’s outstanding ordinary shares and a trustee thereof, and Mark Gershinson, in the capacity as the representative of the ParagonEx sellers, entered into an Acquisition Agreement, or the Acquisition Agreement, pursuant to which, among other things, subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions set forth in the Acquisition Agreement, Merger Sub would merge with and into the Company, as a result of which each outstanding share of the Company’s common stock and warrant to purchase the same would be cancelled in exchange for the right of the holders thereof to receive 0.93 substantially equivalent securities of GFH, after which GFH would acquire (i) all of the issued and outstanding securities of BI China in exchange for newly issued ordinary shares of GFH and (ii) all of the issued and outstanding ordinary shares of ParagonEx for a combination of cash in the amount equal to approximately $25 million (the majority of which was raised in a private placement by GFH), unsecured promissory notes and newly issued ordinary shares of GFH, or collectively, the Transactions.
In furtherance of the Transactions, and upon the terms and subject to the conditions described in the Acquisition Agreement, BNN agreed to commence a tender offer, or the Offer, as promptly as practicable and no event later than 15 business days after the execution of the Acquisition Agreement, to purchase up to approximately 20% of the outstanding shares of the Company’s common stock at a price per share of $1.65, net to the sellers in cash, without interest, or the Offer Price. On March 13, 2019. the deadline for the Offer was extended to April 8, 2019. Additionally, following the Transactions, it was contemplated that the certain of the Company’s operating business assets, including company’s interest in Micronet, would be spun off to company’s stockholders who continue to retain shares of company’s common stock after the Offer. Subject to the terms and conditions of the Acquisition Agreement, and assuming that none of the shares of company’s common stock are purchased by BNN in connection with the Offer, company’s stockholders would own approximately 5.27% of GFH after giving effect to the transactions contemplated by the Acquisition Agreement.
On May 31, 2019, we terminated the spin-off of Micronet and in June 2019, the Offer was terminated. Effective November 7, 2019, we, BNN, BI China and ParagonEx (the “Parties”) entered into a mutual Termination Agreement (the “Termination Agreement”), pursuant to which the parties agreed to terminate the 2018 Acquisition Agreement, effective immediately.
Merger Agreement with GFH
On November 7, 2019, company’s, GFH Intermediate Holdings Ltd., a British Virgin Islands company (“Intermediate”) that is wholly owned by GFH entered into, and MICT Merger Subsidiary Inc., a to-be-formed British Virgin Islands company and a wholly owned subsidiary of MICT (“Merger Sub”), shall upon execution of a joinder enter into, an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”), pursuant to which, among other things, subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions set forth in the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub will merge with and into Intermediate, with Intermediate continuing as the surviving entity, and each outstanding share of Intermediate’s common stock shall be cancelled in exchange for the right of the holders thereof to receive a substantially equivalent security of MICT (collectively, the “Acquisition”). GFH will receive an aggregate of 109,946,914 shares of MICT common stock as merger consideration in the Acquisition.
Concurrent with the execution of the Merger Agreement, Intermediate entered into (i) a share exchange agreement with Beijing Brookfield Interactive Science & Technology Co. Ltd., an enterprise formed under the laws of the Peoples Republic of China (“Beijing Brookfield”), pursuant to which Intermediate will acquire all of the issued and outstanding ordinary shares and other equity interest of Beijing Brookfield from the shareholders of Beijing Brookfield in exchange for 16,310,759 newly issued shares of GFH and (ii) a share exchange agreement with ParagonEx, shareholders of ParagoneEx specified therein (the “ParagonEx Sellers”) and Mark Gershinson, pursuant to which, the ParagonEx Sellers will transfer to Intermediate all of the issued and outstanding securities of ParagonEx in exchange for Intermediate’s payment and delivery of $10.0 million in cash, which is to be paid upon the closing of the Acquisition, and 75,132,504 newly issued shares of GFH deliverable at the closing of the share exchange.
After giving effect to the Acquisition, the conversion of the Convertible Debentures (as defined below) and the conversion or exercise of the securities issued by MICT pursuant to the Offering of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock and Warrants and the Offering of Convertible Note and Warrants, each as further below, it is expected that MICT will have approximately $15.0 million of cash as well as ownership of ParagonEx and Beijing Brookfield and that MICT’s current stockholders will own approximately 11,089,532 shares, or 7.64%, of the 145,130,577 shares of MICT common stock outstanding.
Consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement is subject to certain closing conditions, including, among other things, approval by the stockholders of MICT and receipt of a fairness opinion indicating that the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement are fair to the stockholders of MICT. The Merger Agreement contains certain termination rights for the Company and Intermediate. The Merger Agreement also contains customary representations, warranties and covenants made by, among others, MICT, Intermediate and Merger Sub, including as to the conduct of their respective businesses (as applicable) between the date of signing the Merger Agreement and the closing of the transactions contemplated thereby.
The Merger Agreement provides that all options to purchase shares of the Company’s common stock that are outstanding and unexercised shall be accelerated in full effective as of immediately prior to the effective time of the Acquisition. The options shall survive the closing of the Acquisition for a period of 15 months from the date of the closing of the Acquisition and all equity incentive plans of the Company shall remain in effect.
Consummation of the Merger Agreement is subject to various conditions, including the following mutual conditions of the parties unless waived: (i) the approval of the Merger Agreement by the requisite vote of MICT’s stockholders; (ii) expiration of the applicable waiting period under any antitrust laws, including the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, as amended; (iii) receipt of requisite regulatory approval, (iv) receipt of required consents and provision of required notices to third parties, (v) no law or order preventing or prohibiting the Merger or the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement or the Closing; (vi) no restraining order or injunction preventing the Merger or the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement; (vii) appointment or election of the members of the post-Closing MICT board of directors as agreed, and (viii) the filing of the definitive proxy statement with the SEC.
In addition, prior to the consummation of the Merger, if the Merger Agreement is terminated after the closing of the Beijing Brookfield Acquisition or the ParagonEx Acquisition, as the case may be, or if the Merger does not close by the outside date set forth in the Merger Agreement, the transactions contemplated by the Beijing Brookfield Share Exchange Agreement and the ParagonEx Share Exchange Agreement, may be unwound. In the event of an unwinding of such acquisitions, GFH will return the Beijing Brookfield shares to BI Interactive and the ParagonEx shares to the Paragon Ex Sellers and in turn BI Interactive and the ParagonEx Sellers will return the shares of Global Fintech received in the applicable share exchange.
Voting Agreement. In connection with the execution and delivery of the Merger Agreement, D. L Capital (“DLC”), an entity affiliated with David Lucatz, the President and Chief Executive Officer of MICT, entered into a voting agreement, by and among MICT, GFH and DLC (the “Voting Agreement”), pursuant to which, during the term of such agreement, DLC has agreed to vote all of its capital shares in MICT in favor of the Merger Agreement, the related ancillary documents and any required amendments to MICT’s organizational documents, and in favor of all of the transactions in furtherance thereof, and to take certain other actions in support of the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement and will, at every meeting of the stockholders of MICT called for such purpose, and at every adjournment or postponement thereof (or in any other circumstances upon which a vote, consent or approval is sought, including by written consent), not vote any of its shares of the Common Stock at such meeting in favor of, or consent to, and will vote against and not consent to, the approval of any alternative proposal that is intended, or would reasonably be expected, to prevent, impede, interfere with, delay or adversely affect in any material respect the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement. The Voting Agreement was terminated.
On April 21, 2020, MICT, Inc. entered into a series of note purchase agreements with certain investors identified therein pursuant to which, among other things, the Purchasers purchased on July 1, 2020 certain convertible notes with an aggregate principal amount of approximately $11.0 million. On July 8, 2020, the Company entered into an additional series of purchase agreements with certain other purchaser pursuant to which such purchasers purchased from the Company at such date convertible notes with an aggregate principal amount of approximately $4.0 million. Accordingly, at total, pursuant to the above, the Company has sold convertible notes with an aggregate principal amount of approximately $15.0 million.
The Convertible Notes included terms allowing for a conversion into shares of common stock of the Company at a conversion price of $1.10 per share. The Convertible Notes are generally due two years from the date of issuance, except that certain convertible notes will be due five years from the date of issuance. The Company is obligated to pay interest to the Purchasers on the outstanding principal amount at the rate of 1.0% per annum, payable on each conversion date, in cash or, at the Company’s option, in shares of common stock. Subject to approval of the Company’s stockholders, the Convertible Notes shall be convertible into shares of common stock. Upon the occurrence of certain events, the Purchasers are permitted to require the Company to redeem the Convertible Notes, including any interest that has accrued thereunder, for cash. As of the date hereof and based on the terms included in the convertible notes, following receipt of the Company’s stockholders, the Convertible Notes were converted into shares of common stock of the Company at a conversion price of $1.10 per share as set above.
In July 2020, we completed the acquisition of Intermediate pursuant to the Merger Agreement. Intermediate is a financial technology company with a marketplace principally in China and in other areas of the world. Intermediate is in the process of building various platforms for business opportunities in various verticals and technology segments it can capitalize on, and it plans to continue to add the capabilities of such platforms through acquisition or license of technologies to support these efforts in the different market segments as more fully described below. By building secure, reliable and scalable platforms with high volume processing capability, Intermediate believes it is able to provide customized solutions that address the needs of a very diverse client base. In July 2020, each outstanding share of Intermediate was cancelled in exchange for a convertible promissory note in the principal amount of $25,000,000. On September 9, 2020, the Convertible Note was converted into 22,727,273 shares of common stock of MICT at a conversion price of $1.10 per share,.
Intermediate’s management is seeking to secure material contracts in valuable market segments in China and has developed good opportunities, which will allow Intermediate to access the following market segments: stock trading, oil and gas trading, insurance brokerage and recyclable metal trading through its operating subsidiaries.
Offering of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock and Warrants
On June 4, 2019, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Preferred Securities Purchase Agreement”) with the purchasers named therein (the “Preferred Purchasers”) subject to approval by the Nasdaq Stock Market for as to the eligibility of the transaction, pursuant to which we agreed to sell 3,181,818 shares of newly designated Series A Convertible Preferred Stock with a stated value of $2.20 per share (the “Preferred Stock”). The Preferred Stock, which shall be convertible into up to 6,363,636 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (the “Common Stock”), shall be sold together with certain Common Stock purchase warrants (the “Preferred Warrants”) to purchase up to 4,772,727 shares of Common Stock (representing 75% of the aggregate number of shares of Common Stock into which the Preferred Stock shall be convertible), for aggregate gross proceeds of $7 million to us (the “Preferred Offering”). The terms of the Preferred Securities Purchase Agreement were approved by Nasdaq Stock Market on July 31, 2019 and as a result the Company issued the preferred stock along with the warrants.
The Preferred Stock shall be convertible into Common Stock at the option of each holder of Preferred Stock at any time and from time to time at a conversion price of $1.10 per share, and shall also convert automatically upon the occurrence of certain events, including the completion by us of a fundamental transaction. Commencing on March 31, 2020, cumulative cash dividends shall become payable on the Preferred Stock at the rate per share of 7% per annum, which rate shall increase to 14% per annum on June 30, 2020. We shall also have the option to redeem some or all of the Preferred Stock, at any time and from time to time, beginning on December 31, 2020. The holders of Preferred Stock shall vote together with the holders of Common Stock as a single class on as-converted basis, and the holders of Preferred Stock holding a majority-in-interest of the Preferred Stock shall be entitled to appoint an independent director to the Company’s board of directors (the “Preferred Director”). The Preferred Securities Purchase Agreement provides for customary registration rights.
The Preferred Warrants shall have an exercise price of $1.01 (subject to customary adjustment in the event of future stock dividends, splits and the like), which is above the average price of the Common Stock during the preceding five trading days of entry into the Preferred Securities Purchase Agreement, and shall be exercisable immediately, until the earlier of (i) two years from the date of issuance or (ii) the later of (a) 180 days after the closing by the Company of a change of control transaction, or (b) the Company’s next debt or equity financing of at least $20 million.
On September 8, 2020, the Company and all of the holders of the Company’s Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share, entered into a series A Convertible Preferred Stock Exchange Agreements (each an Exchange Agreement and together, the “Exchange Agreements”), pursuant to which the Holders exchanged an aggregate of 3,181,818 shares of the Series A Preferred, on a 1-for-2 basis, for an aggregate of 6,363,636 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share.
Offering of Convertible Note and Warrants
On June 4, 2019, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Note Purchase Agreement”) with BNN subject to approval by the Nasdaq Stock Market for as to the eligibility of the transaction, pursuant to which BNN agreed to purchase from us $2 million of convertible notes, which subscription amount shall be subject to increase by up to an additional $1 million as determined by BNN and us (collectively, the “Convertible Notes”). The Convertible Notes, which shall be convertible into up to 2,727,272 shares of Common Stock (using the applicable conversion ratio of $1.10 per share), shall be sold together with certain Common Stock purchase warrants (the “Note Warrants”) to purchase up to 2,727,272 shares of Common Stock (representing 100% of the aggregate number of shares of Common Stock into which the Convertible Notes are convertible) (the “Convertible Note Offering”). The Convertible Notes shall have a duration of two (2) years.
The Convertible Notes shall be convertible into Common Stock at the option of the Note Purchaser at any time and from time to time, and upon the issuance of one or more Convertible Notes. Darren Mercer, the Chief Executive Officer of BNN, was appointed to the Company’s board of directors (the “Note Director”). The Note Purchase Agreement provides for customary registration rights. The terms of the note purchase agreement were approved by Nasdaq Stock Market on July 31, 2019 and as a result the Company issued the convertible notes along with the warrants.
The Note Warrants shall have an exercise price of $1.01 (subject to customary adjustment in the event of future stock dividends, splits and the like), and shall be exercisable immediately upon receipt of stockholder approval of the Convertible Note Offering, until the earlier of (i) two years from the date of issuance or (ii) the later of (a) 180 days after the closing by the Company of a change of control transaction, or (b) the Company’s next debt or equity financing of at least $20 million.
In accordance with ASC 470 “Debt”, the Company analyzed the Note Purchase Agreement and the Preferred Securities Purchase Agreement (as described above) as combined transaction, as both agreements were signed simultaneously with an overall objective and as a result allocated the total proceeds between convertible notes, the warrants and Series A Convertible Preferred Stock based on their relative fair value at the closing date. The Company analyzed the warrants issued, the convertible conversation feature and Series A Convertible Preferred Stock and concluded that they meet the definition of an equity instrument.
On January 21, 2020, we entered into a Conversion Agreement with BNN, pursuant to which BNN agreed to convert the outstanding convertible note, issued on July 31, 2019, into 1,818,181 shares of the Company’s newly-designated Series B Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share, with a stated value of $1.10 per share (the “Series B Preferred”) (collectively, the “Conversion”). In accordance with the Conversion, the Company filed a Certificate of Designation of Preferences, Rights and Limitations of Series B Preferred with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware on January 21, 2020 to designate the rights and preferences of up to 1,818,181 shares of Series B Preferred.
On September 10, 2020, the Company and the holder of the Company’s Series B Convertible Preferred Stock, with a par value of $0.001 per share , entered into that certain Series B Convertible Preferred Stock Exchange Agreement, pursuant to which the Holder exchanged an aggregate of 1,818,181 shares of the Series B Preferred, on a 1-for-1 basis, for an aggregate of 1,818,181 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share.
Offering of Secured Convertible Debentures
On November 7, 2019, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase, with certain investors, pursuant to which, among other things, the Primary Purchasers agreed, subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions set forth in the Primary Purchase Agreement, to purchase from us 5% senior secured convertible debentures due during 2020 with an aggregate principal amount of approximately $15,900,000. The proceeds of $15,900,000 from the sale of the Primary Convertible Debentures were funded on January 21, 2020. Concurrently with entry into the Primary Purchase Agreement, the Company entered into a separate Securities Purchase Agreement and, together with the Primary Purchase Agreement, the Purchase Agreements, with certain investors , and, together with the Primary Purchasers, the , pursuant to which, among other things, the Non-Primary Purchasers agreed, subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions set forth in the Non-Primary Purchase Agreement, to purchase from us 5% senior secured convertible debentures due during , and, together with the Primary Convertible Debentures, the , with an aggregate principal amount of $9,000,000, together with the Primary Convertible Debenture Offering, the . The Convertible Debentures were convertible into our shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $1.41 per share. The Primary Purchasers exercised their right to an optional redemption pursuant to Section 6(b) of each Primary Convertible Debenture and declared the occurrence and continuance of an event of default, each of which accelerated the Company’s obligation to repay all outstanding balances under the Primary Convertible Debentures. On March 16, 2020, the Outstanding Principle was transferred from the Company to the Purchasers. As a result, the Primary Purchase Agreement was terminated.
On November 2, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with certain investors (the “Investors”) for the purpose of raising $25.0 million in gross proceeds for the Company (the “Offering”). Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement, the Company sold in a registered direct offering, an aggregate of 10,000,000 units (each, a “Unit”), with each Unit consisting of one share of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (the “Common Stock”), and one warrant to purchase 0.8 of one share of Common Stock (each, a “Warrant”). at a purchase price of $2.50 per Unit. The Warrants are exercisable six months after the date of issuance at an exercise price of $3.12 per share and will expire five years following the date the Warrants become exercisable. The closing of the sale of Units pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement occurred on November 4, 2020. By December 31, 2020, the Company had received a total of $22.325 million in gross proceeds pursuant to Offering and issued in the aggregate, 7,600,000 Units. The remaining gross proceeds, in the additional aggregate amount of $2.675 million, were received by the Company on March 1, 2021 and in consideration for such proceeds, the Company issued the remaining 2,400,000 units.
A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners acted as the exclusive placement agent (the “Placement Agent”) for the Company, on a “reasonable best efforts” basis, in connection with the Offering. Pursuant to that certain Placement Agency Agreement, dated as of November 2, 2020, by and between the Company and the Placement Agent (the “Placement Agency Agreement”), the Placement Agent will be entitled to a cash fee equal to 7.0% of the gross proceeds from the placement of the total amount of Units sold by the Placement Agent and 3.5% of the gross proceeds from the placement of the total amount of Units sold in the offering, plus a non-accountable expense allowance in an amount equal to 1% of the aggregate gross proceeds of the Offering.
On February 11, 2021, the Company announced that it has entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with certain institution investors for the sale of (i) 22,471,904 shares of common stock, (ii) 22,471,904 Series A Warrants to purchase 22,471,904 shares of common stock and (iii) 11,235,952 Series B Warrants to purchase 11,235,952 shares of common stock at a combined purchase price of $2.67 (the “Offering”). The gross proceeds to the Company from the Offering are expected to be approximately $60,000,000 before deducting placement agent fees and other estimated Offering expenses. The Series A Warrants will be exercisable six months after the date of issuance, have an exercise price of $2.80 per share and will expire five and one-half years from the date of issuance. The Series B Warrants will be exercisable six months after the date of issuance, have an exercise price of $2.80 per share and will expire three and one-half years from the date of issuance.
On March 2, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain investors for the purpose of raising approximately $54,000,000 in gross proceeds for the Company. Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement, the Company agreed to sell, in a registered direct offering, an aggregate of 19,285,715 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (the “Common Stock”), at a purchase price of $2.675 per Share and in a concurrent private placement, warrants to purchase an aggregate of 19,285,715 shares of Common Stock, at a purchase price of $0.125 per Warrant, for a combined purchase price per Share and Warrant of $2.80 (the “Purchase Price”) which was priced at the market under Nasdaq rules. The Warrants are immediately exercisable at an exercise price of $2.80 per share, subject to adjustment, and expire five years after the issuance date. The closing date was on March 4, 2021. The Company received net proceeds of $48.69 million on March 4, 2021, after deducting the Placement Agent’s fees and other expenses.
Acquisition Agreement with Huapei Global Securities Limited
MICT, Inc previously announced on October 2, 2020 that its indirect wholly-owned subsidiary BI Intermediate (Hong Kong) Limited (“BI Intermediate”) has entered a strategic agreement (“Strategic Agreement”) to acquire, for a total purchase price of U.S.$3.0 million, 9% of a Huapei Global Securities Limited (“Huapei”), Hong Kong based securities and investments firm. The Strategic Agreement provided that the remaining 91% of Huapei would be purchased by BI Intermediate upon approval from the Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission (SFC), the principal regulator of Hong Kong’s securities and futures markets. On November 11, 2020, BI Intermediate closed on its acquisition of the first 9% of its acquisition and paid 9% of the purchase price. Additionally, on November 11, 2020, upon the initial closing, BI Intermediate made a loan to Huapei in an amount equivalent to the remaining 91% of the purchase price. Upon the closing of the remaining 91%, which remains subject to SFC approval, the loan will be cancelled, and BI Intermediate will acquire the remaining 91% of Huapei. If the Strategic Agreement is terminated or the closing of the remaining 91% does not occur within 24 months, Huapei will repay the loan to BI Intermediate. The loan is secured against the 91% of the share capital of Huapei not owned by BI Intermediate. The obligations of Huapei Global Capital Limited, the seller of the interests of Huapei, under the loan agreement have been guaranteed by the ultimate controller of Huapei Global Capital Limited. Huapei is licensed to trade securities on leading exchanges in Hong Kong, the U.S. and China including the valuable China A-Shares, all of which are the primary target markets for Company’s global fintech business. The Company is in the process of integrating its mobile app supporting platform with Huapei’s licensed trading assets.
On February 26, 2021, the Company, through its fully owned subsidiary (BI Intermediate (Hong Kong) Limited, a Hong Kong company (“BI Intermediate”), has completed the acquisition of Huapei Global Securities Ltd. (“Huapei Global”) upon the purchase of remaining outstanding share capital (91% of the share capital) of Huapei Global. The acquisition was consummated following the receipt of the approval of the Securities and Futures Commission of Hong Kong (“SFC”) for the change in the substantial shareholder of Huapei Global. In consideration for the entire share capital of Huapei Global, the Company paid a total of $2,936,000 (reflecting the net asset value of Huapei Global estimated at $2,034,000, and a premium $902,000 (the “Consideration”).
GAIN OF CONTROL OF SUBSIDIARY- Micronet Acquisition
On June 23, 2020, Micronet completed the special tender offer (the “Tender Offer”), in which MICT successfully purchased 5,999,996 shares of Micronet’s ordinary shares (the “Ordinary Shares”), in the aggregate amount of NIS 1,800,000 (or $515,000) offered in the Tender Offer, which brought MICT’s ownership interest up to 45.53%.
Also, on June 23, 2020, MICT purchased an additional 10,334,000 shares of Micronet’s Ordinary Shares in the aggregate amount of NIS 3,100,200 (or $887,000), which brought MICT’s ownership interest up to 53.39%. Accordingly, MICT obtained voting control over Micronet and, as a result, MICT applied purchase accounting (see the table below) and began to consolidate Micronet beginning on such date. MICT recognized a $665,000 gain from consolidation.
Management engaged a third-party valuation firm to assist them with the valuation of the intangible assets that are detailed in the schedule below.
Purchased identifiable intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their respective useful lives. The table set forth below summarizes the estimates of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and resulting gain on bargain purchase. In addition, the following table summarizes the allocation of the preliminary purchase price as of the acquisition date:
Micronet LTD Purchase Price Allocation
(USD In Thousands)
(1) Cash paid at the closing of the Micronet public offering.
(2) Book value used as a proxy for fair value.
GFH Intermediate Holdings Ltd (“GFHI”) Acquisition
On July 1, 2020, MICT completed its acquisition of GFH Intermediate Holdings Ltd. pursuant to the previously announced Agreement and Plan of Merger entered into on November 7, 2019 by and between MICT, Micronet, GFHI, Global Fintech Holding Ltd,a British Virgin Islands company and the sole shareholder of GFHI, and MICT Merger Subsidiary Inc., a British Virgin Islands company and a wholly owned subsidiary of MICT , as amended and restated on April 15, 2020 . As described in the Restated Merger Agreement, upon consummation of the Acquisition, the outstanding share of GFHI was cancelled in exchange for a convertible promissory note in the principal amount of $25,000,000 issued to GFH by MICT, which Consideration Note has been converted into shares of common stock of MICT at a conversion price of $1.10 per share.
Management engaged a third-party valuation firm to assist them with the valuation of the intangible assets that are detailed in the schedule below.
Purchased identifiable intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their respective useful lives. The table set forth below summarizes the estimates of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and resulting gain on bargain purchase. In addition, the following table summarizes the allocation of the preliminary purchase price as of the acquisition date:
GFH Intermediate Holdings LTD, Purchase Price Allocation
(USD In Thousands)
(1) The purchase consideration represented the fair value of the Convertible Promissory Notes that were converted into common stock of MICT Inc.
(2) The Customer database value is based on the cost to recreate, as indicated by a third-party valuation firm.
(3) Represents the income tax effect of the difference between the accounting and income tax bases of the identified intangible assets.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to providing financial measurements based on generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S., or GAAP, we provide additional financial metrics that are not prepared in accordance with GAAP, or non-GAAP financial measures. Management uses non-GAAP financial measures, in addition to GAAP financial measures, to understand and compare operating results across accounting periods, for financial and operational decision making, for planning and forecasting purposes and to evaluate our financial performance.
Management believes that these non-GAAP financial measures reflect our ongoing business in a manner that allows for meaningful comparisons and analysis of trends in our business, as they exclude expenses and gains that are not reflective of our ongoing operating results. Management also believes that these non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information to investors in understanding and evaluating our operating results and future prospects in the same manner as management and in comparing financial results across accounting periods and to those of peer companies.
The non-GAAP financial measures do not replace the presentation of our GAAP financial results and should only be used as a supplement to, not as a substitute for, our financial results presented in accordance with GAAP.
The non-GAAP adjustments, and the basis for excluding them from non-GAAP financial measures, are outlined below:
● Amortization of acquired intangible assets - We are required to amortize the intangible assets, included in our GAAP financial statements, related to the Transaction and the Acquisition. The amount of an acquisition’s purchase price allocated to intangible assets and term of its related amortization are unique to these transactions. The amortization of acquired intangible assets are non-cash charges. We believe that such charges do not reflect our operational performance. Therefore, we exclude amortization of acquired intangible assets to provide investors with a consistent basis for comparing pre- and post-transaction operating results.
● Expenses related to beneficial conversion feature expense - Those expenses are non-cash expenses and are related to the difference between the stock price at the closing of the Note Purchase Agreements and the conversion price of $1.10 per share.
● Stock-based compensation is share based awards granted to certain individuals. They are non-cash and affected by our historical stock prices which are irrelevant to forward-looking analyses and are not necessarily linked to our operational performance.
●
Expenses related to the purchase of a business - These expenses relate directly to the purchase of the GFH I transaction and consist mainly of legal and accounting fees, insurance fees and other consultants. We believe that these expenses do not reflect our operational performance. Therefore, we exclude them to provide investors with a consistent basis for comparing pre- and post-Vehicle Business purchase operating results.
●
Expenses related to settlement agreement - These expenses relate directly to the settlement agreement with Maxim and Sunrise. More information can be found in the legal proceeding part.
The following table reconciles, for the periods presented, GAAP net loss attributable to MICT to non-GAAP net income attributable to MICT. and GAAP loss per diluted share attributable to MICT to non-GAAP net loss per diluted share attributable to MICT.:
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
During 2020, we have acquired certain additional shares of Micronet in addition to our existing owned Mironet shares. As a result of such acquisition, on June 23, 2020 we have gained control in Micronet. We are therefore consolidating Micronet’s operations in our financial statements commencing from June 23, 2020. In addition, on July 1, 2020, we have completed and consummated a merger transaction for the acquisition of GFH Intermediate Holdings Ltd. (“GFHI”) As a result of such acquisition, we are consolidating the results of GFHI as of such closing date and for the period thereafter. Relating to our operations, beginning on the second half of December 2020, we have launched our insurance platform operated by GFHI for the Chinese market and from that day onward, we have been generating certain revenues in GFHI. These business activities conducted by MICT in combination with the completion of the above acquisitions, contributed to the following P&L items:
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,173,000, compared to $477,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This represents an increase of $696,000, or 146%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period last year.
Gross loss
Gross loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $311,000 to $58,000 and represents 5% of the revenues. This is in comparison to gross loss of 369,000, or 77% of the revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and Marketing costs are part of operating expenses. Selling and marketing income for year ended December 31, 2020 were $38,000, as compared to cost of $198,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This represents a decrease of $236,000, or 119%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period last year. The decrease is mainly attributed to our ability to reduce a severance payment demand made against Micronet on June 2020 by a former executive in the sum of $230,000 (based on a claim that his employment agreement was breached) which was settled on February 17, 2021, pursuant to an executed settlement and released agreement for the payment of $90,000 and a mutual waiver and release and claims. As a result, the Company reduced the provision in its books recorded during the second quarter of 2020.
General and Administrative
General and administrative costs are part of operating expenses. General and administrative costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $14,228,000, compared to $3,027,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This represents an increase of $11,201,000, or 370%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period last year. The increase is mainly a result of (i) the acquisitions as noted above, and (ii) an increase in retaining professional advice from various service providers, advisors and professionals in connection with the consummation of the public offering closed on November 2020 and GFH merger; and (iii) an increase associated with the issuance of options and shares to directors, employees and consultants, and (iv) an increase of the salary of the new CEO of MICT.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are part of operating expenses. Research and development costs, which mainly include wages, materials and sub-contractors, for the year ended December 31, 2020, were $484,000, compared to $255,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This represents an increase of $229,000, or 89%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period last year.
Loss from Operations
Our loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $16,579,000, compared to loss from operations of $3,869,000, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in loss from operations is mainly a result of the acquisitions as mention above, as well as the increase in general and administrative costs as explained in the General and Administrative section above.
Financial Expenses, net
Financial expenses, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $7,462,000, compared to expenses of $388,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This represents an increase of $7,074,000, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in financial expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily due 8,877,000 expenses related to beneficial conversion feature expense, Pursuant to the April and July convertible notes.
Net Profit/Loss Attributed to MICT, Inc.
Our net loss attributed to MICT, Inc. for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $22,992,000, compared to a net loss of $4,217,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This represents an increase in net loss of $18,775,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period last year. The increase is mainly a result of the acquisitions as noted above, as well as the increase in general and administrative costs and increase in Financial costs as explained above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, our total cash and cash equivalents balance was $29,049,000, as compared to $3,199,000 as of December 31, 2019. This reflects an increase of $25,850,000 in cash and cash equivalents for the reasons described below.
Sales of our Securities
Pursuant to the April 21, 2020, and the July 8, 2020 Agreements entered by MICT with various purchasers for the sale of certain convertible notes as described in the Description of Business above, MICT has sold convertible notes with an aggregate total principal amount of approximately $15.0 million under such terms as described hereinabove
On the third quarter a total number of 2,181,282 warrants previously issued by MICT were exercised by certain holders resulting in receipt by MICT of an aggregate principal amount of $1,612,327.
In addition, as a result of the exercise of 1,198,000 options issued to consultants and former officers and directors, MICT has received an aggregate principal amount of $2,365,968.
On November 2, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with certain investors (the “Investors”) for the purpose of raising $25.0 million in gross proceeds for the Company (the “Offering”). Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement, the Company sold in a registered direct offering, an aggregate of 10,000,000 units (each, a “Unit”), with each Unit consisting of one share of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (the “Common Stock”), and one warrant to purchase 0.8 of one share of Common Stock (each, a “Warrant”). at a purchase price of $2.50 per Unit. The Warrants are exercisable six months after the date of issuance at an exercise price of $3.12 per share and will expire five years following the date the Warrants become exercisable. The closing of the sale of Units pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement occurred on November 4, 2020. By December 31, 2020, the Company had received a total of $22.325 million in gross proceeds pursuant to Offering and issued in the aggregate, 7,600,000 Units. The remaining gross proceeds, in the additional aggregate amount of $2.675 million, were received by the Company on March 1, 2021 and in consideration for such proceeds, the Company issued the remaining 2,400,000 units.
Loans Provided by MICT
On September 19, 2019, MICT Telematics entered into a loan agreement with Micronet, pursuant to which MICT Telematics loaned Micronet $250,000 (the “First Loan”), on certain terms and conditions. The proceeds from the First Loan were designated, per the terms of the First Loan, for Micronet’s working capital and general corporate needs. The First Loan did not bear any interest and was due and payable upon the earlier of (i) December 31, 2019; or (ii) at such time Micronet receives an investment of at least $250,000 from non-related parties.
In view of Micronet’s working capital needs, on November 18, 2019, the Company entered into an additional loan agreement with Micronet for the loan of $125,000 (the “Second Loan”), pursuant to terms and conditions identical to those governing the First Loan, including the repayment terms. Accordingly, at such date (and prior to the approval of the Convertible Loan by Micronet’s shareholders on January 1, 2020 as set forth hereunder), the Company granted to Micronet, pursuant to the First Loan and Second Loan, an accumulated loan in the total sum of $375,000.
Loans Provided by MICT (Cont.)
On November 13, 2019, the Company and Micronet executed a convertible loan agreement pursuant to which the Company agreed to loan to Micronet $500,000 in the aggregate (the “Convertible Loan”). The Convertible Loan bears interest at a rate of 3.95% calculated and is paid on a quarterly basis. In addition, the Convertible Loan, if not converted, shall be repaid in four equal installments, the first of such installment payable following the fifth quarter after the issuance of the Convertible Loan, with the remaining three installments due on each subsequent quarter thereafter, such that the Convertible Loan shall be repaid in full upon the lapse of 24 months from its grant. In addition, the outstanding principal balance of the Convertible Loan, and all accrued and unpaid interest, is convertible at the Company’s option, at a conversion price equal to 0.38 NIS per Micronet share. Pursuant to the Convertible Loan agreement, Micronet also agreed to issue the Company an option to purchase up to one of Micronet’s ordinary shares for each ordinary share that it issued as a result of a conversion of the Convertible Loan (“Convertible Loan Warrant”), at an exercise price of 0.60 NIS per share, exercisable for a period of 15 months. On July 5, 2020, Micronet had a reverse split where the price of the Convertible Loan changed from 0.08 NIS per Micronet share into 5.7 NIS per Micronet share. The option’s exercised price was changed from 0.6 NIS per share to 9 NIS per Micronet share.
On January 1, 2020, the Convertible Loan transaction was approved at a general meeting of the Micronet shareholders and as a result, the Convertible Loan and the transactions contemplated thereby entered into effect. At such time, the First Loan and Second Loan were repaid to us and the Convertible Loan was provided.
On August 13, 2020, MICT Telematics extended to Micronet an additional loan in the aggregate amount of $175,000 (the “Third Loan” and the “Loan Sum”, respectively) which governing the existing outstanding intercompany debt. The Third Loan does not bear any interest and is provided for a period of twelve (12) months. The Loan Sum was granted for the purpose of supporting Micronet’s working capital and general corporate needs.
Debt Repayment
On June 17, 2014, MICT Telematics entered into a loan agreement, or the Mercantile Loan Agreement, with Mercantile Discount Bank Ltd., or Mercantile Bank, pursuant to which Mercantile Bank agreed to loan the Company approximately $3,631,000 on certain terms and conditions, or the Mercantile Loan. The proceeds of the Mercantile Loan were used by the Company: (1) to refinance previous loans granted to the Company in the amount of approximately $1,333,000; (2) to complete the purchase by the Company, via Enertec, of 1.2 million shares of Micronet constituting 6.3% of the issued and outstanding shares of Micronet; and (3) for working capital and general corporate purposes. The Mercantile loan was fully repaid in July 2019.
On March 29, 2018, the Company and MICT Telematics executed and closed on a securities purchase agreement with YA, whereby the Company issued and sold to YA (1) certain Series A Convertible Debentures in the aggregate principal aggregate amount of $3.2 million, or the Series A Debentures, and (2) a Series B Convertible Debenture in the principal aggregate amount of $1.8 million, or the Series B Debenture. The Series A Debentures were issued in exchange for the cancellation and retirement of certain promissory notes issued by the Company to YA on October 28, 2016, December 22, 2016, June 8, 2017 and August 22, 2017, or collectively, the Prior Notes, with a total outstanding aggregate principal amount of $3.2 million. The Series B Debenture was issued and sold for aggregate gross cash proceeds of $1.8 million. At the closing of the transactions contemplated by the securities purchase agreement, the Company agreed to pay YA II, or its designee, a commitment fee of $90,000, an extension fee of $50,000 relating to the prior extension of the secured promissory note issued on August 22, 2017, and $126,786.74 representing the accrued and unpaid interest on the Prior Notes. The Series A Debentures and Series B Debenture were secured by a pledge of shares of Micronet owned by MICT Telematics. In conjunction with the issuance of the Series A Debentures and the Series B Debentures, a total of $273,787 in fees and expenses were deducted from the aggregate gross proceeds.
In addition, pursuant to the terms of the securities purchase agreement, the Company agreed to issue to YA a warrant to purchase up to 375,000 shares of the Company’s common stock at a purchase price of $2.00 per share, a warrant to purchase up to 200,000 shares of the Company’s common stock at a purchase price of $3.00 per share and a warrant to purchase up to 112,500 shares of the Company’s common stock at a purchase price of $4.00 per share.
On December 17, 2018, the Company entered into an agreement with YA, or the YA Agreement, with respect to (i) the Series A Debentures and the Series B Debenture, and (ii) the warrants to purchase an aggregate of 1,187,500 shares of the Company’s common stock held by YA, with exercise prices ranging from $1.50 to $4.00 and expiration dates ranging from June 30, 2021 to March 29, 2023, or collectively, the Warrants.
Pursuant to the YA Agreement, in connection with the transactions contemplated by the Acquisition Agreement and effective upon the consummation of the acquisition, the Warrants shall be replaced by certain new warrants, or the Replacement Warrants, exercisable at $2.00 per share for a number of ordinary shares of MICT equal to the number of shares underlying the Warrants immediately prior to the effectiveness of the acquisition (subject to adjustment as described therein). YA II also agreed that it would not convert the Series A Debentures and the Series B Debenture into more than one million shares of the Company’s common stock during the period between the execution of the YA Agreement and the earlier to occur of the effectiveness of the acquisition or the termination of the Acquisition Agreement.
The Company agreed to pay in cash the remaining outstanding principal amount and all accrued interest with respect to the Series A Debentures and the Series B Debenture as of the consummation of the Acquisitions, subject to any applicable redemption premiums.
During 2019, the Company repaid the entire outstanding principal balance of the Series B Debentures in the aggregate amount of $1,225,000, which was paid in shares of the Company’s common stock, and in October 31, 2019, the Company paid all of its outstanding principal balance, together with its accrued interest and a required 10% premium, of the Series A Debentures in the aggregate amount of $2,057,000.
On the third quarter of 2020 a total number of 1,187,500 warrants previously issued by MICT to YA II were exercised by them to 584,920 shares.
As of December 31, 2020, our total debt, was $884,000 as compared to $1,856,000 on December 31, 2019. The change in total debt is primarily due to the (i) MICT entered into a Conversion Agreement with BNN on January 21, 2020, pursuant to which BNN agreed to convert the outstanding convertible note, issued on July 31, 2019, into 1,818,181 shares of the Company’s newly-designated Series B Preferred stock, par value $0.001 per share, with a stated value of $1.10 per share, or the Series B Preferred. The Series B Preferred was issued on February 3, 2020. (ii) the gain in control over Micronernt from June 23, 2020 that as a result, we have started to consolidate Micront’s financial statements as of this date.
Total Current Assets, Trade Accounts Receivable and Working Capital
As of December 31, 2020, our total current assets were $33,330,000, as compared to $4,417,000 on December 31, 2019. The increase is mainly due to the increase in our cash and cash equivalents as described above, and the consolidation of GFH and Micronet financial reports.
Our trade accounts receivable at December 31, 2020, were $523 as compared to $0 at December 31, 2019. The increase is due to consolidation of GFH and Micronet financial reports.
As of December 31, 2020, our working capital was $26,343,000, as compared to $4,127,000 at December 31, 2019. The increase is mainly due to the increase in our cash and cash equivalents as described above, and the consolidation of GFH and Micronet financial reports.
Financing Needs
The Company will be required to support its own operational financial needs, which include, among others, our general and administrative costs (such as for our various consultants in regulatory, tax, legal, accounting and other areas of business) and our financing costs related to the loans and funding instruments assumed by us.
We expect the net proceeds from the sale of the securities will be used to fund the growth and development of our insurance business, as well as for working capital and for other general corporate purposes. We may also use a portion of the net proceeds to acquire or invest in businesses, products and technologies that are complementary to our business, but we currently have no commitments or agreements relating to any of these types of transactions.
Based on our current business plan, and in view of our cash balance following the transactions described in this Item 2, we anticipate that our cash balances will be sufficient to permit us to conduct our operations and carry out our contemplated business plans for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect that is material to investors on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies
Principles of consolidation. The consolidated financial statements include the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ financial statements. Control is the power to govern the financial and operating policies of an entity so as to obtain benefits from its operating activities. In assessing control legal and contractual rights are taken into account. The consolidated financial statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date that control is achieved until the date that control ceases. Intercompany transactions and balances are eliminated upon consolidation.
Accounts receivable and allowances for doubtful accounts. Our trade receivables include amounts due from customers. We perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers’ financial condition and we require collateral as deemed necessary. We maintain allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make payments. In judging the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts, we consider multiple factors including the aging of our receivables, historical bad debt experience and the general economic environment. Management applies considerable judgment in assessing the realization of receivables, including assessing the probability of collection and the current creditworthiness of each customer. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required.
Long-lived assets and intangible assets. Intangible assets that are not considered to have an indefinite useful life are amortized using the straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. The Company evaluates property and equipment and purchased intangible assets with finite lives for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. The Company assesses the recoverability of the assets based on the undiscounted future cash flow and recognizes an impairment loss when the estimated undiscounted future cash flow expected to result from the use of the asset plus the net proceeds expected from disposition of the asset, if any, are less than the carrying value of the asset. When the Company identifies an impairment, it reduces the carrying amount of the asset to its estimated fair value based on a discounted cash flow approach or, when available and appropriate, to comparable market values. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, no indicators of impairment have been identified.
Goodwill.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of the net assets acquired in the acquisition of a business. We test goodwill for impairment annually in the fourth quarter and when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of a reporting unit with goodwill has been reduced below its carrying value. On January 26, 2017 the FASB issued ASU 2017-04, "Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment." The standard simplifies the accounting for goodwill impairment by requiring a goodwill impairment to be measured using a single step impairment model, whereby the impairment equals the difference between the carrying amount and the estimated fair value of the specified reporting units in their entirety. This eliminated the second step of the previous impairment model that required companies to first estimate the fair value of all assets in a reporting unit and measure impairments based on those estimated fair values and a residual measurement approach. It also specifies that any loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Revenue recognition. With respect to Micronet applicable revenue recognition U.S. GAAP requirements, Micronet implements a revenue recognition policy pursuant to which it recognizes its revenues at the amount to which it expects to be entitled when control of the products or services is transferred to its customers. Control is generally transferred when the Company has a present right to payment and title and the significant risks and rewards of ownership of products are transferred to its customers. There is limited discretion needed in identifying the point control passes: once physical delivery of the products to the agreed location has occurred, Micronet no longer has physical possession of the product and will be entitled at such time to receive payment while relieved from the significant risks and rewards of the goods delivered. For most of Micronet’s products sales, control transfers when products are shipped.
With respect to the GFHI subsidiary applicable revenue recognition GAAP requirements, the GFHI subsidiary implemented a revenue recognition policy pursuant to which it recognizes its revenues at the amount to which it expects to be entitled when control of the products or services is transferred to its customers. Control is generally transferred when the Company has a present right to payment and title and the significant risks and rewards of services are provided to its customers.
Income taxes. Deferred taxes are determined utilizing the “asset and liability” method, whereby deferred tax asset and liability account balances are determined based on differences between financial reporting and the tax basis of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. The Company provides a valuation allowance, when it’s more likely than not that deferred tax assets will not be realized in the foreseeable future.
The Company applied FASB ASC Topic 740-10-25, “Income Taxes,” which provides guidance for recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions and prescribes a threshold condition that a tax position must meet for any of the benefits of the uncertain tax position to be recognized in the financial statements. It also provides accounting guidance on derecognizing, classification and disclosure of these uncertain tax positions. The Company’s policy on classification of all interest and penalties related to unrecognized income tax positions, if any, is to present them as a component of income tax expense.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock based compensation under the fair market value method under which compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the value of the award and is recognized over the service period, which is usually the vesting period. For stock options, fair value is determined using an option-pricing model that takes into account the stock price at the grant date, the exercise price, the expected life of the option, the volatility of the underlying stock, the expected dividends on it, and the risk-free interest rate over the expected life of the option.