Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on August 20, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Placement Units, our securities, debt or a combination of cash, securities and debt. Our efforts to identify a prospective target business will not be limited to a particular geographic region or industry.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with an initial business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our common stock and/or Public Warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On March 8, 2021, we entered into the Business Combination Agreement by and among the among the company, Airspan, and Merger Sub, pursuant to which Merger Sub will merge with and into Airspan, with Airspan surviving the Merger as a wholly-owned direct subsidiary of the company. The Business Combination Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, covenants, closing conditions and termination fee provisions.
The consideration to be paid to the pre-closing equityholders of Airspan and the pre-closing equityholders at the closing of the Business Combination (the “Closing”) will be equity consideration, pursuant to which each issued and outstanding share of Airspan’s capital stock shall automatically be converted into and become the right to receive, in accordance with the Payment Spreadsheet (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), the number of shares of our common stock and newly issued warrants s set forth in the Payment Spreadsheet. We shall assume the Company Equity Plan (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), and all outstanding options and restricted stock units shall be converted into a right to receive our securities as set forth on the Payment Spreadsheet. The participants in Airspan’s Management Incentive Plan will be entitled to receive a mis of cash consideration and equity consideration as set forth on the Payment Spreadsheet.
The Business Combination will be consummated subject to the deliverables and provisions as further described in the Business Combination Agreement.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from August 20, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after our Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period ended December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $202,686, which consisted of interest income earned on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $12,473, offset by operating costs of $215,159.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 3, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 10,000,000 Units, which includes the sale of 500,000 Placement Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $105 million. On November 9, 2020, simultaneously with the closing of the first exercise in part of the underwriters’ over-allotment option for 1,000,000 Units, the Company completed the private sale of an aggregate of 30,000 Placement Units to our Sponsor, at a purchase price of $10.00 per Placement Unit, generating gross proceeds of $10,300,000. On November 12, 2020, simultaneously with the closing of the second exercise in part of the underwriters’ over-allotment option for 500,000 Units, the Company completed the private sale of an aggregate of 15,000 Placement Units to our Sponsor, at a purchase price of $10.00 per Placement Unit, generating gross proceeds of $5,150,000.
Transaction costs amounted to $6,731,655 consisting of $2,300,000 of underwriting discount, $4,025,000 of deferred underwriting discount, and $406,655 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $434,130. Net loss of $202,686 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $12,473. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $218,971 of cash.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $116,150,000 consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions) to complete an initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete an initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1,184,215 held outside the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate prospective acquisition candidates, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, select the target business to acquire and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our initial stockholders, officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds from time to time or at any time, as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used to repay such loaned amounts. Up to $1.5 million of such loans may be convertible into units, at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender, upon consummation of our initial business combination. Such private units would be identical to the Placement Units.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amounts necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative services. We began incurring these fees on October 29, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of an initial business combination and the Company’s liquidation.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s common stock feature certain redemption rights that is considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020, 10,748,854 shares of common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of common stock outstanding during the period. An aggregate of 10,746,599 shares of common stock subject to possible redemption at December 31, 2020 was excluded from the calculation of basic loss per share of common stock since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the Trust Account earnings. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the IPO and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 12,045,000 shares of the Company’s common stock in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since they are not yet exercisable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.