ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” contains statements that are not statements of historical fact and are forward-looking statements within the meaning of federal securities laws. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. These statements reflect our current views with respect to future events and are based on assumptions and subject to risks and uncertainties. Factors that may cause our actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements include those factors described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” beginning on page 13 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should carefully review all of these factors, as well as the comprehensive discussion of forward-looking statements on page 22 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We deliver innovative internet access products that reliably and securely connect homes and offices around the world. We derive our net sales primarily from sales of home networking products including cable modems, cable modem/routers, wireless routers, and mesh WiFi systems to retailers, distributors, and Internet Service Providers under an exclusive global license to the Motorola® brand, as well as our ZOOM® brand. Our AI-driven cloud platform and applications, acquired on December 4, 2020 through a merger with Minim Inc., make network optimization simple for broadband users and their service- leading to higher customer satisfaction and decreased support burden.
We sell our products through a direct sales force, independent sales agents, distributors, and reseller partners. Our growth strategy centers on four key pillars: distributing high-margin software on hardware products as a profit driver; employing customer-driven product design and planning; expanding our global sales reach with ISPs and retailers; and mitigating costs and risks through supply chain resiliency. We believe our competitive edge in the market is forged by our software-driven approach to hardware product delivery, radical customer centricity, and commitment to win-win relationships with our reseller and partner base.
We are experienced in electronics hardware, firmware, and software design and testing, regulatory certifications, product documentation, and packaging; and we use that experience in developing each product in-house or in partnership with suppliers who are typically based in Asia. Electronic assembly and testing of the Company’s products in accordance with our specifications is typically done in Asia.
We continually seek to improve our product designs and manufacturing approach to elevate product performance and reduce our costs. We pursue a strategy of outsourcing rather than internally developing our hardware product chipsets, which are application-specific integrated circuits that form the technology base for our modems. By outsourcing the chipset technology, we are able to concentrate our research and development resources on modem system design, leverage the extensive research and development capabilities of our chipset suppliers, and reduce our development time and associated costs and risks. As a result of this approach, we are able to quickly develop new products while maintaining a relatively low level of research and development expense as a percentage of net sales. We also outsource aspects of our manufacturing to contract manufacturers as a means of reducing our costs of production, and to provide us with greater flexibility in our production capacity.
Generally, our gross margin for a given product depends on a number of factors, including the type of customer to whom we are selling. The gross margin products sold to retailers tends to be higher than for some of our other customers; but the sales, support, returns, and overhead costs associated with products sold to retailers also tend to be higher. Zoom’s sales to certain countries are currently handled by a single master distributor for each country that handles the support and marketing costs within the country. Gross margin for sales to these master distributors tends to be low, since lower pricing to these distributors helps them to cover the support and marketing costs for their country.
The Company’s cash and cash equivalents balance on December 31, 2020 was $772 thousand compared to $1.2 million on December 31, 2019. On December 31, 2020, the Company had $2.4 million outstanding bank debt on an available asset-based credit line of $4.0 million, and working capital of $5.9 million.
The Company closed on a $3.4 million private placement and issued an aggregate of 2,237,103 shares on May 26, 2020 at a purchase price of $1.52 per share, and in connection with the closing of the offering two designees of an investor in the private placement joined Zoom’s Board of Directors. Other major changes of cash and cash equivalents during 2020 were decreases of approximately $5.0 million in accounts receivables, $8.8 million in inventories, and $0.3 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets; and increases of approximately $6.7 million in accounts payable and $4.7 million in accrued expenses. The Company had drawn $2.4 million, net, of its credit line. In 2020, the Company also had a net loss of $3.9 million, which contributed to the decrease in cash and cash equivalents.
The Company’s ability to maintain adequate levels of liquidity depends in part on our ability to sell inventory on hand and collect related receivables. Effective September 24, 2018, almost all of our products were subject to a 10% tariff because they were produced in China and they were in product categories subject to a 10% tariff on our cost of goods at the time of entry into the United States. Effective June 15, 2019 almost all of our products were subject to the tariff increase from 10% to 25%. This has a significant impact on our cost of inventory and profitability. Because these tariffs may not be reduced and may even be increased, we moved a substantial portion of our production capability outside China to Vietnam. Although the Company has recently experienced losses, it has continued to experience sales growth. Zoom experienced five consecutive years with double-digit sales growth.
COVID-19 Pandemic
We are subject to risks and uncertainties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is highly uncertain and difficult to predict as coronavirus continues to spread around the world. The availability of vaccines has been limited, and there can be no assurance as to when the pandemic will be contained. Since March 2020, we have instituted office closures, travel restrictions and a mandatory work-from-home policy for substantially all of our employees. The spread of COVID-19 has had a prolonged impact on our supply chain operations due to restrictions, reduced capacity and limited availability from suppliers whom we rely on for sourcing components and materials and from third-party partners whom we rely on for manufacturing, warehousing and logistics services. Although demand for our products has been strong in the short-term as consumers seek more bandwidth and better Wi-Fi, customers’ purchasing decisions over the long-term may be impacted by the pandemic and its impact on the economy, which could in turn impact our revenue and results of operations. Furthermore, our supply chain continues to face constraints primarily due to challenges in sourcing components and materials for our products. The prolonged impact of COVID-19 could exacerbate these constraints or cause further supply chain disruptions.
In the second quarter of 2020, the Company temporarily shifted from the use of primarily ocean freight during prior quarters to the use of primarily air freight during the second quarter of 2020 and into the third quarter of 2020 to keep up with demand and replenish supply. By the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company had returned to primarily ocean freight. These changes in freight transportation resulted in an additional $1.5 million in freight expense incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company also implemented cost cutting measures to conserve cash, delaying the planned start dates of all new hiring during 2020, and not renewing the same footprint of its headquarters office lease when it expired in June 2020. The Company retained a small executive office within the City of Boston on a short-term, month-to-month basis at a cost of $682 per month starting November 1, 2020. The Company negotiated extended and improved payment terms with its primary outsourced manufacturing partner. The Company applied for and received approval for a Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Plan Loan with Primary Bank under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The loan in the amount of $583.3 thousand was approved and funded in April 2020. The Company used the proceeds from the loan for qualifying expenses as defined in the CARES Act.
Recent Accounting Standards
Please refer to Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Following is a discussion of what we view as our more significant accounting policies and estimates. As described below, management judgments and estimates must be made and used in connection with the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We have identified areas where material differences could result in the amount and timing of our net sales, costs, and expenses for any period if we had made different judgments or used different estimates.
Revenue Recognition. The Company primarily sells hardware products to its customers. The hardware products include cable modems and gateways, mobile broadband modems, wireless routers, MoCA adapters and mesh home networking devices. The Company also sells software, including the Minim subscription service that enables and secures a better connected home.
The Company derives its net sales primarily from the sales of hardware products to computer peripherals retailers, computer product distributors, OEMs, and direct to consumers and other channel partners via the Internet. The Company accounts for point-of-sale taxes on a net basis. In addition, the Company earns revenues from its software subscription services of the Minim AI-driven smart home WiFi management and security platform.
The Company applies Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, which requires that an entity recognize revenue when it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which a company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
Product Returns. Products are returned by retail stores and distributors for inventory balancing, contractual stock rotation privileges, and warranty repair or replacements. Analyses of actual returned product are compared to analyses of the product return estimates and historically have resulted in no material difference between the two. The Company has concluded that the current process of estimating the return reserve represents a fair measure with which to adjust revenue. Returned goods are variable and under Topic 606, are estimated and recognized as a reduction of revenue as performance obligations are satisfied (e.g. upon shipment of goods). Under Topic 606, the Company monitors pending authorized returns of goods and, if deemed appropriate, record the right of return asset accordingly.
Price Protection Refunds. We have a policy of offering price protection to certain of our retailer and distributor customers for some or all their inventory. Price protection provides that if the Company reduces the price on any products sold to the customer, the Company will guarantee an account credit for the price difference for all quantities of that product that the customer still holds. Price protection is variable and under Topic 606, are estimated and recognized as a reduction of revenue as performance obligations are satisfied (e.g. upon shipment of goods). The estimates are due to price protection are historically not material.
Volume Rebates and Promotion Programs. Many of our retailer customers require sales and marketing support funding, usually set as a percentage of our sales in their stores. Volume rebates are variable dependent upon the volume of goods sold-through the Company’s customers to end users variable and under Topic 606, are estimated and recognized as a reduction of revenue as performance obligations are satisfied (e.g. upon shipment of goods). The estimates due to rebates and promotions are historically not material.
Warranties. The Company does not offer customers to purchase a warranty separately. Therefore, there is not a separate performance obligation. The Company does account for warranties as a cost accrual and the warranties do not include any additional distinct services other than the assurance that the goods comply with agreed-upon specifications. The estimates due to warranties are historically not material.
Inventory Valuation and Cost of Goods Sold. Inventory is valued at the lower of cost, determined by the first-in, first-out method, or its net realizable value. We review inventories for obsolete and slow-moving products each quarter and make provisions based on our estimate of the probability that the material will not be consumed or that it will be sold below cost. Additionally, material product certification costs on new products are capitalized and amortized over the expected period of value of the respective products.
Valuation and Impairment of Deferred Tax Assets. As part of the process of preparing our financial statements we estimate our income tax expense and deferred income tax position. This process involves the estimation of our actual current tax exposure together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in our balance sheet. We then assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income. To the extent we believe that recovery is not likely, we establish a valuation allowance. Changes in the valuation allowance are reflected in the statement of operations.
Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes and any valuation allowances. We have recorded a 100% valuation allowance against our deferred income tax assets. It is management's estimate that, after considering all available objective evidence, historical and prospective, with greater weight given to historical evidence, it is more likely than not that these assets will not be realized. If we establish a record of continuing profitability, at some point we will be required to reduce the valuation allowance and recognize an equal income tax benefit which will increase net income in that period(s).
In December 2017, the U.S. government enacted comprehensive tax legislation commonly referred to as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”) that significantly revised the U.S. tax code effective January 1, 2018 by, among other things, lowering the corporate income tax rate from a top marginal rate of 35% to a flat 21%.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had federal net operating loss carry forwards of approximately $61,779,000 which are available to offset future taxable income. They are due to expire in varying amounts from 2021 to 2039. Federal net operating losses occurring after December 31, 2017, of approximately $13,617,000 may be carried forward indefinitely. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had state net operating loss carry forwards of approximately $19,151,000 which are available to offset future taxable income. They are due to expire in varying amounts from 2032 through 2039. The Company’s merger with Minim in 2020 triggered a change of ownership that may limit the use of our net operating losses. The Company is in the process of determining the impact of any such limitation. A valuation allowance has been established for the full amount of deferred income tax assets as management has concluded that it is more-likely than-not that the benefits from such assets will not be realized.
Sales Tax. The Company recorded a sales tax accrual in 2017 after the Company became aware that a state sales tax liability was both probable and estimable as of December 31, 2017. The state sales tax liability stems from the Company’s ‘Fulfilled By Amazon’ sales agreement which allows Amazon to warehouse the Company’s inventory throughout a number of states. As a result, the Company recorded an expense of approximately $831 thousand during the year ended December 31, 2017. During the year 2018, the Company settled its obligations with most of the states and re-assessed its liability on the last couple of states which resulted in a reduction of approximately $203 thousand in the sales tax liability. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $86 thousand of the original state sales tax liability remains and $133 thousand relates to sales tax that has been collected and not yet remitted to the respective states. As of December 31, 2019, approximately $51 thousand of the original state sales tax liability remains and $98 thousand relates to sales tax that has been collected and not yet remitted to the respective states. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $50 thousand of the original state sales tax liability remains and $46 thousand relates to sales tax that has been collected and not yet remitted to the respective states.
Results of Operations
Zoom’s net sales of $48.0 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 (“FY 2020”) were up 27.6% from $37.6 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 (“FY 2019”). Zoom reported a net loss of $3.9 million or $0.15 per share for FY 2020 compared to a net loss of $3.3 million or $0.18 per share for FY 2019. Gross profit was $13.6 million for FY 2020, up $2.7 million from $10.9 million for FY 2019. Gross margin decreased to 28.4% in FY 2020 from 29.0% in FY 2019.
The following table sets forth certain financial data as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31,
The following is a discussion of the major categories of our consolidated statement of operations, comparing the consolidated financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020 with the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Sales. Our total net sales increased year-over-year by $10.4 million or 27.6%. The growth in net sales is directly attributable to increased sales of Motorola branded cable modems and gateways. In both 2020 and 2019, we primarily generated our sales by selling cable modems and gateways. The decrease in other category of $0.3 million over 2019 is primarily due to a reduction in DSL products and a refocus on new products with growth potential outside North America as well as within new product introductions.
As shown in the table below, our net sales in North America increased $10.4 million to $47.1 million in FY 2020 from $36.7 million in FY 2019. Net sales outside North America remained relatively flat from 2019 at $871.9 thousand for FY 2020. Generally, Zoom’s lower sales outside North America reflect the fact that cable modems are sold successfully through retailers in the United States but not in most countries outside the United States, due primarily to variations in government regulations.
Relatively few companies account for a substantial portion of the Company’s revenues. In 2020, two companies accounted for 10% or greater individually, and 76% in the aggregate of the Company’s total net sales. At December 31, 2020, three companies with an accounts receivable balance of 10% or greater individually accounted for a combined 85% of the Company’s accounts receivable. In 2019, two companies accounted for 10% or greater individually, and 84% in the aggregate of the Company’s total net sales. At December 31, 2019, three companies with an accounts receivable balance of 10% or greater individually accounted for a combined 84% of the Company’s accounts receivable.
Our customers generally do not enter into long-term agreements obligating them to purchase our products. Because of our significant customer concentration, our net sales and operating income could fluctuate significantly due to changes in political or economic conditions or the loss of, reduction of business with, or less favorable terms for any of our significant customers. A reduction or delay in orders from any of our significant customers, or a delay or default in payment by any significant customer could materially harm our business, results of operation and liquidity.
Gross Profit. Gross profit was $13.6 million for FY 2020, up $2.7 million from $10.9 million for FY 2019. Gross margin decreased to 28.4% in FY 2020 from 29.0% in FY 2019. The increase in gross profit was attributable to sales growth of Motorola branded cable modems and gateways. The decrease in profit margin was primarily due to tariff costs and air freight costs of $2.8 million and $1.5 million, respectively, in 2020 compared to $3.2 million and $0, respectively, in 2019.
Operating Expense. Total operating expense increased by $4.3 million from $14.1 million in FY 2020 to $18.4 million in FY 2019. Total operating expense as a percentage of net sales increased from 37.6% in 2019 to 38.4% in 2020. The table below illustrates the change in operating expense.
Selling and Marketing Expense. Selling and marketing expense decreased $68 thousand to $9.1 million in FY 2020 from $9.2 million in FY 2019. Selling and marketing expense as a percentage of net sales was 19.1% in FY 2020 and 24.5% in FY 2019. The decrease of $68 thousand was primarily due to reduction in advertising expenses of $1.0 million, partially offset by increased Motorola trademark royalty costs of $600 thousand, and salary and related costs of $290 thousand.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense increased to $5.4 million in FY 2020 from $2.7 million in FY 2019. General and administrative expense as a percentage of net sales was 11.3% in FY 2020 and 7.1% in FY 2019. General and administrative expenses increased approximately $2.8 million primarily due to $1.6 million in one-time transactions costs of legal and professional services related to the merger with Minim, $0.6 million related to one-time legal and professional services expenses related to evaluation of agreements consummated for the purchase of company stock, and $0.8 million of salary and related costs. These costs were offset by reductions in bad debt provision of $0.4 million.
Research and Development Expense. Research and development expense increased to $3.8 million in FY 2020 from $2.2 million in FY 2019. Research and development expense as a percentage of net sales increased to 8.0% in FY 2020 from 5.9% in FY 2019. The increase of approximately $1.6 million was primarily due to salary and related costs of $1.0 million and increased product testing, certification and software development costs of $0.4 million.
Other Income (Expense). Other income (expense), net was $1.0 million in FY 2020 and $(30) thousand in FY 2019, primarily due to $1.1 million forgiveness on loans received under the Paycheck Protection Plan of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). Refer to Note 17 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit). We recorded minimum state income tax for a few states and tax related to our operations in Mexico, which was $27 thousand and $25 thousand in FY 2020 and FY 2019, respectively.
Unaudited Pro Forma Information
The following unaudited pro forma financial information summarizes the combined results of operations for the Company and Minim, Inc. as if the merger of Minim, Inc. had been completed on January 1, 2019. The pro forma results have been prepared for comparative purposes only, and do not necessarily represent what the net sales or results of operations would have been had the merger been completed on January 1, 2019. In addition, these results are not intended to be a projection of future operating results. The unaudited pro forma information includes adjustments to eliminate intercompany transactions and align accounting policies. The pro forma results for the year ended December 31, 2020 also includes the non-recurring transaction costs totaling $1.6 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s cash and cash equivalents balance on December 31, 2020 was $771.7 thousand compared to $1.2 million on December 31, 2019. On December 31, 2020, the Company had $2.4 million bank debt outstanding on an available asset-based credit line of $4.0 million, and working capital of $5.9 million. We have funded our operations and investing activities primarily through cash generated from operations, borrowings on our line of credit, and sales of our common stock.
On April 13, 2020, the Company amended its Financing Agreement with Rosenthal & Rosenthal, Inc. The amendment increased the size of the revolving credit line from $3.0 million to $4.0 million effective the date of the amendment. On February 4, 2021, the Company amended the Financing Agreement to increase the revolving credit line from $4.0 million to $5.0 million effective the date of the amendment. The Company is required to calculate its covenant compliance on a quarterly basis under the Financing Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with both the minimum working capital covenant of $1.75 million and minimum tangible net worth covenant of $2.0 million. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s tangible net worth, as calculated pursuant to the Financing Agreement, was approximately $6.3 million, while the Company’s working capital, as calculated pursuant to the Financing Agreement, was approximately $5.9 million. Loan availability is based on certain eligible receivables. Loan availability was approximately $1.6 million as of December 31, 2020.
On April 15 2020, the Company received approval for a SBA Paycheck Protection Plan Loan with Primary Bank under the CARES Act. The loan in the amount of $583.3 thousand was used for qualifying expenses as defined in the CARES Act. The loan and related interest was subsequently partially forgiven in November 2020.
On May 26, 2020, the Company closed on a $3.4 million private placement and issued an aggregate of 2,237,103 shares at a purchase price of $1.52 per share, and in connection with the closing of the offering two designees of an investor in the private placement joined Zoom’s Board of Directors.
On March 12, 2021, the Company terminated its Financing Agreement with Rosenthal & Rosenthal, Inc. and entered into a new loan and security agreement with Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB Loan Agreement”). The SVB Loan Agreement provides for a revolving facility up to a principal amount of $12.0 million. The SVB Loan Agreement matures, and all outstanding amounts become due and payable, on March 12, 2023. The SVB Loan Agreement is secured by substantially all of the Company’s assets but excludes the Company’s intellectual property. The availability of borrowings under the SVB Loan Agreement is subject to certain conditions and requirements.
Based on the Company’s present business plan, funding available under the SVB Loan Agreement and additional financing that the Company believes is obtainable under acceptable terms if needed, the Company expects to maintain acceptable levels of liquidity to meet its obligations as they become due during the next 12months.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In 2006, the Company entered into a maquiladora agreement with North American Production Sharing, Inc. (“NAPS”). This agreement provides that NAPS provide certain personnel and other services for a production facility in Mexico on our behalf. Although the maquiladora agreement expired on September 25, 2019, the agreement automatically renews annually unless otherwise cancelled per provisions in the agreement. Any related assets, liabilities, or expenses are reported in the accompanying financial statements. Additionally, the Company is obligated to pay future minimum required royalty payments associated with certain licensing agreements which are not included in our consolidated balance sheet.