ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements, which are included in this report.
Our company
We are a hybrid mortgage REIT that opportunistically invests in a diversified risk adjusted portfolio of Credit Investments and Agency RMBS. Our Credit Investments include Residential Investments and Commercial Investments. We are a Maryland corporation and are externally managed by our Manager, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Angelo Gordon, pursuant to a management agreement. Our Manager, pursuant to a delegation agreement dated as of June 29, 2011, has delegated to Angelo Gordon the overall responsibility of its day-to-day duties and obligations arising under the management agreement. We conduct our operations to qualify and be taxed as a REIT, for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Accordingly, we generally will not be subject to U.S. federal income taxes on our taxable income that we distribute currently to our stockholders as long as we maintain our intended qualification as a REIT. We also operate our business in a manner that permits us to maintain our exemption from registration under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act.
Prior to December 31, 2019, we conducted our business through the following segments; (i) Securities and Loans and (ii) Single-Family Rental Properties. On November 15, 2019, we sold our portfolio of single-family rental properties and no longer separate our business into segments. We reclassified the operating results of our Single-Family Rental Properties segment to discontinued operations and excluded the income associated with the portfolio from continuing operations for all periods presented. See Note 13 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional financial information regarding our discontinued operations.
COVID-19 Impact
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the novel coronavirus ("COVID-19") a pandemic. On March 13, 2020, the U.S. declared a national emergency concerning the COVID-19 pandemic, and several states and municipalities have subsequently declared public health emergencies. These conditions have caused, and continue to cause, a significant disruption in the U.S. and world economies. To slow the spread of COVID-19, many countries, including the U.S., have implemented social distancing measures, which have substantially prohibited large gatherings, including at sporting events, religious services and schools. Further, many regions, including the majority of U.S. states, implemented additional measures, such as shelter-in-place and stay-at-home orders. Many businesses moved to a remote working environment, temporarily suspended operations, laid off a significant percentage of their workforce and/or shut down completely. Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic and certain of the actions taken to reduce its spread have resulted in lost business revenue, rapid and significant increases in unemployment, changes in consumer behavior and significant reductions in liquidity and the fair value of many assets, including those in which the Company invests. Although many of the government restrictions were relaxed over the summer and early fall of 2020, these conditions, or some level thereof, are expected to continue over the near term and may continue throughout 2021, depending on state and local outbreaks and the success of availability of an effective vaccine.
Beginning in mid-March 2020, the global pandemic associated with COVID-19 and related economic conditions caused financial and mortgage-related asset markets to come under extreme duress, resulting in credit spread widening, a sharp decrease in interest rates and unprecedented illiquidity in repurchase agreement financing and MBS markets. The illiquidity was exacerbated by inadequate demand for MBS among primary dealers due to balance sheet constraints. These events, in turn, resulted in falling prices of our assets and increased margin calls from our repurchase agreement counterparties. To conserve capital, protect assets and to pause the escalating negative impacts caused by the market dislocation and allow the markets for many of our assets to stabilize, on March 20, 2020, we notified our repurchase agreement counterparties that we did not expect to fund the existing and anticipated future margin calls under our repurchase agreements and commenced discussions with our counterparties with regard to entering into forbearance agreements. We entered into three consecutive forbearance agreements, pursuant to which the forbearing counterparties agreed not to exercise any of their rights or remedies under their applicable financing arrangement with us through June 15, 2020. On June 10, 2020, we exited forbearance, terminating the last remaining forbearance agreement, and entered into a reinstatement agreement, pursuant to which each Participating Counterparty agreed to permanently waive all existing and prior events of default under our financing agreements and reinstate our financing arrangements described in more detail below under the "Financing arrangements" heading of this Part II, Item 7.
In an effort to manage our portfolio through this unprecedented turmoil in the financial markets, to improve liquidity, and preserve capital, we executed the following during the year ended December 31, 2020.
•Reduced GAAP investment portfolio from $4.0 billion at December 31, 2019 to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020 and investment portfolio on a non-GAAP basis from $4.4 billion at December 31, 2019 to $1.4 billion at December 31, 2020 through sales, directly or as a result of financing counterparty seizures.
•Reduced financing arrangement balance on a GAAP basis from $3.2 billion at December 31, 2019 to $564.0 million at December 31, 2020 and financing arrangements on a non-GAAP basis from $3.5 billion at December 31, 2019 to $680.8 million at December 31, 2020.
•Reduced mark-to-market recourse financing from $3.5 billion at December 31, 2019 to $580.1 million at December 31, 2020.
◦Increased non mark-to-market non-recourse financing from $224.3 million at December 31, 2019 to $466.3 million at December 31, 2020.
•Reduced our GAAP leverage ratio and Economic Leverage Ratio from 4.1x and 4.1x at December 31, 2019, respectively, to 2.4x and 1.5x at December 31, 2020, respectively.
•Unwound entire portfolio of pay-fixed, receive-variable interest rate swaps held directly and through investments in debt and equity of affiliates during the first quarter, recognizing net realized losses of $(65.4) million on a GAAP basis as a result of the market disruption caused by the pandemic.
We also executed the following during the year ended December 31, 2020:
•We purchased $0.5 billion of Agency RMBS and $60.2 million of Residential Mortgage Loans.
•We participated in a non-rated securitization, in which Residential Mortgage Loans with a fair value of $199.6 million were securitized, converting financing from recourse financing that was mark-to-market with respect to margin calls to non-recourse financing that is no longer mark-to-market with respect to margin calls.
•We, alongside private funds under the management of Angelo Gordon, participated through our unconsolidated ownership interest in MATT in a rated Non-QM Loan securitization, in which Non-QM Loans with a fair value of $226.0 million were securitized. Certain senior tranches in the securitization were sold to third-parties with us and private funds under the management of Angelo Gordon retaining the subordinate tranches, which had a fair value of $24.3 million as of September 30, 2020. We have a 44.6% interest in the retained subordinate tranches.
Reconciliations of GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures appear below.
The full impact of COVID-19 on the mortgage REIT industry, the credit markets and, consequently, our financial condition and results of operations for future periods is uncertain and cannot be predicted at the current time as it depends on several factors beyond our control including, but not limited to (i) the uncertainty around the severity, duration and spread of the outbreak, (ii) the effectiveness of the United States and global public health response, (iii) the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies, (iv) the timing, scope and effectiveness of additional governmental responses to the pandemic, including the availability of a treatment or vaccination for COVID-19, (v) the impact of government interventions, and (vi) the negative impact on our borrowers, asset values and cost of capital.
Market conditions
While 2020 began with an improved interest rate environment for our business and industry as a whole, the impact of the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic on the financial markets resulted in unprecedented market disruption in the first two quarters of the year. Beginning in the middle of the first quarter of 2020 and continuing into the second quarter, financial and mortgage-related asset markets experienced significant volatility as a result of the spread of COVID-19. That caused, among other things, credit spread widening, a sharp decrease in interest rates and unprecedented illiquidity in repurchase agreement financing and MBS markets. These conditions put significant pressure on the mortgage REIT industry, including financing operations, mortgage asset pricing and liquidity demands. After a series of rate cuts in 2019, the U.S. Federal Reserve responded to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic with a series of large-scale actions, including cutting the Fed Funds target rate by 150 basis points, back to the zero bound. The Fed also committed in March 2020 to unlimited purchases of U.S. Treasuries and Agency RMBS, in a round of quantitative easing known as QE4. Combined with significant fiscal stimulus enacted by Congress, these actions seemed to stabilize broader market conditions by late in the second quarter. Subsequently, risk assets generally rallied through the balance of the year as fundamentals became more clear and risk appetite amongst market participants returned.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the financial markets continued a cautious recovery from the unprecedented dislocation caused by the COVID-19 outbreak and the resultant economic shutdown across much of the U.S. economy. We believe several
factors have contributed to this recovery, including support from the U.S. Federal Reserve, capital flows into fixed income assets and generally improving economic data. The Federal Reserve has expressed continued commitment to the broad array of programs it implemented in the immediate wake of the COVID-19 crisis, which are all designed to support the financial markets and facilitate economic recovery, including unlimited purchases of Agency RMBS and U.S. Treasuries, as well as purchases in certain segments of the corporate credit market. The Federal Reserve signaled that it intends to maintain low interest rates for the foreseeable future. Additionally, continuing bond fund inflows throughout the quarter have provided further technical support to the credit markets.
We believe that risks for the mortgage- and asset-backed sectors have been balanced against collateral fundamentals that have generally exceeded the market’s expectations since March and April 2020, as markets conditions improve. The latest survey of home price indices in the fourth quarter point to an annual increase of around 9% for 2020, as limited supply of new and existing homes and strong demand continued to drive price appreciation. We expect that the mortgage and consumer sectors will continue to benefit from the unemployment support and stimulus disbursements, which were included in the Bipartisan-Bicameral Omnibus COVID Relief Deal bill, which was passed by Congress in December 2020.
Credit Assets. Overall, the factors discussed above contributed to increasingly tighter spreads over the course of the quarter, particularly the lower tranches of credit-related assets. For example, Credit Risk Transfer ("CRT") mezzanine spreads were around 15 basis points tighter while subordinate spreads tightened around 100 basis points. Benchmark new-issue triple-A spreads mostly tightened around 10 basis points, except for Non-QM triple-A rated tranches which were roughly 40 basis points tighter. As a result, primary spreads are approaching pre-pandemic levels for several sectors, including Non-QM RMBS, which ended the year around five basis points tighter than February 2020 spreads. Limited supply contributed to the strong oversubscription levels for newly issued RMBS, which fell 26% compared to the prior quarter as the election likely sidelined some issuers. Overall, issuance in the fourth quarter brought full-year 2020 RMBS volumes to around $95 billion, which was around 25% lower compared to 2019.
Agency MBS. Agency MBS continued their strong performance in the fourth quarter, with generic current coupon MBS spreads versus the 10-year Treasury rate tightening 29 basis points on the quarter and tightening 37 basis points over the full year, to spreads not seen since the third round of quantitative easing from the Federal Reserve in 2012. Specified pools have also continued to perform well as demand for protection from refinancing-driven prepayments remains elevated given historically low mortgage rates. Federal Reserve buying, strong bank deposit growth, broad demand for yield and low interest rate volatility continue to result in a supportive backdrop for valuations despite elevated gross issuance. While structured credit spreads have rallied from their March extremes, spreads for most RMBS and some ABS sub-sectors remain wide of pre-pandemic levels as ongoing risks over the implications of high unemployment due to COVID-19 hang over the market.
CMBS. With respect to the CMBS market, markets conditions varied throughout the year. In September and October of 2020 the significant rally in CMBS prices experienced earlier in the year seemed to be losing momentum, likely due to concerns regarding COVID-19 infections and political uncertainties. Conditions improved in November of 2020, likely due to positive news regarding a COVID-19 vaccine and the broad election results. Later in the month, the CMBS market experience significant pressure based on guidance provided by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. However, there was significant demand to absorb these sales, permitting the CMBS market to end the year on a positive note.
Regarding CMBS valuations over the course of 2020, we estimate that CMBS conduit AAA bonds started the year at approximately swaps plus 95 basis points, tightened to the mid-80s by February 2020 before widening into the mid-300s at the height of the pandemic-related panic, and subsequently tightened back to around swaps plus 80 to end the year. The moves in BBB- bonds were even more dramatic, starting the year in the mid-300s, tightening to the low 300s before gapping out to well over swaps plus 1,000 basis points, and then ending the year in the low 400s range. Delinquency data by property type also provides an interesting perspective on this difficult year. The industrial sector fared best, with delinquencies rising from 1.4% to a peak of just 1.8% and then falling to 1.2% at year-end. Office and multifamily properties largely followed similar patterns, with delinquencies ending the year around 2.2% and 2.9%, respectively. Retail was negatively affected, with delinquencies rising from 4.4% to as high as 18% and ending the year at 13%. Hotels were most impacted, with delinquencies rising from 1.5% to 24% and ending the year at 20%. Notably, when hotel loans in special servicing or on servicer watchlists are included in this metric, approximately 70% of all securitized loans in that space showed some level of distress at their peak in 2020.
In light of various market uncertainties, in particular the pervasive uncertainties of the COVID-19 pandemic for the U.S. and global economy, there can be no assurance that the trends and conditions described above will not change in a manner materially adverse to the mortgage REIT industry and/or our Company.
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Year 2020 and 2019
Our operating results can be affected by a number of factors and primarily depend on the size and composition of our investment portfolio, the level of our net interest income, the fair value of our assets and the supply of, and demand for, our target assets in the marketplace, among other things, which can be impacted by unanticipated credit events, such as defaults, liquidations or delinquencies, experienced by borrowers whose mortgage loans are included in our investment portfolio and other unanticipated events in our markets. Our primary source of net income or loss available to common stockholders is our net interest income, less our cost of hedging, which represents the difference between the interest earned on our investment portfolio and the costs of financing and hedging our investment portfolio, as well as any income or losses from our equity investments in affiliates.
In particular, our results of operations for 2020 were significantly impacted by the conditions created by the COVID-19 pandemic. Prior to the pandemic, our net interest income varied primarily as a result of changes in market interest rates, prepayment speeds, as measured by the Constant Prepayment Rate ("CPR") on the Agency RMBS in our investment portfolio, and our funding and hedging costs. However, we sold our 30 Year Fixed Rate Agency RMBS portfolio in March 2020 to raise liquidity. As a result, we incurred large realized losses in 2020 and a sharp decline in book value. Additionally, we believe the significant reduction in the size of our investment portfolio will materially limit our earnings going forward.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The table below presents certain information from our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (in thousands):
Interest income
Interest income is calculated using the effective interest method for our GAAP investment portfolio and calculated based on the actual coupon rate.
Interest income decreased from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 primarily due to the significant reduction in the size of our investment portfolio as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic. The weighted average cost of our GAAP investment portfolio decreased by $2.0 billion from $3.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect our interest income going forward to be materially lower compared to comparable prior periods as a result of the changes in our investment portfolio set forth in the tables of the "Investment activities" section below as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest expense
Interest expense is calculated based on the actual financing rate and the outstanding financing balance of our GAAP investment portfolio.
Interest expense decreased from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 primarily due to the significant reduction in the size of our investment portfolio and related financing as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic. The weighted average financing balance on our GAAP investment portfolio during the period decreased by $2.0 billion from $3.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to the "Financing activities" section below for a discussion of the material changes in our cost of funds. We do not expect our interest expense, set forth in the consolidated statements of operations table above, to be indicative of our future interest expense due to the changes in our financing arrangements described in the "Financing activities" section below.
Net realized gain/(loss)
Net realized gain/(loss) represents the net gain or loss recognized on any (i) sales and seizure, of real estate securities out of our GAAP investment portfolio, including any associated deficiency recognized, (ii) sale of loans out of our GAAP investment portfolio, transfer of loans from our GAAP investment portfolio to real estate owned, which is included within our Other assets line item on our consolidated balance sheets, and sale of Other assets, (iii) settlement of derivatives and other instruments, and (iv) prior to the adoption of ASU 2016-13, other-than-temporary-impairment ("OTTI") charges recorded during the period. See Note 2, Note 3, and Note 4 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for further discussion on OTTI. The following table presents a summary of Net realized gain/(loss) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (in thousands):
As previously discussed, in order to preserve liquidity and meet margin calls, we sold approximately $3.2 billion of securities and loans during the year ended December 31, 2020, a majority of which were sold due to the unprecedented market conditions experienced as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic, which is the primary driver of the variances presented in the table above.
Net interest component of interest rate swaps
Net interest component of interest rate swaps represents the net interest income received or expense paid on our interest rate swaps.
Net interest component of interest rate swaps decreased from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, primarily due to the significant reduction in the size of our investment portfolio and related financing as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Unrealized gain/(loss) on real estate securities and loans, net
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the loss of $159.5 million consisted of unrealized losses on securities of $136.8 million and unrealized losses on loans of $22.7 million during the year.
Unrealized gain/(loss) on derivative and other instruments, net
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the $10.3 million loss consisted of unrealized losses on certain derivatives and securitized debt, offset by unrealized gains on Excess MSRs.
Foreign currency gain/(loss), net
Foreign currency gain/(loss), net pertains to the effects of remeasuring the monetary assets and liabilities of our foreign
investments into U.S. dollars using foreign currency exchange rates at the end of the reporting period.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our liabilities held in foreign currencies generated gains as the result of a decrease in the value of GBP relative to USD.
Other income
Other income currently includes certain fees we receive on our loans and CMBS portfolios. Other income decreased from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 as a result of origination fees received on our loans during 2019 and a premium received on a credit default swap during 2019 that we did not receive in 2020.
Management fee to affiliate
Our management fee is based upon a percentage of our Stockholders’ Equity. See the "Contractual obligations" section of this Part II, Item 7 for further detail on the calculation of our management fee and for the definition of Stockholders’ Equity. Management fees decreased from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2019 primarily due to an decrease in our Stockholders’ Equity as calculated pursuant to our Management Agreement.
On April 6, 2020, we executed an amendment to our Management Agreement pursuant to which our Manager agreed to defer our payment of the management fee and reimbursement of expenses beginning with the first quarter 2020 through September 30, 2020, or such other time as we and the Manager agreed. As of December 31, 2020, we have paid all deferred management fees related to earlier periods and settled $4.3 million of management fees through the issuance of common stock to the Manager. See Note 10 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" and the "Liquidity and capital resources" section of this Item 7 below for a further discussion on management fees.
Other operating expenses
These amounts primarily comprise professional fees, directors’ and officers’ ("D&O") insurance and directors’ fees, as well as certain expenses reimbursable to the Manager. We are required to reimburse our Manager or its affiliates for operating expenses incurred by our Manager or its affiliates on our behalf, including certain salary expenses and other expenses relating to legal, accounting, due diligence, and other services. Refer to the "Contractual obligations" section below for more detail on certain expenses reimbursable to the Manager. The following table presents a summary of expenses within Other operating expenses broken out between non-investment related expenses and investment related expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (in thousands):
(1)We recognize certain upfront costs and fees relating to investments for which the fair value option has been elected in current period earnings as incurred and do not defer those costs. Refer to Note 2 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for more information regarding this policy.
(2)For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, total transaction related expenses and deal related performance fees were $(0.6) million and $4.5 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the $(0.6) million was comprised of $(1.2) million per the chart above as well as $0.6 million of deferred financing costs that are included within interest expense. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the $4.5 million consisted of $42.0 thousand and $4.5 million per the chart above as well as a de minimis amount of deferred financing costs that are included within interest expense. The decrease in Transaction related expenses and deal related performance fees from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily a result of accrued deal-related performance fees being reversed in the current period due to a decline in the price of the related assets, as well as the seizure of such assets by financing counterparties.
Restructuring related expenses
Restructuring related expenses relate to legal and consulting fees primarily incurred in connection with executing the Forbearance Agreement and subsequent Reinstatement Agreement. Refer to the "Financing activities" section below for more information regarding the Forbearance Agreement and the Reinstatement Agreement.
Equity based compensation to affiliate
Equity based compensation to affiliate represents amortization of the fair value of our restricted stock units issued to our Manager, less the present value of dividends expected to be paid on the underlying shares through the requisite period.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our equity based compensation to affiliate decreased as a result of the remaining restricted stock units vesting during 2020.
Excise tax
Excise tax represents a four percent tax on the required amount of any ordinary income and net capital gains not distributed during the year. The expense is calculated in accordance with applicable tax regulations.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 our excise tax decreased primarily due to losses associated with COVID-19.
Servicing fees
We incur servicing fee expenses in connection with the servicing of our Residential mortgage loans. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, we owned Residential mortgage loans with a fair value of $435.4 million and $417.8 million, respectively. This increase in the fair value of the Residential mortgage loans we own pertains to the net purchases of Residential mortgage loan pools in 2019 and 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our servicing fees increased primarily due to our net purchases of residential mortgage loans described above.
Equity in earnings/(loss) from affiliates
Equity in earnings/(loss) from affiliates represents our share of earnings and profits of investments held within affiliated entities. A majority of these investments comprise real estate securities, loans and our investment in AG Arc. The decrease from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily pertains to unrealized losses on investments held within affiliated entities, offset by our share of income generated by Arc Home. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $23.3 million of equity in earnings from affiliates related to our investment in AG Arc. The increase in earnings within AG Arc was the result of elevated origination volumes and the related lending revenues experienced at Arc Home. See Note 2 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information on equity in earnings/(loss) from affiliates.
Discontinued operations
On November 15, 2019, we sold our portfolio of single-family rental properties to a third-party at a price of approximately $137 million. We recognized a gain of $0.2 million as a result of the transaction. We reclassified the operating results of the single-family rental properties segment to discontinued operations and excluded the income from continuing operations for all periods presented.
Gain on Exchange Offers, net
We completed a public exchange offer and two privately negotiated exchange offers (collectively, the "Exchange Offers") during the the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result of the Exchange Offers, we exchanged a total of 253,482 shares of our 8.25% Series A Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock ("Series A Preferred Stock"), 435,272 shares of our 8.00% Series B Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock ("Series B Preferred Stock") and 716,822 shares of our and 8.000% Series C Fixed-to-Floating Rate Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock ("Series C Preferred Stock") for a total of 5,095,934 shares of common stock and cash consideration of $8.0 million. We recognized a gain of $10.6 million in connection with the Exchange Offers, which is net of related expenses. Refer to the "Liquidity and capital resources" section below for more information on the Exchange Offers.
Results of Operations for Fiscal Year 2019 and 2018
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
Book value per share
Per share amounts for book value are calculated using all outstanding common shares in accordance with GAAP, including all vested shares issued to our Manager, and our independent directors under our equity incentive plans as of quarter-end. As of December 31, 2020, the net proceeds for the Series A Preferred Stock, Series B Preferred Stock, and Series C Preferred Stock is $43.8 million, $100.8 million and $93.9 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the liquidation preference for the issued and outstanding Series A Preferred Stock, Series B Preferred Stock, and Series C Preferred Stock is $45.4 million, $104.1 million and $97.1 million, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our book value per common share calculated using stockholders’ equity less net proceeds on our preferred stock as the numerator was $4.13 and $17.61, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our adjusted book value per common share calculated using stockholders’ equity less the liquidation preference of our preferred stock as the numerator was $3.94 and $17.33, respectively.
Presentation of investment, financing and hedging activities
In the "Investment activities," "Financing activities," "Hedging activities" and "Liquidity and capital resources" sections of this Part II, Item 7, where we disclose our investment portfolio and the related financing arrangements, we have presented this information inclusive of (i) unconsolidated ownership interests in affiliates that are accounted for under GAAP using the equity method and (ii) TBAs, which are accounted for as derivatives under GAAP. Our investment portfolio and the related financing arrangements are presented along with a reconciliation to GAAP. This presentation of our investment portfolio is consistent with how our management team evaluates the business, and we believe this presentation, when considered with the GAAP presentation, provides supplemental information useful for investors in evaluating our investment portfolio and financial condition. See Note 2 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for a discussion of investments in debt and equity of affiliates.
Net interest margin and leverage ratio
GAAP net interest margin and non-GAAP net interest margin, a non-GAAP financial measure, are calculated by subtracting the weighted average cost of funds from the weighted average yield for our GAAP investment portfolio or our investment portfolio, respectively, both of which exclude cash held by us and any net TBA position. The weighted average yield on our Agency RMBS portfolio and our credit portfolio represents an effective interest rate, which utilizes all estimates of future cash flows and adjusts for actual prepayment and cash flow activity as of year-end. The calculation of weighted average yield is weighted on fair value at year-end. The weighted average cost of funds is the sum of the weighted average funding costs on total financing arrangements outstanding at year-end, including all non-recourse financing arrangements, and our weighted average hedging cost, which is the weighted average of the net pay rate on our interest rate swaps. Both elements of cost of funds are weighted by the outstanding financing arrangements on our GAAP investment portfolio or our investment portfolio and securitized debt at year-end.
As our capital allocation shifts, our weighted average yields and weighted average cost of funds will also shift. Our Agency Investments, given their liquidity and high credit quality, are eligible for higher levels of leverage, while our Credit
Investments, with less liquidity and/or more exposure to credit risk and prepayment, utilize lower levels of leverage. As a result, our leverage ratio is determined by our portfolio mix as well as many additional factors, including the liquidity of our portfolio, the availability and price of our financing, the diversification of our counterparties and their available capacity to finance our assets, and anticipated regulatory developments. Prior to March 2020, we generally maintained a leverage ratio range of 4.0 to 5.0 times to finance our investment portfolio, on a fully deployed capital basis. Our debt-to-equity ratio is directly correlated to the composition of our portfolio; specifically, the higher percentage of Agency Investments we hold, the higher our leverage ratio is, while the higher percentage of Credit Investments we hold, the lower our leverage ratio is. As previously mentioned, in an effort to prudently manage our portfolio through unprecedented market volatility and to preserve long-term stockholder value, we completed the sale of our 30 Year Fixed Rate Agency securities during the first quarter of 2020. We believe the resulting capital allocation impacts the weighted average yield, weighted average cost of funds and leverage ratio as illustrated below.
Net interest margin and leverage ratio are metrics that management believes should be considered when evaluating the performance of our investment portfolio. See the "Financing activities" section below for more detail on our leverage ratio.
The chart below sets forth the net interest margin and leverage ratio from our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 and a reconciliation to our GAAP investment portfolio:
(a)Excludes any net TBA position.
(b)Includes cost of non-recourse financing arrangements. Non-recourse financing arrangements include securitized debt.
(c)The leverage ratio on our GAAP Investment Portfolio represents GAAP leverage. The leverage ratio on our investment portfolio represents Economic Leverage as defined below in the "Financing Activities" section.
(d)Refer to the "Financing activities" section below for an aggregate breakout of leverage.
Core Earnings
We define Core Earnings, a non-GAAP financial measure, as Net Income/(loss) available to common stockholders excluding (i) (a) unrealized gains/(losses) on real estate securities, loans, derivatives and other investments, inclusive of our investment in AG Arc, (b) net realized gains/(losses) on the sale or termination of such instruments, and (c) any OTTI, (ii) any transaction related expenses incurred in connection with the acquisition or disposition of our investments, (iii) accrued deal-related performance fees payable to Arc Home and third party operators to the extent the primary component of the accrual relates to items that are excluded from Core Earnings, such as unrealized and realized gains/(losses), (iv) realized and unrealized changes in the fair value of Arc Home's net mortgage servicing rights and the derivatives intended to offset changes in the fair value of those net mortgage servicing rights, (v) deferred taxes recognized at our taxable REIT subsidiaries, if any, (vi) beginning with the third quarter of 2019, concurrent with a change in our business, any foreign currency gain/(loss) relating to monetary assets and liabilities, (vii) beginning with the fourth quarter of 2019 and applied retrospectively, concurrent with a change in our business, income from discontinued operations, and (viii) any gains/(losses) associated with exchange transactions on our common and preferred stock. Items (i) through (viii) above include any amount related to those items held in affiliated entities. Management considers the transaction related expenses referenced in (ii) above to be similar to realized losses incurred at the acquisition or disposition of an asset and does not view them as being part of its core operations. Management views the exclusion described in (iv) above to be consistent with how it calculates Core Earnings on the remainder of its portfolio. Management excludes all deferred taxes because it believes deferred taxes are not representative of current operations.
As defined, Core Earnings include the net interest income and other income earned on our investments on a yield adjusted basis, including TBA dollar roll income or any other investment activity that may earn or pay net interest or its economic equivalent. One of our objectives is to generate net income from net interest margin on the portfolio, and management uses Core Earnings to help measure our performance against this objective. Management believes that this non-GAAP measure, when considered with our GAAP financial statements, provides supplemental information useful for investors as it enables them to evaluate our current core performance using the same methodology that management uses to operate the business. This metric, in conjunction with related GAAP measures, provides greater transparency into the information used by our management team in its financial and operational decision-making. Our presentation of Core Earnings may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures of other companies, who may use different calculations. This non-GAAP measure should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, the financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Our GAAP financial results and the reconciliations from these results should be carefully evaluated. Refer to the "Results of Operations" section above for a detailed discussion of our GAAP financial results.
A reconciliation of "Net Income/(loss) available to common stockholders" to Core Earnings for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 is set forth below (in thousands, except per share data):
(1)Refer to changes in Interest expense and Other operating expenses in our "Results of Operations" section above for a breakout of transaction related expenses and deal related performance fees for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
(2)For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, $(3.9 million) or $(0.11) per share and $(8.5 million) or $(0.26) per share, respectively, of realized and unrealized changes in the fair value of Arc Home's net mortgage servicing rights and corresponding derivatives were excluded from Core Earnings per diluted share.
We did not disclose Core Earnings during the first three quarters of 2020 as we determined that this measure, as we have historically calculated it, did not appropriately capture our business, liquidity, results of operations, financial condition, or our ability to make distributions to our stockholders. During the fourth quarter of 2020 we began disclosing Core Earnings in conjunction with the reinstatement of our dividends on our common stock and preferred stock.
Investment activities
Overall, our intention is to allocate capital to investment opportunities with attractive risk/return profiles in our target asset classes. Historically, our investment portfolio has consisted of Agency RMBS, Residential Investments and Commercial Investments. Our capital allocation to each of these investments is set forth in more detail below. Our investment and capital allocation decisions depend on prevailing market conditions and compliance with Investment Company Act and REIT tests, among other factors, and may change over time in response to opportunities available in different economic and capital market environments. The risk-reward profile of our investment opportunities changes continuously with the market, with labor, housing and economic fundamentals, and with U.S. monetary policy, among others. As a result, in reacting to market conditions
and taking into account a variety of other factors, including liquidity, duration, interest rate expectations and hedging, the mix of our assets changes over time as we opportunistically deploy capital.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we reduced the size of our GAAP investment portfolio from $4.0 billion to $1.2 billion, and at December 31, 2020, our equity capital allocation was 19.7% to Agency RMBS and 80.3% to credit investments. We have expertise in Agency RMBS, and may choose to allocate additional capital in those assets should the opportunity arise; however, in the near term we expect our capital to be almost entirely allocated to Credit Investments.
We evaluate investments in Agency RMBS using factors including, among others, expected future prepayment trends, supply of and demand for Agency RMBS, costs of financing, costs of hedging, liquidity, expected future interest rate volatility and the overall shape of the U.S. Treasury and interest rate swap yield curves. Prepayment speeds, as reflected by the CPR, and interest rates vary according to the type of investment, conditions in financial markets, competition and other factors, none of which can be predicted with any certainty. In general, as prepayment speeds on our Agency RMBS portfolio increase, the related purchase premium amortization increases, thereby reducing the net yield on such assets.
Our credit investments are subject to risk of loss with regard to principal and interest payments. We evaluate each investment in our credit portfolio based on the characteristics of the underlying collateral, the securitization structure, expected return, geography, collateral type, and the cost and availability of financing, among others. We maintain a comprehensive portfolio management process that generally includes day-to-day oversight by the portfolio management team and a quarterly credit review process for each investment that examines the need for a potential reduction in accretable yield, missed or late contractual payments, significant declines in collateral performance, prepayments, projected defaults, loss severities and other data that may indicate a potential issue in our ability to recover our capital from the investment. These processes are designed to enable our Manager to evaluate and proactively to manage asset-specific credit issues and identify credit trends on a portfolio-wide basis. Nevertheless, we cannot be certain that our review will identify all issues within our portfolio due to, among other things, adverse economic conditions or events adversely affecting specific assets. Therefore, potential future losses may also stem from issues with our investments that are not identified by our credit reviews.
The following table presents a detailed break-down of our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 and a reconciliation to our GAAP Investment Portfolio ($ in thousands):
(a)The leverage ratio on our investment portfolio represents Economic Leverage as defined below in the "Financing Activities" section and is calculated by dividing each investment type's total recourse financing arrangements by its allocated equity (described in the chart below). Cash posted as collateral has been allocated pro-rata by each respective asset class's Economic Leverage amount. The Economic Leverage Ratio excludes any fully non-recourse financing arrangements. The leverage ratio on our Agency RMBS includes any net receivables on TBA. The leverage ratio on our GAAP Investment Portfolio represents GAAP leverage.
(b)Certain Re/Non-Performing Loans held in securitized form are presented net of non-recourse securitized debt.
(c)Refer to the "Financing activities" section below for an aggregate breakout of leverage.
We allocate our equity by investment using the fair value of our investment portfolio, less any associated leverage, inclusive of any long TBA position (at cost). We allocate all non-investment portfolio related assets and liabilities to our investment portfolio based on the characteristics of such assets and liabilities in order to sum to stockholders' equity per the consolidated balance sheets. Our equity allocation method is a non-GAAP methodology and may not be comparable to the similarly titled measure or concepts of other companies, who may use different calculations and allocation methodologies.
The following table presents a summary of the allocated equity of our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 ($ in thousands):
The following table presents a reconciliation of our Investment Portfolio to our GAAP Investment Portfolio as of December 31, 2020 ($ in thousands):
(1)Refer to "Off-balance sheet arrangements" section below and Note 2 to the "Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements" section for more detail on what is included in our "Investments in debt and equity of affiliates" line item on our consolidated balance sheet and a discussion of Investments in debt and equity of affiliates.
(2)Equity residuals, principal only securities and Excess MSRs with a zero coupon rate are excluded from this calculation.
(3)Weighted average life is based on projected life. Typically, actual maturities of investments and loans are shorter than stated contractual maturities. Maturities are affected by the contractual lives of the underlying mortgages, periodic payments of principal and prepayments of principal.
(4)Excess MSRs whose underlying collateral is securitized in a trust held by a U.S. government agency or GSE are included within Agency RMBS. Excess MSRs whose underlying collateral is securitized in a trust not held by a U.S. government agency or GSE are included within Residential Investments.
(5)Non-Agency RMBS with credit scores above 700, between 700 and 620 and below 620 at origination are classified as Prime, Alt-A, and Subprime, respectively. The weighted average credit scores of our Prime and Alt-A/Subprime Non-Agency RMBS were 739 and 687, respectively.
(6)Comprised of Freddie Mac K-Series interest-only bonds.
(7)Yield on Commercial Real Estate Loans includes any exit fees. Refer to Note 4 to the "Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements" section for more detail on what is included in our "Commercial Loans" line item on our consolidated balance sheet.
The following table presents a reconciliation of our Investment Portfolio to our GAAP Investment Portfolio as of December 31, 2019 (in thousands):
(1)Refer to "Off-balance sheet arrangements" section below and Note 2 to the "Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements" section for more detail on what is included in our "Investments in debt and equity of affiliates" line item on our consolidated balance sheet and a discussion of Investments in debt and equity of affiliates.
(2)Equity residuals, principal only securities and Excess MSRs with a zero coupon rate are excluded from this calculation.
(3)Weighted average life is based on projected life. Typically, actual maturities of investments and loans are shorter than stated contractual maturities. Maturities are affected by the contractual lives of the underlying mortgages, periodic payments of principal and prepayments of principal.
(4)Excess MSRs whose underlying collateral is securitized in a trust held by a U.S. government agency or GSE are included within Agency RMBS. Excess MSRs whose underlying collateral is securitized in a trust not held by a U.S. government agency or GSE are included within Residential Investments
(5)Non-Agency RMBS with credit scores above 700, between 700 and 620 and below 620 at origination are classified as Prime, Alt-A, and Subprime, respectively. The weighted average credit scores of our Prime and Alt-A/Subprime Non-Agency RMBS were 719 and 674, respectively.
(6)Comprised of Freddie Mac K-Series interest-only bonds.
(7)Yield on Commercial Real Estate Loans includes any exit fees. Refer to Note 4 to the "Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements" section for more detail on what is included in our "Commercial Loans" line item on our consolidated balance sheet.
The following table presents the fair value ($ in thousands) and the CPR experienced on our GAAP Agency RMBS portfolio for the year ends presented:
(1)Represents the weighted average monthly CPRs published during the year for our in-place portfolio during the same period.
(2)Source: Bloomberg.
(3)CPRs are shown only for securities with fair values as of period end.
The following table presents the fair value of the securities and loans in our credit portfolio, and a reconciliation to our GAAP credit portfolio (in thousands) for the year ends presented:
(1)Includes Prime, Alt-A/Subprime, Credit Risk Transfer, Non-U.S RMBS, Interest-Only and Excess MSR, Re/Non-Performing Loans, Non-QM Loans, and Land Related Financing held in securitized form.
(2)Includes Conduit, Single-Asset/Single-Borrower, Freddie Mac K-Series, and Interest-Only investments.
(3)Includes Re/Non-Performing Loans, Non-QM Loans, and Land Related Financing not held in securitized form.
The following table presents the fair value of our credit securities portfolio by credit rating as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (in thousands):
(1)Represents the minimum rating for rated assets of S&P, Moody and Fitch credit ratings, stated in terms of the S&P equivalent.
(2)Certain Re/Non-Performing Loans held in securitized form are presented net of non-recourse securitized debt.
The following tables present the geographic concentration of the underlying collateral for our Non-Agency RMBS and CMBS portfolios ($ in thousands). The geographic markets that we invest in have been and continue to be severely impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
(1)Non-Agency RMBS fair value includes $3.1 million of investments where there were no data regarding the underlying collateral. These positions were excluded from the percent calculation.
(1)Non-Agency RMBS fair value includes $123.0 million of investments where there were no data regarding the underlying collateral. These positions were excluded from the percent calculation.
See Note 4 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for a breakout of geographic concentration of credit risk within loans we include in the "Residential mortgage loans, at fair value" line item on our consolidated balance sheets.
The following tables present certain information regarding credit quality for certain categories within our Non-Agency RMBS and CMBS portfolios ($ in thousands):
*Sources: Intex, Trepp
In our Re/Non-Performing Loan portfolio, 28% of the overall population has requested COVID-19-related assistance as of December 31, 2020; approximately 48% of the population requesting assistance is being reported as contractually current as of year end as this population no longer owes any past due payments.
At the end of the initial forbearance period, those borrowers who can make their regular monthly scheduled payment will do so and the payment terms of the forbearance amounts will be negotiated (reinstatement, repayment or deferral). For those borrowers who cannot make their scheduled payment, the servicer will initiate phone contact with such borrowers to determine income status and ability to make future mortgage payments. The servicer will collect documents (where allowed by state laws) to initiate further forbearance or loss mitigation strategies for those borrowers who cannot make their regularly scheduled mortgage payments at the end of the initial forbearance period. On February 9, 2021, the FHFA announced that it was extending the maximum time a borrower can be in COVID-19 forbearance to 15 months, up from 12 months previously. The FHFA also announced that it had extended its moratorium on foreclosure on single-family homes through March 31, 2021. As guidelines continue to evolve, the servicers will adapt their practices accordingly.
Prior to March 2020, the three month average monthly default rate, or rate at which a borrower moved from current to 30 days delinquent, was 6.4%. The default rate for the fourth quarter of 2020 was 4.8%. COVID-19 related delinquencies made up approximately 33% of those defaults in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Our Re/Non-Performing Loan valuation process in 2020 has incorporated increased defaults and extended liquidation timelines.
In our Non-QM Loan portfolio, 34% of the overall population has requested COVID-19 related assistance as of December 31, 2020; approximately 67% of the population requesting assistance is being reported as contractually current as of year end as this population no longer owes any past due payments.
At the end of the forbearance period, the servicer will complete the same steps as described above with regards to Re/Non-Performing Loans.
Prior to March 2020, the three month average monthly default rate was 1.3%. The default rate for the fourth quarter of 2020 was 0.8%. COVID-19 related delinquencies made up approximately 38% of those defaults in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Financing activities
We use leverage to finance the purchase of our target assets. In 2020 and 2019, our leverage has primarily been in the form of repurchase agreements, credit facilities, and securitized debt. Repurchase agreements involve the sale and a simultaneous agreement to repurchase the transferred assets or similar assets at a future date. The amount borrowed generally is equal to the fair value of the assets pledged less an agreed-upon discount, referred to as a "haircut." The size of the haircut reflects the perceived risk associated with the pledged asset. Haircuts may change as our financing arrangements mature or roll and are sensitive to governmental regulations. We experienced fluctuations in our haircuts that caused us to alter our business and financing strategies for the year ended December 31, 2020. As previously described, this resulted in us raising liquidity and de-risking our portfolio. Through asset sales and related debt pay-offs, we have reduced the aggregate number of our financing counterparties, bringing the counterparties we have debt outstanding with down from 30 as of December 31, 2019 to 5 as of December 31, 2020.
Our repurchase agreements are accounted for as financings and require the repurchase of the transferred securities or loans or repayment of the advance at the end of each agreement’s term, typically 30 to 90 days. If we maintain the beneficial interest in the specific assets pledged during the term of the borrowing, we receive the related principal and interest payments. If we do not maintain the beneficial interest in the specific assets pledged during the term of the borrowing, the lender will remit to us the related principal and interest payments. Interest rates on borrowings are fixed based on prevailing rates corresponding to the terms of the borrowings, and interest is paid at the termination of the borrowing at which time we may enter into a new borrowing arrangement at prevailing market rates with the same counterparty or repay that counterparty and negotiate financing with a different counterparty.
We have also entered into revolving facilities to purchase certain loans in our investment portfolio. These facilities typically have longer stated maturities than repurchase agreements. Interest rates on these facilities are based on prevailing rates corresponding to the terms of the borrowings, and interest is paid on a monthly basis. Additionally, these facilities contain representations, warranties, covenant, including financial covenant, events of default and indemnities that are customary for agreements of these types.
In response to declines in fair value of pledged assets due to changes in market conditions or the publishing of monthly security paydown factors, lenders typically require us to post additional assets as collateral, pay down borrowings or establish cash margin accounts with the counterparties in order to re-establish the agreed-upon collateral requirements, referred to as margin calls.
The balance on our financing arrangements can reasonably be expected to (i) increase as the size of our investment portfolio increases primarily through equity capital raises and as we increase our investment allocation to Agency RMBS and (ii) decrease as the size of our portfolio decreases through asset sales, principal paydowns, and as we increase our investment allocation to credit investments. Credit investments due to their risk profile, have lower leverage ratios than Agency RMBS, which restricts our financing counterparties from providing as much financing to us and lowers the balance of our total financing.
Forbearance and Reinstatement Agreements
Prior to the recent turmoil in the financial markets, we sought to achieve a balanced and diverse funding mix to finance our assets and operations, which included a combination of short-term borrowings, such as repurchase agreements with terms typically of 30-90 days, longer term repurchase agreement borrowings, and longer term financings, such as securitizations and revolving facilities, with terms longer than one year. We have explored, and will continue to explore, additional financing arrangements to further strengthen our balance sheet and position ourselves for future investment opportunities, including, without limitation, issuances of equity or debt securities and longer-termed financing arrangements; however, no assurance can be given that we will be able to access any such financing or the size, timing or terms thereof.
In 2020, in response to the unprecedented illiquidity and drop in demand for MBS due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in a significant decline in the value of our assets and, in turn, an unusually high number of margin calls from our financing counterparties, we reduced our overall exposure to our financing counterparties by selling a significant portion of our investment portfolio and reducing the amount of our financing arrangements. As previously described, we sold our entire portfolio of 30 Year Fixed Rate Agency RMBS in March of 2020.
On March 20, 2020, we notified our financing counterparties that we did not expect to be in a position to fund the anticipated volume of future margin calls under our financing arrangements in the near term as a result of market disruptions created by the COVID-19 pandemic. During this period of market upheaval, we engaged in discussions with our financing counterparties with regard to entering into forbearance agreements pursuant to which each counterparty would agree to forbear from exercising its rights and remedies with respect to an event of default under the applicable financing arrangement for an agreed-upon period. On April 10, 2020, we entered into a forbearance agreement for an initial 15 day period, a second forbearance agreement on April 27, 2020, for an extended period ending on June 1, 2020, and a third forbearance agreement on June 1, 2020 for an additional period ending June 15, 2020 (collectively, the "Forbearance Agreement") with certain of our financing counterparties (the "Participating Counterparties"). Pursuant to the terms of the Forbearance Agreement, the Participating Counterparties agreed to forbear from exercising any of their right and remedies in respect of events of default and any and all other defaults under the applicable financing arrangement with us for the duration of the forbearance period specified in the Forbearance Agreement (the "Forbearance Period").
On June 10, 2020, we entered into a Reinstatement Agreement with the Participating Counterparties, pursuant to which the parties agreed to terminate the Forbearance Agreement, and each Participating Counterparty agreed to permanently waive all existing and prior events of default under our financing agreements (each, a "Bilateral Agreement") and to reinstate each Bilateral Agreement, as it may be amended by agreement between the Participating Counterparty and the Company. As a result of the termination of the Forbearance Agreement and entry into the Reinstatement Agreement, default interest on our outstanding borrowings under each Bilateral Agreement has ceased to accrue as of June 10, 2020 and the interest rate was the non-default rate of interest or pricing rate, as set forth in the applicable Bilateral Agreements; all cash margin has been applied to outstanding balances we owe, and the DTC repo tracker coding for each Bilateral Agreement has been reinstated, thereby allowing principal and interest payments on the underlying collateral to flow to and be used by us, just as it was before the prior forbearance agreements were put in place. In addition, pursuant to the terms of the Reinstatement Agreement, the security interests granted to Participating Counterparties as additional collateral under the various forbearance agreements have been terminated and released. We also agreed to pay the reasonable fees and out-of-pocket expenses of counsel and other professional advisors for the Participating Counterparties and the collateral agent. Additionally, the Reinstatement Agreement provides a set of financial covenants that override and replace the financial covenants in each Bilateral Agreement and sets forth various reporting requirements from the Company to the Participating Counterparties, releases, certain netting obligations and cross-default provisions. In connection with the negotiation and execution of the Reinstatement Agreement, we entered into certain amendments to the Bilateral Agreements with certain of the Participating Counterparties to reflect current market terms. In general, the amendments reflect increased haircuts and higher coupons.
On June 10, 2020, we also entered a separate reinstatement agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank (the "JPM Reinstatement Agreement") on substantially the same terms as those set forth in the Reinstatement Agreement. The Reinstatement Agreement and the JPM Reinstatement Agreement collectively cover all of our existing financing arrangements as of the date of this report.
Refer to Note 12 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for more information on deficiencies that are now settled.
Recourse and non-recourse financing
We utilize both recourse and non-recourse debt to finance our portfolio. Non-recourse financing includes securitized debt and other non-recourse financing. Recourse financing includes the secured debt from our Manager, as further described in the "Contractual obligations-Secured debt" section below, and other recourse financing. The below table provides detail on the breakout between recourse and non-recourse financing as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (in thousands):
(1)As of December 31, 2020, total financing includes $680.8 million of financing arrangements, collateralized by various asset types in our investment portfolio; $355.2 million of securitized debt, collateralized by Re/Non-Performing Loans; and $10.4 million of secured debt. As of December 31, 2019, total financing includes $3.5 billion of financing arrangements and $224.3 million of securitized debt.
(2)On January 29, 2021, we and private funds under the management of Angelo Gordon entered into an amendment with respect to our Restructured Financing Arrangement in MATT. The amendment serves to convert the existing financing to a mark-to-market facility that is recourse to us and the private funds managed by Angelo Gordon that invest in MATT.
Financing arrangements on our investment portfolio
The following table presents a summary of the financing arrangements on our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 ($ in thousands).
(1)We also had $1.5 million of cash pledged under repurchase agreements as of December 31, 2020, which included $45.0 thousand pledged under repurchase agreements held at Investments in Debt and Equity of Affiliates.
(2)Includes repurchase agreements on Prime, Alt-A/Subprime, Credit Risk Transfer, Non-U.S RMBS, Interest-Only and Excess MSR, Re/Non-Performing Loans, Non-QM Loans, and Land Related Financing held in securitized form.
(3)These amounts represent certain of our retained interests in securitizations. Refer to "Other financing transactions" below for more information on the August 2019 VIE and September 2020 VIE.
(4)Includes repurchase agreements on Conduit, Single-Asset/Single-Borrower, Freddie Mac K-Series, and Interest-Only investments.
(5)All revolving facilities listed above are interest only until maturity.
(6)Under the terms of our financing agreements, our financial counterparties may, in certain cases, sell or re-hypothecate the pledged collateral.
(7)Increasing the Company's borrowing capacity under these facilities requires consent of the lender.
(8)The funding cost on this facility is inclusive of the impact of deferred financing costs. The stated rate was 2.30% as of December 31, 2020.
(9)The borrowing capacity on the commercial loan revolving facility is $100 million.
(10)Includes financing on Re/Non-Performing Loans and Non-QM Loans not held in securitized form.
(11)As of December 31, 2020, there are two revolving facilities used to finance residential loans, including one which is also used to finance Real Estate Owned. As of December 31, 2019, there were four revolving facilities used to finance residential loans, two of which were also used to finance real estate owned. Two of these facilities paid off during 2020.
Through asset sales and related debt pay offs, we have reduced our exposure to various counterparties, bringing the counterparties with debt outstanding down from 30 as of December 31, 2019 to 5 as of December 31, 2020. See Note 6 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for a description of our material financing arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Our financing arrangements generally include customary representations, warranties, and covenants, but may also contain more restrictive supplemental terms and conditions. Although specific to each repurchase agreement, typical supplemental terms include requirements of minimum equity, leverage ratios, performance triggers or other financial ratios.
Other financing transactions
In addition to our financing arrangements, we also finance our Re/Non-performing loans with securitized debt. From time to time, we enter into securitization transactions of certain Re/Non-performing loans where special purpose entities ("SPEs") are created to facilities the transactions. These SPEs are considered variable interest entities ("VIEs"), which should be consolidated under ASC 810-10. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we have recorded secured financing in connection with these VIEs of $355.2 million and $224.4 million, respectively, on the consolidated balance sheets in the "Securitized debt, at fair value" line item. See Note 2, Note 3, and Note 4 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for more detail on securitized debt and our consolidated VIEs.
Leverage
We define GAAP leverage as the sum of (1) our GAAP financing arrangements, net of any restricted cash posted on such financing arrangements, (2) the amount payable on purchases that have not yet settled less the financing remaining on sales that have not yet settled, and (3) securitized debt, at fair value. We define Economic Leverage, a non-GAAP metric, as the sum of: (i) our GAAP leverage, exclusive of any fully non-recourse financing arrangements, (ii) financing arrangements held through affiliated entities, net of any restricted cash posted on such financing arrangements, exclusive of any financing utilized through AG Arc, any adjustment related to unsettled trades as described in (2) in the previous sentence, and any fully non-recourse financing arrangements and (iii) our net TBA position (at cost). Our calculations of GAAP leverage and Economic Leverage exclude financing arrangements and net receivables/payables on unsettled trades pertaining to U.S. Treasury securities due to the highly liquid and temporary nature of these investments.
The calculations in the tables below divide GAAP leverage and Economic Leverage by our GAAP stockholders’ equity to derive our leverage ratios. The following tables present a reconciliation of our Economic Leverage ratio back to GAAP ($ in thousands).
(1) Non-recourse financing arrangements include securitized debt.
(1) Non-recourse financing arrangements include securitized debt.
The amount of leverage, or debt, we may deploy for particular assets depends upon our Manager’s assessment of the credit and other risks of those assets, and also depends on any limitation placed upon us through covenants contained in our financing arrangements. We generate income principally from the yields earned on our investments and, to the extent that leverage is deployed, on the difference between the yields earned on our investments and our cost of borrowing and the cost of any hedging activities. Subject to maintaining both our qualification as a REIT for U.S. federal income tax purposes and our Investment Company Act exemption, to the extent leverage is deployed, we may use a number of sources to finance our investments.
As previously described, due to market volatility caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, we executed on various asset sales in an effort to create additional liquidity and de-risk our portfolio. As a result of these asset sales and related debt pay-offs, we have reduced the number of financing counterparties we have, bringing the overall number of counterparties with debt outstanding down from thirty (30) as of December 31, 2019 to five (5) as of December 31, 2020 with debt outstanding of $0.7 billion, inclusive of financing arrangements through affiliated entities. These agreements generally include customary representations, warranties, and covenants but may also contain more restrictive supplemental terms and conditions. Although specific to each lending agreement, typical supplemental terms include requirements of minimum equity, leverage ratios, performance triggers or other financial ratios.
Under our financing arrangements, we may be required to pledge additional assets to our lenders in the event the estimated fair value of the existing pledged collateral under such agreements declines and such lenders demand additional collateral, which may take the form of additional securities or cash. Certain securities that are pledged as collateral under our financing arrangements are in unrealized loss positions.
During the second quarter of 2020, we entered into the Forbearance Agreement pursuant to which the consent of the Participating Counterparties was required in order for us to increase our leverage. As described above, upon entering in to the Reinstatement Agreement, we are no longer subject to the restrictive covenants set forth in the Forbearance Agreement, though the Reinstatement Agreement limits our Recourse Indebtedness to Stockholder's Equity (both as defined therein) leverage ratio to no greater than 3:1.
The following table presents information at December 31, 2020 with respect to each counterparty that provides us with financing for which we had greater than 5% of our stockholders’ equity at risk ($ in thousands).
(a)Represents stockholders' equity at risk, weighted average maturity and percentage of stockholders' equity from financing arrangements held in investments in debt and equity of affiliates.
Hedging activities
Subject to maintaining our qualification as a REIT and our Investment Company Act exemption, to the extent leverage is deployed, we may utilize derivative instruments in an effort to hedge the interest rate risk associated with the financing of our portfolio. Specifically, we may seek to hedge our exposure to potential interest rate mismatches between the interest we earn on our investments and our borrowing costs caused by fluctuations in short-term interest rates. We may utilize interest rate swaps, swaption agreements, and other financial instruments such as short positions in U.S. Treasury securities. In addition, we may utilize Eurodollar Futures, U.S. Treasury Futures, British Pound Futures and Euro Futures (collectively, "Futures"). In utilizing leverage and interest rate derivatives, our objectives are to improve risk-adjusted returns and, where possible, to lock in, on a long-term basis, a spread between the yield on our assets and the costs of our financing and hedging. Derivatives have not been designated as hedging instruments for GAAP. See Note 7 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for more information.
Dividends
Federal income tax law generally requires that a REIT distribute annually at least 90% of its REIT ordinary taxable income, without regard to the deduction for dividends paid and excluding net capital gains and that it pay tax at regular corporate rates to the extent that it annually distributes less than 100% of its net taxable income. Before we pay any dividend, whether for U.S. federal income tax purposes or otherwise, we must first meet both our operating requirements and debt service on our financing arrangements and other debt payable. If our cash available for distribution is less than our net taxable income, we could be required to sell assets or borrow funds to make required cash distributions or we may make a portion of the required distribution in the form of a taxable stock distribution or distribution of debt securities.
As described above, our distribution requirements are based on taxable income rather than GAAP net income. Differences
between taxable income and GAAP net income include (i) unrealized gains and losses associated with investment and derivative portfolios which are marked-to-market in current income for GAAP purposes, but excluded from taxable income until realized or settled, (ii) temporary differences related to amortization of premiums and discounts paid on investments, (iii) the timing and amount of deductions related to stock-based compensation, (iv) temporary differences related to the recognition of realized gains and losses on sold investments and certain terminated derivatives, (v) taxes and (vi) methods of depreciation. Undistributed taxable income is based on current estimates and is not finalized until we file our annual tax return for that tax year, typically in October of the following year. We did not have any undistributed taxable income as of December 31, 2020. Refer to the "Results of operations" section above for more detail.
On March 27, 2020, we announced that our Board of Directors approved a suspension of our quarterly dividends on our Series A Preferred Stock, Series B Preferred Stock, and Series C Preferred Stock, beginning with the preferred dividend that would have been declared in May 2020, in order to conserve capital and improve its liquidity position during the market volatility due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a suspension of the quarterly dividend on the common stock, beginning with the dividend that normally would have been declared in March 2020. Under the terms of the Articles Supplementary governing our series of preferred stock, we cannot pay cash dividends with respect to our common stock if dividends on our preferred stock are in arrears.
On December 17, 2020, we paid our Series A Preferred Stock, Series B Preferred Stock, and Series C Preferred Stock dividends that were in arrears as well as the full dividends payable on the preferred stock for the fourth quarter of 2020 in the amount of $1.54689, $1.50 and $1.50 per share, respectively. On December 22, 2020, our Board of Directors declared a dividend of $0.03 per common share for the fourth quarter 2020. The dividend was paid on January 29, 2021 to shareholders of record at the close of business on December 31, 2020.
The following tables detail the Company's common stock dividends during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
The following tables detail our preferred stock dividends during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
Liquidity and capital resources
Our liquidity determines our ability to meet our cash obligations, including distributions to our stockholders, payment of our expenses, financing our investments and satisfying other general business needs. Our principal sources of cash as of December 31, 2020 consisted of proceeds from sales of assets in an effort to prudently manage our portfolio through unprecedented market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 global pandemic, borrowings under financing arrangements, principal and interest payments we receive on our investment portfolio, and proceeds from capital market transactions. We typically use cash to repay principal and interest on our financing arrangements, to purchase real estate securities, loans and other real estate related assets, to make dividend payments on our capital stock, and to fund our operations. At December 31, 2020, we had $54.2 million of liquidity, which consisted of $47.9 million of cash and $6.3 million of unencumbered assets available to support our liquidity needs. Refer to the "Contractual obligations" section of this Part II, Item 7 for additional obligations that could impact our liquidity.
As previously discussed, on June 1, 2020, we entered into a third forbearance agreement with the Participating Counterparties, providing for a forbearance period ending on June 15, 2020. We exited forbrearance on June 10, 2020. Pursuant to the terms of the Forbearance Agreement, we were obligated to comply with a set of restrictive covenants set forth in the Forbearance Agreement, including restrictions on the use of our cash, restrictions on our incurrence of additional debt, and restrictions on the sale of our assets. We also granted to the Participating Counterparties a lien and security interest in all of our unencumbered assets. Upon entering into the Reinstatement Agreement with the Participating Counterparties, we are no longer subject to the restrictive covenants set forth in the Forbearance Agreement and the lien and security interest granted to the Participating Counterparties on all of our unencumbered assets were terminated and released.
Margin requirements
The fair value of our real estate securities and loans fluctuate according to market conditions. When the fair value of the assets pledged as collateral to secure a financing arrangement decreases to the point where the difference between the collateral fair value and the financing arrangement amount is less than the haircut, our lenders may issue a "margin call," which requires us to post additional collateral to the lender in the form of additional assets or cash. Under our repurchase facilities, our lenders have full discretion to determine the fair value of the securities we pledge to them. Our lenders typically value assets based on recent trades in the market. Lenders also issue margin calls as the published current principal balance factors change on the pool of mortgages underlying the securities pledged as collateral when scheduled and unscheduled paydowns are announced monthly. We experience margin calls in the ordinary course of our business. In seeking to manage effectively the margin requirements established by our lenders, we maintain a position of cash and, when owned, unpledged Agency RMBS. We refer to this position as our "liquidity." The level of liquidity we have available to meet margin calls is directly affected by our leverage levels, our haircuts and the price changes on our securities. Typically, if interest rates increase or if credit spreads widen, then the prices of our collateral (and our unpledged assets that constitute our liquidity) will decline, we will experience margin calls, and we will need to use our liquidity to meet the margin calls. There can be no assurance that we will maintain sufficient levels of liquidity to meet any margin calls. If our haircuts increase, our liquidity will proportionately decrease. In addition, if we increase our borrowings, our liquidity will decrease by the amount of additional haircut on the increased level of indebtedness. We intend to maintain a level of liquidity in relation to our assets that enables us to meet reasonably anticipated margin calls but that also allows us to be substantially invested in our target assets. We may misjudge the appropriate amount of our liquidity by maintaining excessive liquidity, which would lower our investment returns, or by maintaining insufficient liquidity, which may force us to liquidate assets into potentially unfavorable market conditions and harm our results of operations and financial condition. Further, an unexpected rise in interest rates and a corresponding fall in the fair value of our securities may also force us to liquidate assets under difficult market conditions, thereby harming our results of operations and financial condition, in an effort to maintain sufficient liquidity to meet increased margin calls.
Similar to the margin calls that we receive on our borrowing agreements, we may also receive margin calls on our derivative instruments when their fair values decline. This typically occurs when prevailing market rates change adversely, with the severity of the change also dependent on the terms of the derivatives involved. We may also receive margin calls on our derivatives based on the implied volatility of interest rates. Our posting of collateral with our counterparties can be done in cash or securities, and is generally bilateral, which means that if the fair value of our interest rate hedges increases, our counterparty will be required to post collateral with us. Refer to the "Liquidity risk - derivatives" section of Part II,