Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
Company Background
MJ Holdings, Inc. (OTCPK: MJNE) is a highly-diversified holding company providing cultivation management, asset and infrastructure development - currently concentrated in the Las Vegas market. It is the Company’s intention to grow its business and provide a 360-degree spectrum of infrastructure, including, cannabis cultivation, production of cannabis related products, management services, dispensaries and consulting services. The Company intends to grow its business through joint ventures with existing companies possessing complementary subject matter expertise, acquisition of existing companies and through the development of new opportunities. The Company intends to “prove the concept” profitably in the rapidly expanding Las Vegas market and then use that anticipated success as a template for replicating the concept in other developing states through a combination of strategic partnerships, acquisitions and opening new operations.
Current Initiatives include:
● a three-acre, hybrid, outdoor, marijuana-cultivation facility (the “Cultivation Facility”) located in the Amargosa Valley of Nevada. The Company has the contractual right to manage and cultivate marijuana on this property until 2026, for which it will receive sixty percent (60%) of the net revenues realized from its management of this facility and twenty-five percent (25%) of the net revenues from equipment rental. The licensed facility is owned by Acres Cultivation, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Curaleaf Holdings, Inc. The Company completed its second harvest on this property in November of 2019 and had anticipated generating revenue from this harvest until late Q4 of 2020. The impact of COVID-19 greatly impacted the continuing sale of inventory from this harvest. In April of this year, the Company planted a one acre auto-flower crop, which it began harvesting in late June. The Company successfully integrated its cloning program for 2020, and projects that it will grow approximately 10,000 marijuana plants starting in June of this year for harvest in mid Q4 2020. On January 21, 2021, the Company received a Notice of Termination, effective immediately, from Acres Cultivation, LLC. Subsequent to year end, the Company elected to relocate all of its equipment utilized on the Acres lease to its 260 acres adjacent to the Acres lease. The Company does not anticipate that it will generate any further revenue under the Acres relationship.
● acres of farmland for the purpose of cultivating additional marijuana (the “260 Acres”) purchased in January of 2019. The Company intends to utilize the state-of-the-art Cravo® cultivation system for growing an additional five acres of marijuana on this property, that is contiguous to the three-acre property that it manages in Amargosa. The Cravo® system will allow multiple harvests per year and should result in higher annual yields per acre. The land has more than 180-acre feet of permitted water rights, which will provide more than sufficient water to markedly increase the Company’s marijuana cultivation capabilities. This facility, upon receipt of required funding, is expected to become operational in the spring of 2021. Subsequent to year end, the Company elected to relocate all of its equipment utilized on the Acres lease to its 260 acres adjacent to the Acres lease. The Company will utilize the 260 Acres for its own harvest along with additional harvests under any Cultivation and Sales Agreements. Please see Note 15 - Subsequent Events for further information.
● a nearby commercial trailer and RV park (THC Park - Tiny Home Community) was purchased in April of 2019 to supply necessary housing for the Company’s farm employees. After the Company’s 2018 harvest, it came to realize that it would need to find a more efficient method of housing and to bring its cultivation team to its facilities. The Company purchased the 50-acre plus THC Park for $600,000 in cash and $50,000 of the Company’s restricted common stock. At present, the Company’s construction and completion of this community is approximately seventy-five present complete. The impact of COVID-19 in obtaining inspections and permitting has significantly delayed the completion of this community. The Company has elected to cease any renovations or additions at its Tiny Home Community with possible future plans of placing the property up for sale.
● an agreement to acquire an additional cultivation license and production license, both currently located in Nye County Nevada. On April 2, 2019, the Company executed a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement (“MIPA”) with MJ Distributing, Inc. (the “Seller”) to acquire all of the outstanding membership interests of MJ Distributing C202, LLC and MJ Distributing P133, LLC, each the holder of a State of Nevada provisional medical and recreational cultivation license and a provisional medical and recreational production license. The licenses were required to be perfected pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 453A (NRS 453A - Medical Marijuana) and Nevada Revised Statures 453D (NRS453D - Recreation/Adult Use Marijuana). In January of 2020, the State of Nevada issued a Conditional Medical Marijuana Cultivation Certificate and a Conditional Medical Marijuana Production Certificate. On May 1, 2020, the State of Nevada issued a Conditional Recreational Marijuana Cultivation Certificate and a Conditional Recreational Marijuana Production Certificate. As of October 2019, the State of Nevada had placed a moratorium on the transfer of all licenses within the state. The Company does not know when this moratorium will be lifted, but it expects the newly formed Cannabis Control Board to expedite transfers beginning in Q4 of 2020. Due to the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s business operations, it has been unable to comply with the payment obligations required of it in the MIPA. In February of this year, the Company received a Demand for Payment from the Seller. As of the date of this filing, the Company has been in active negotiations with the Seller for an extension of the payment terms. There is no guarantee that it will be successful in its negotiations. Subsequent to year end, the Company and the Seller elected to terminate the MIPA due to the Company’s inability to complete all required funding. Subsequent to the termination, the Company and the Seller entered into a new MIPA3 for the acquisition of the certificates. Please see Note 15 - Subsequent Events for further information.
● indoor cultivation facility build-out in the City of Las Vegas (the “Indoor Facility”). Through its subsidiary, Red Earth, LLC, the Company holds a Medical Marijuana Establishment Registration Certificate, Application No. C012. In August of 2019, the Company entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Element NV, LLC (“Element”), to sell a 49% interest in the license. Under the terms of the Agreement, Element was required to invest more than $3,500,000 into this Indoor Facility. Element paid the monthly rent on the facility from December 2019 through March 2020 but failed to make any additional payments. On June 11, 2020, the Company entered into the First Amendment (“First Amendment”) to the Agreement. Under the terms of the First Amendment, the Closing Purchase Price was adjusted to $441,000, and Element was required to make a capital contribution (the “Initial Contribution Payment”) to the Target Company in the amount of $120,000 and was required to make an additional cash contribution (the Final Contribution Payment”) in the amount of $240,000. Due to the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s respective business operations, it has not been able to pay the monthly rent. As of the date of this filing, the Company is in active negotiations with the landlord to find an acceptable resolution regarding the payment of past due rent. The Company is currently in discussions with Element regarding the default of payments. There is no guarantee that Element will agree to remit the required funds to bring them current under the terms of the Agreement. In the event that Element fails to make the required payment, the Company may elect to remit a Notice of Default to Element, terminate the Agreement, fund the development of the facility through additional sources or sale the license.
The Company may also continue to seek to identify potential acquisitions of revenue producing assets and licenses within legalized cannabis markets that can maximize shareholder value.
The Company may face substantial competition in the operation of cultivation facilities in Nevada. Numerous other companies have also been granted cultivation licenses, and, therefore, the Company anticipates that it will face competition from these other companies. The Company’s management team has experience in successfully developing, implementing, and operating marijuana cultivation and related businesses in other legal cannabis markets. The Company believes its experience in outdoor cultivation provides it with a distinct competitive advantage over its competitors and it will continue to focus on this area of its operations.
The Company was incorporated on November 17, 2006, as Securitas EDGAR Filings, Inc. under the laws of the State of Nevada. Prior to the formation of Securitas EDGAR Filings Inc., the business was operated as Xpedient EDGAR Filings, LLC, a Florida Limited Liability Company, formed on October 31, 2005. On November 21, 2005, Xpedient EDGAR Filings LLC amended its Articles of Organization to change its name to Securitas EDGAR Filings, LLC. On January 21, 2009, Securitas EDGAR Filings LLC merged into Securitas EDGAR Filings, Inc., a Nevada corporation. On February 14, 2014, the Company amended and restated its Articles of Incorporation and changed its name to MJ Holdings, Inc.
On November 22, 2016, in connection with a plan to divest the Company of its real estate business, the Company submitted to its stockholders an offer to exchange (the “Exchange Offer”) its common stock for shares in MJ Real Estate Partners, LLC, (“MJRE”) a newly-formed LLC formed for the sole purpose of effecting the Exchange Offer. On January 10, 2017, the Company accepted for exchange 1,800,000 shares of its Common Stock in exchange for 1,800,000 shares of MJRE’s common units, representing membership interests in MJRE. Effective February 1, 2017, the Company transferred its ownership interests in the real estate properties and its subsidiaries, through which the Company held ownership of the real estate properties, to MJRE. MJRE also assumed the senior notes and any and all obligations associated with the real estate properties and business, effective February 1, 2017.
Acquisition of Red Earth
On December 15, 2017, the Company acquired all of the issued and outstanding membership interests of Red Earth, LLC, a Nevada limited liability company (“Red Earth”) established in October 2016, in exchange for 52,732,969 shares of its Common Stock and a promissory note in the amount of $900,000. The acquisition was accounted for as a “Reverse Merger”, whereby Red Earth was considered the accounting acquirer and became its wholly owned subsidiary. Upon the consummation of the acquisition, the now former members of Red Earth became the beneficial owners of approximately 88% of the Company’s Common Stock, obtained controlling interest of the Company, and retained certain of its key management positions. In accordance with the accounting treatment for a “reverse merger” or a “reverse acquisition”, the Company’s historical financial statements prior to the reverse merger will be replaced with the historical financial statements of Red Earth prior to the reverse merger in all future filings with the SEC. Red Earth is the holder of a Nevada Marijuana Establishment Certificate for the cultivation of marijuana.
The consolidated financial statements after completion of the reverse merger included: the assets, liabilities, and results of operations of the combined company from and after the closing date of the reverse merger, with only certain aspects of pre-consummation stockholders’ equity remaining in the consolidated financial statements. In February of 2019, the Company repurchased, from the Company’s largest shareholder, 20,000,000 of the 26,366,484 shares of common stock that this shareholder originally received in connection with the Reverse Merger - for a total purchase price of $20,000.
The Company’s corporate headquarters is located at 7320 S Rainbow Blvd, #102-210, Las Vegas, NV 89139 and its telephone number is (702) 879-4440. The Company’s website address is: www.MJHoldingsinc.com. No information available on or through its websites shall be deemed to be incorporated into this Form 10-K. The Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 (the “Common Stock”), is quoted on the OTC Markets Group, Inc.’s Pink® Market under the symbol “MJNE.”
Our Business
Through its acquisition of Red Earth and its wholly owned subsidiary, HDGLV, LLC (“HDGLV”), the Company began cultivating marijuana, which commenced during the fourth quarter of 2018 upon approval by the Nevada Department of Taxation of the transfer of a Provisional Cultivation License to Red Earth, which occurred in April 2018. It is the Company’s intention to grow its business through the acquisition of existing companies and/or through the development of new opportunities that can provide a 360-degree spectrum of infrastructure (dispensaries), cultivation and production management, and consulting services in the regulated cannabis industry.
Through Red Earth, the Company holds a provisional State of Nevada issued cannabis cultivation license, and through HDGLV, the Company holds a triple-net leasehold, with an option to buy, on a 17,298 square-foot building, which it expects will be home to its cultivation facility.
The Company currently operates through the following entities:
Corporate Entities
MJ Holdings, Inc. This entity, the Parent, serves as a holding company for all of the operating businesses/assets.
Prescott Management, LLC Prescott Management is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company that provides day-to-day management and operational oversight to the Company’s operating subsidiaries.
Icon Management, LLC Icon is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company that provides Human Resource Management (“HR”) services to the Company. Icon is responsible for all payroll activities and administration of employee benefit plans and programs.
Farm Road, LLC Farm Road, LLC is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company that owns 260 acres of farmland in Amargosa, NV. The Company acquired all of the membership interests of Farm Road in January of 2019.
Condo Highrise Management, LLC Condo Highrise Management is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company that manages the Company owned Trailer Park in Amargosa, Nevada.
Red Earth Holdings, LLC Red Earth Holdings, LLC is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company that will eventually be the holder of the Company’s primary cannabis license assets. As of the date of this report, Red Earth Holdings has no operations and holds no assets
Red Earth, LLC Red Earth, established in 2016, was a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company from December 15, 2017 until August 30, 2019 prior to the Company selling a forty-nine percent (49%) interest in Red Earth to Element NV, LLC, an unrelated third party (See further description of the transaction hereinabove). Red Earth’s assets consist of: (i) a cultivation license to grow marijuana within the City of Las Vegas in the State of Nevada, and (ii) all of the outstanding membership interests in HDGLV, which holds a triple net leasehold interest in a 17,298 square-foot building in Las Vegas, Nevada, which it expects to operate as an indoor marijuana cultivation facility. In July 2018, the Company completed the first phase of construction on this facility, and it received a City of Las Vegas Business License to operate a marijuana cultivation facility. The Company expects to obtain final approval towards perfecting the cultivation license from the State of Nevada regulatory authorities in the fourth quarter of 2020, but it can provide no assurances on the receipt and/or timing of the final approvals.
HDGLV, LLC HDGLV is a wholly owned subsidiary of Red Earth, LLC and is the holder of a triple net lease on a commercial building in Las Vegas, Nevada which is being developed to house the Company’s indoor grow facility.
Alternative Hospitality, Inc. Alternative Hospitality is a Nevada corporation formed in November of 2018. MJ Holdings owns fifty-one percent (51%) of the company and the remaining forty-nine percent (49%) is owned by TVK, LLC, a Florida limited liability company.
MJ International Research Company Limited MJ International is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company that is headquartered in Dublin, Ireland. MJ International is the sole shareholder of MJ Holdings International Single Member S.A. and Gioura International Single Member Private Company.
Critical Accounting Policies, Judgments and Estimates
The Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations is based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires the Company to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimate that are reasonably likely to occur, could materially impact the consolidated financial statements. The Company believes that the following critical accounting policies reflect the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2018, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers using the modified retrospective method. Since the Company had not previously recognized any revenue there was no impact upon adoption of ASC 606 on its consolidated financial statements. The new revenue standard was applied prospectively in the Company’s consolidated financial statements from January 1, 2018 forward and reported financial information for historical comparable periods will not be revised and will continue to be reported under the accounting standards in effect during those historical periods. Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or performance obligations for services is transferred to the Company’s customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for the goods or services.
Convertible Instruments
The Company evaluates and accounts for conversion options embedded in convertible instruments in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging Activities.
Applicable GAAP requires companies to bifurcate conversion options from their host instruments and account for them as free-standing derivative financial instruments according to certain criteria. The criteria include circumstances in which (a) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract, (b) the hybrid instrument that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured at fair value under other GAAP with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur and (c) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument.
The Company accounts for convertible instruments (when it has been determined that the embedded conversion options should not be bifurcated from their host instruments) as follows: The Company records, when necessary, discounts to convertible notes for the intrinsic value of conversion options embedded in debt instruments based upon the differences between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date of the note transaction and the effective conversion price embedded in the note. Debt discounts under these arrangements are amortized over the term of the related debt to their stated date of redemption.
The Company evaluates convertible preferred stock in accordance with ASC 470-20-35-7. There were no issuances of convertible preferred stock in 2020.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance on deferred tax assets is established when management considers it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Tax benefits from an uncertain tax position are only recognized if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. Interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits are recorded as incurred as a component of income tax expense. The Company has not recognized any tax benefits from uncertain tax positions for any of the reporting periods presented.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The Company’s historical financial statements prior to the reverse merger were replaced with the historical financial statements of Red Earth, the “accounting acquirer,” based on the accounting treatment for reverse merger transactions.
Revenues
Revenues were $822,845 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $897,696 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
(i) The rental income is from the Company’s THC Park.
(ii) In April 2018, the Company entered into a management agreement with Acres Cultivation, LLC, a Nevada limited liability company (the “Licensed Operator”) that holds a license for the legal cultivation of marijuana for sale under the laws of the State of Nevada. In January of 2019, the Company entered into a revised agreement, which replaced the April 2018 agreement, with the Licensed Operator in order to be more stringently aligned with Nevada marijuana laws. The material terms of the agreement remain unchanged. The Licensed Operator is contractually obligated to pay over to the Company eighty-five (85%) percent of gross revenues defined as gross proceeds from sales of marijuana products minus applicable state excise taxes and local sales tax. The agreement is to remain in force until April 2026. In April 2019, the Licensed Operator was acquired by Curaleaf Holdings, Inc., a publicly traded Canadian cannabis company. Please see Note 15 - Subsequent Events for further information.
(iii) In October of 2018, the Company entered into a Revenue Participation Rights Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Let’s Roll NV, LLC and Blue Sky Companies, LLC (together, the “Subscribers”). Under the terms of the Agreement, the Company transferred its ownership interest in 3.95% of the gross revenue from the “Amargosa Outdoor Grow” to the Subscribers in exchange for $100,000 cash payment and a Subscription Agreement in the amount of $1,142,100. On or before April 30th for the next 8 years (2019-2026), the Company shall calculate the pro rata gross revenue due to the Subscribers with payments being made on or before May 31st of each year. The Subscribers have agreed to forgo any payments required under the Agreement until May 2021. Please see Note 15 - Subsequent Events for further information.
Operating Expenses
Direct cost of revenue was $1,206,960 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1,187,723 for the year ending December 31, 2019, resulting in an increase of $19,237. The increase was largely attributable to (1) labor costs (2) cost of materials (3) product testing, and (4) professional fees.
General and administrative, marketing and selling expenses were $2,979,348 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $6,774,597 for the year ended December 31, 2019, resulting in a decrease of $3,795,249. The decrease was largely attributable to a decrease in our operations due to COVID-19 and county and state regulatory restrictions.
Depreciation and amortization were $453,887 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $371,512 for the year ended December 31, 2019, resulting in an increase of $82,375. The increase was largely attributable to depreciation of the Company’s assets purchased in prior years.
Other income (expenses)
Other income/(expense) were ($147,878) for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to ($819,749) for the year ended December 31, 2019, resulting in a decrease of $671,871. The decrease was largely attributable to loss on impairment of investments in the amount of $1,110,356 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 versus $18,345 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Net loss was $3,973,128 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to loss of $8,271,852 for the year ended December 31, 2019, resulting in a decrease of $4,812,343. The decrease in net loss in 2020 is largely attributable to a decrease in general administrative expense and the decrease on loss on impairment of investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes the cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The Company had cash of $117,536 at December 31, 2020 compared with cash of $22,932 at December 31, 2019.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $186,365 versus $4,622,155 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cash used in operating activities in 2020 included a net loss of $3,973,128 offset by accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $1,306,632, common stock issued for services of $398,466 and depreciation and amortization of $453,884.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was $35,477 as compared to $1,516,643 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in investing activities in 2020 is attributable to the decrease in purchases of fixed assets and third-party investments by the Company.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was $316,446 as compared to $6,105,074 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in financing activities in 2020 is attributable to the decrease in the sale of common stock and the issuance of notes payable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Seasonality
The Company does not consider its business to be seasonal.
Commitments and Contingencies
The Company is subject to the legal proceedings described in “Item 3. Legal Proceedings” of this report. There are no legal proceedings which are pending or have been threatened against it or any of the Company’s officers, directors or control persons of which management is aware.
Inflation and Changing Prices
Neither inflation nor changing prices for the year ended December 31, 2020 had a material impact on the Company’s operations.