Item 7.
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
References to the “Company,” “one” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to one. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on June 24, 2020 as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses that we have not yet selected (“Business Combination”). We have not selected any business combination partner and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination partner. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of
this offering and the sale of the private placement units, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt. Our Sponsor is A-star, a Cayman Islands exempted limited partnership. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our registration statements for the Initial Public Offering became effective on August 17, 2020. On August 20, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 21,500,000 Units, including the issuance of 1,500,000 Units as a result of the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $215.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $12.4 million, inclusive of approximately $7.5 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 3,150,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $2.00 per Private Placement Warrant with the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $6.3 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement in August 2020, $215.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”), located in the United States, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and will be invested by the trustee only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
If the we are unable to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) to the our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Proposed Business Combination
As more fully described in Note 7 to the financial statements contained in Item 8 as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, on February 23, 2021, the Company entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among the Company, Caspian Merger Sub Inc., a Delaware corporation and direct, wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”), and MarkForged, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Markforged”). Also, in connection with Merger Agreement, the Company entered into certain related agreements including Subscription Agreements, Sponsor Support Agreement, Stockholder Support Agreement. For more information, the Company’s announcement and the related agreements have been filed on a Current Report on Form 8-K on February 24, 2021.
We expect to expend substantial time and incur significant costs in connection with the proposed business combination with Markforged. If, for any reason, we are unable to consummate the transaction with Markforged, we will have fewer funds available to us to pursue an initial business combination, and will have less time to complete such transaction before we are required to liquidate our trust account and return such funds to our public shareholders.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $0.9 million in cash and working capital of approximately $1.1 million.
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2020 had been satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from our Sponsor to cover for certain expenses on behalf of us in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, a loan of approximately $163,000 pursuant to the Note (as defined below) issued to our Sponsor, and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We fully repaid the Note to our Sponsor on August 20, 2020. In addition, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor may, but is not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that it will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective Initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from June 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, was in preparation for an Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective Initial Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our Initial Business Combination.
For the period from June 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $305,000 which consisted of approximately $341,000 in general and administrative expenses, $40,000 of related party administrative fees, partially offset by approximately $76,000 of income from our investments held in the Trust Account.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On June 26, 2020, we issued 5,750,000 Class B ordinary shares to our Sponsor (the “Founder Shares”) in exchange for the Sponsor’s payment of offering costs of $25,000. On August 10, 2020, the Sponsor transferred 25,000 Founder Shares to each of Michelle Gill, Lachy Groom, Gautam Gupta, Trina Spear, and Laura de Petra, and 30,000 Founder Shares to Pierre Lamond. The holders of the Founder Shares had agreed to forfeit up to an aggregate of 750,000 Founder Shares, to the extent that the over-allotment option is not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20.0% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering. On August 20, 2020, the underwriters exercised their over-allotment option and, an aggregate of 375,000 Founder Shares were forfeited by the Sponsor for no consideration accordingly.
The initial shareholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination and (B) subsequent to the initial Business Combination, (x) if the closing price of Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of the Public Shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Related Party Loans
On June 26, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan us up to $300,000 to be used for the payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). The Note was non-interest
bearing and payable on the earlier of December 31, 2020 or the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We borrowed approximately $163,000 under the Note, and then fully repaid the Note on August 20, 2020.
In addition, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $2.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. To date, the Company had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, Class A ordinary shares underlying the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, if any, were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $4.3 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $7.5 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in net gain from investments held in Trust Account
in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A ordinary shares are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 20,364,519 shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the accompanying balance sheet
Net Income (Loss) Per Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and private placement to purchase an aggregate of 8,525,000 shares of Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted per ordinary share is the same as basic loss per ordinary share for the periods presented.
Our statement of operations include a presentation of income per share for ordinary shares subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per share, basic and diluted for Class A ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the investment income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable income and franchise taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A ordinary shares outstanding since the initial issuance. Net loss per share, basic and diluted for Class B ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net loss, less income attributable to Class A ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material impact on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of September 30, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an
“emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.