Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION & ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The accompanying consolidated financial statements and related notes have been prepared in accordance with United States (U.S.) generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and include the accounts of Markel Corporation and its subsidiaries, as well as any variable interest entities that meet the requirements for consolidation (the Company). For a discussion of our significant accounting policies, as well as recently issued accounting pronouncements that we have not yet adopted and their expected effects on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows, see note 1 of the notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8.
The following discussion and analysis includes discussion of changes in our results of operations and financial condition from 2019 to 2020 and should be read in conjunction with Item 6 Selected Financial Data, the consolidated financial statements and related notes included under Item 8, Item 1A Risk Factors and "Safe Harbor and Cautionary Statement" under Item 7. A discussion of changes in our results of operations and financial condition from 2018 to 2019 may be found in Part II Item 7 Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which was filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on February 21, 2020.
Results of Operations
The following table presents the components of net income to shareholders, net income to common shareholders and comprehensive income to shareholders.
(1) Net investment income and net investment gains, if any, attributable to Markel Ventures are included in segment profit for Markel Ventures. All other net investment income and net investment gains are included in Investing segment profit.
(2) Segment profit for the Markel Ventures segment includes amortization of intangible assets attributable to Markel Ventures.
(3) Other operations includes the results attributable to our operations that are not included in a reportable segment, as well as any amortization of intangible assets that is not allocated to a reportable segment. Amortization of intangible assets attributable to our underwriting segments was $41.9 million and $39.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively; however, we do not allocate amortization of intangible assets between the Insurance and Reinsurance segments.
The decrease in comprehensive income to shareholders in 2020 was primarily due to lower net investment gains on our equity portfolio in 2020 compared to 2019. Comprehensive income to shareholders in 2020 also reflects significant underwriting losses and other impacts attributed to COVID-19, a novel coronavirus outbreak that was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020, which has caused unprecedented social and economic disruption, increased volatility of capital markets and interventions by various governments and central banks around the world. The components of net income to shareholders and comprehensive income to shareholders are discussed in further detail under "Underwriting Results," "Investing Results," "Markel Ventures," "Other Operations," "Interest Expense, Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt and Income Taxes" and "Comprehensive Income to Shareholders."
10K - 37
Underwriting Results
Underwriting profits are a key component of our strategy to build shareholder value. We believe that the ability to achieve consistent underwriting profits demonstrates knowledge and expertise, commitment to superior customer service and the ability to manage insurance risk. The property and casualty insurance industry commonly defines underwriting profit or loss as earned premiums net of losses and loss adjustment expenses and underwriting, acquisition and insurance expenses. We use underwriting profit or loss and the combined ratio as a basis for evaluating our underwriting performance. The combined ratio is a measure of underwriting performance and represents the relationship of incurred losses, loss adjustment expenses and underwriting, acquisition and insurance expenses to earned premiums. The combined ratio is the sum of the loss ratio and the expense ratio. The loss ratio represents the relationship of incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. The expense ratio represents the relationship of underwriting, acquisition and insurance expenses to earned premiums. A combined ratio less than 100% indicates an underwriting profit, while a combined ratio greater than 100% reflects an underwriting loss. Segment profit for our underwriting segments may also include other revenues and expenses that are attributable to our underwriting operations that are not captured in underwriting profit.
The following table presents selected data from our underwriting operations.
(1)Gross premium volume and net retention for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 exclude $2.1 billion and $2.3 billion, respectively, of written premiums attributable to our program services business and other fronting arrangements that were ceded.
Combined Ratio
Our consolidated combined ratio for 2020 included $360.4 million, or six points, of underwriting loss attributed to COVID-19 and $168.9 million, or three points, of underwriting loss attributed to natural catastrophes compared to $100.4 million, or two points, of catastrophe losses in 2019. Excluding the impacts of COVID-19 and catastrophe losses, our combined ratio improved due to a lower attritional loss ratio and a lower expense ratio arising from improved performance within our Insurance segment in 2020 compared to 2019.
COVID-19 Losses
The following table summarizes, by segment, the components of the underwriting loss attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. The losses and loss adjustment expenses were net of ceded losses of $106.2 million.
10K - 38
The COVID-19 outbreak was identified as a potential exposure within our underwriting operations in late February, at which point we began to regularly review all of our product lines to identify lines of business we believed could be directly impacted by COVID-19 and to evaluate the extent to which the virus may impact our coverages. In those instances where we identified COVID-19 as the proximate, or direct, cause of loss, we established net reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses totaling $325.0 million during the first quarter of 2020. Our direct losses from COVID-19 were primarily attributed to business written within our international insurance operations and were primarily associated with coverages for event cancellation and business interruption losses in policies where no specific pandemic exclusions exist. Since establishing these initial reserves in the first quarter of 2020, we have increased our estimate of direct net losses and loss adjustment expenses attributable to COVID-19 by $18.3 million following changes in certain assumptions on which our estimates are based, resulting in total direct net losses and loss adjustment expenses of $343.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In addition to loss exposures that are directly attributable to COVID-19, we also are exposed to losses indirectly related to the COVID-19 pandemic and associated with a broader range of coverages, including coverages within our trade credit, professional liability and workers' compensation product lines, among others, as well as certain of our reinsurance product lines. During 2020, we recognized $15.0 million of net losses and loss adjustment expenses in our trade credit product line within our Insurance segment related to losses that were indirectly attributable to the pandemic. We do not believe any other significant indirect losses attributable to COVID-19 have been incurred. See "Developments Related to COVID-19" for further discussion of other potential indirect exposures arising from the pandemic.
The following table summarizes, by coverage and underwriting platform, the components of our direct net losses and loss adjustment expenses from COVID-19 for 2020.
Both the gross and net loss estimates for direct losses attributed to COVID-19 represent our best estimates as of December 31, 2020 based upon information currently available. These estimates are based on reported claims, detailed policy level reviews and reviews of in-force assumed reinsurance contracts for potential exposures, as well as analysis of our ceded reinsurance contracts and analysis provided by our brokers and claims counsel. We also considered the results of recent judicial rulings. There are no recent historical events with similar characteristics to COVID-19, and therefore we have no past loss experience on which to base our estimates. Additionally, the economic and social impacts of the pandemic continue to evolve.
Significant assumptions on which our estimates of reserves for direct COVID-19 losses and loss adjustment expenses are based include:
•the scope of coverage provided under our policies, particularly those that provide for business interruption coverage, which generally falls under the following three categories:
◦coverage has not been triggered because the policy's insuring agreement has not been satisfied and/or a covered cause of loss has not been established;
◦the policy would not respond because the policy includes a communicable disease, virus or pandemic exclusion; or
◦the policy may provide coverage for communicable diseases and pandemics, but also includes conditions and limitations to coverage;
•coverage provided under our ceded reinsurance contracts;
•the expected duration of the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic; and
10K - 39
•the ability of insureds to mitigate some or all of their losses. For example, in the case of our event cancellation coverages, by deferring the event or moving to a virtual format, and for our business interruption exposures, the ability to continue providing certain services or to provide services remotely.
Due to the inherent uncertainty associated with the assumptions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, these estimates are subject to a wide range of variability. Our initial estimates in the first quarter of 2020 reflected limited claims reporting and were based on broad assumptions about coverage, liability and reinsurance. A test case of a sample of business interruption coverages for policies written in the United Kingdom (U.K.), which do not have the same exclusions as policies commonly written in the U.S., concluded in the third quarter of 2020 with the court's judgment finding mostly in favor of policyholders. This ruling was subsequently upheld by the U.K. supreme court. This ruling was most impactful to certain estimates in our Reinsurance segment, where we increased our estimate of losses and loss adjustment expenses on certain treaties following an increase in estimated losses by the respective cedents on the treaties. The ruling did not meaningfully impact the reserves previously established for business interruption coverage within our Insurance segment given the assumptions made in our initial estimates and our policy terms and conditions. Our estimates at December 31, 2020 also reflect additional data gathered through increased claims reporting and changes in our expectation of the duration of the pandemic, which was most impactful to our event cancellation coverages.
As of December 31, 2020, assumptions about coverage, liability and reinsurance continue to be subject to judicial review and may be subject to other government action. Additionally, we have begun to see significant litigation involving the handling of business interruption claims associated with COVID-19, and in certain instances, assessing the validity of policy exclusions for pandemics and interpreting policy terms to determine coverage for pandemics, which are also in the process of being tested in various judicial systems. While we believe our net reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses for COVID-19 as of December 31, 2020 are adequate based on information currently available, we continue to closely monitor reported claims, government actions, judicial decisions and changes in the levels of worldwide social disruption and economic activity arising from the pandemic and will adjust our estimates of gross and net losses as new information becomes available. Such adjustments to our reserves for COVID-19 losses and loss adjustment expenses may be material to our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
Catastrophe Losses
Underwriting results in 2020 included $168.9 million of underwriting loss from Hurricanes Isaias, Laura, Sally, Delta and Zeta, as well as wildfires in the western U.S. and the derecho in Iowa (2020 Catastrophes). These losses and loss adjustment expenses were net of ceded losses of $125.7 million. Underwriting results in 2019 included $100.4 million of underwriting loss from Hurricane Dorian and Typhoons Faxai and Hagibis (2019 Catastrophes). These losses and loss adjustment expenses were net of ceded losses of $62.5 million. The following table summarizes, by segment, the components of the underwriting losses related to the 2020 and 2019 Catastrophes.
The net losses and loss adjustment expenses on the 2020 Catastrophes as of December 31, 2020 represent our best estimates based upon information currently available. Our estimates for these losses are based on claims received to date, detailed policy and reinsurance contract level reviews, preliminary industry loss estimates and output from both industry and proprietary models, as well as analysis of our ceded reinsurance contracts. Given the number of events comprising the 2020 Catastrophes, and in certain instances, the limited claims activity thus far, these estimates are still dependent on broad assumptions about coverage, liability and reinsurance and are therefore subject to a wide range of variability. While we believe our reserves for the 2020 Catastrophes as of December 31, 2020 are adequate, we continue to closely monitor reported claims and will adjust our estimates of gross and net losses as new information becomes available.
10K - 40
Insurance Segment
The combined ratio for the Insurance segment in 2020 was 96% (including six points for underwriting losses attributed to COVID-19 and three points for underwriting losses on the 2020 Catastrophes) compared to 93% in 2019.
The increase in the combined ratio was driven by the impact of losses attributed to COVID-19 in 2020 and higher catastrophe losses in 2020 compared to 2019, partially offset by a lower attritional loss ratio and a lower expense ratio in 2020 compared to 2019. Higher earned premiums in 2020 compared to 2019 had a favorable impact on our expense ratio while reducing the benefit of the prior accident years' loss ratio.
•Excluding the impact of losses attributed to COVID-19 and the 2020 and 2019 Catastrophes, the current accident year loss ratio decreased primarily due to lower loss experience and a benefit from improved pricing in 2020 on our property and professional liability product lines. We also experienced lower attritional losses on our marine and energy product lines in 2020, primarily due to changes in the mix of business.
•The Insurance segment's 2020 combined ratio included $554.6 million of favorable development on prior years' loss reserves compared to $462.1 million in 2019. The increase in favorable development was primarily due to more favorable development on our professional liability product lines in 2020 compared to 2019 and favorable development on our property product lines in 2020 compared to adverse development in 2019. These favorable changes were partially offset by less favorable development on our general liability product lines in 2020 compared to 2019. In 2020 and 2019, favorable development was most significant on our general liability, professional liability, workers' compensation and marine and energy product lines. See note 9 of the notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 for more information on the Insurance segment's prior year loss reserve development.
•The decrease in the expense ratio in 2020 was primarily due to the favorable impact of higher earned premiums in 2020 while maintaining consistent levels of general expenses with 2019.
Reinsurance Segment
The combined ratio for the Reinsurance segment was 104% for both 2020 and 2019. In 2020, the Reinsurance segment combined ratio included seven points for underwriting losses attributed to COVID-19 and five points for underwriting losses on the 2020 Catastrophes. In 2019, the Reinsurance segment combined ratio included 10 points for underwriting losses on the 2019 Catastrophes.
Excluding the impact of COVID-19 and catastrophe losses, the combined ratio decreased in 2020 due to a lower attritional loss ratio, partially offset by the impact of less favorable development on prior accident years' loss reserves.
•Excluding the impact of losses attributed to COVID-19 and the 2020 and 2019 Catastrophes, the current accident year loss ratio decreased primarily due to fewer large loss events across several product lines in 2020 compared to 2019, most notably on our property product lines.
•The Reinsurance segment's 2020 combined ratio included $51.8 million of favorable development on prior years' loss reserves compared to $64.8 million in 2019. The decrease in favorable development was primarily due to more adverse development on our public entity product lines in 2020, which totaled $34.4 million in 2020 or four points on the segment combined ratio, as well as less favorable development on our whole account product line in 2020 compared to 2019. These unfavorable changes were partially offset by more favorable development on our property product lines in 2020 compared to 2019. In 2020, favorable development was most significant on our property product lines. In 2020 we also recognized additional exposure related to net favorable premium adjustments along with adverse development on certain of our professional liability product lines. The favorable development on prior years' loss reserves in 2019 was most significant on our property and whole account product lines. See note 9 of the notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 for more information on the Reinsurance segment's prior year loss reserve development.
10K - 41
Premiums
Gross Premium Volume
Gross premium volume in our underwriting operations increased 11% in 2020, primarily due to an increase in gross premium volume in our Insurance segment. Also impacting consolidated gross premium volume were gross premiums written through our program services business and other fronting arrangements, which decreased 10% in 2020. The decrease in gross premium volume in our program services business was driven by the run-off of one large program and the cancellation of an in-force book of policies related to another large program. Substantially all gross premiums from our program services business and other fronting arrangements were ceded to third parties in 2020 and 2019. See "Other Operations" for further discussion on gross premiums from our program services operations.
Gross premium volume in our Insurance segment increased 13% in 2020, primarily driven by new business and more favorable rates within our professional liability, general liability, personal lines and marine and energy product lines.
Gross premium volume in our Reinsurance segment increased 2% in 2020, driven by higher gross premiums within our professional liability and general liability product lines, partially offset by lower gross premiums within our credit and surety product lines. Higher gross premiums within our professional liability product lines were primarily due to increased exposures and improved pricing on renewals, as well as new business. Higher gross premiums within our general liability product lines were primarily due to new business, partially offset by decreased exposures on renewals. Lower gross premiums within our credit and surety product lines in 2020 were primarily due to unfavorable premium adjustments. Significant variability in gross premium volume can be expected in our Reinsurance segment due to individually significant contracts and multi-year contracts.
Following the high level of catastrophes that have occurred in recent years, and based on general market conditions, we are seeing more favorable rates, particularly on our catastrophe-exposed and loss-affected business. We are also seeing improved pricing on most of our other product lines, most notably within our general liability and professional liability product lines. The primary exception is workers' compensation, where we continue to see low single digit rate decreases given generally favorable loss experience in recent years. When we believe the prevailing market price will not support our underwriting profit targets, the business is not written. As a result of our underwriting discipline, gross premium volume may vary when we alter our product offerings to maintain or improve underwriting profitability.
See "Developments Related to COVID-19" for discussion of potential impacts of the pandemic on our premiums.
Net Written Premiums
10K - 42
Net retention of gross premium volume for our underwriting operations was 83% in 2020 and 84% in 2019. The decrease in net retention in 2020 was driven by our Insurance segment, due in part to a new quota share agreement to fully cede premiums on a program that was put into run-off in 2020. Within our underwriting operations, we purchase reinsurance and retrocessional reinsurance in order to manage our net retention on individual risks and overall exposure to losses, and enable us to write policies with sufficient limits to meet policyholder needs.
In late 2020, we decided to discontinue writing catastrophe-exposed property reinsurance within our Reinsurance segment on a risk-bearing basis, and beginning January 1, 2021, any such business will either be written directly by, or ceded to, our Nephila insurance-linked securities (ILS) operations to be placed with third party capital to the extent it fits the ILS investors’ risk profile. For the year ended December 31, 2020, gross and net written premiums for this business were $221.2 million and $125.2 million, respectively.
Earned Premiums
Earned premiums increased 11% in 2020, primarily due to the increase in gross premium volume within our Insurance segment on our professional liability and general liability product lines, as previously discussed.
Disposal Loss
Results attributable to our Reinsurance segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 included a disposal loss of $41.5 million related to the planned disposition of our reinsurance operations in Latin America, which was included in services and other expenses and was not included in the segment's underwriting loss. This disposal loss is primarily attributable to foreign currency translation adjustments for these operations, which were previously included in accumulated other comprehensive income.
Investing Results
Our business strategy recognizes the importance of both consistent underwriting and operating profits and superior investment returns to build shareholder value. We rely on sound underwriting practices to produce investable funds. We measure investing results by our net investment income, net investment gains and the change in net unrealized investment gains on available-for-sale investments, as well as investment yield and our taxable equivalent total investment return. Based on the potential for volatility in the financial markets, we believe investment performance is best analyzed over several years.
10K - 43
The following table summarizes our investment performance.
(1)Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-01. As a result, equity securities are no longer classified as available-for-sale with unrealized gains and losses recognized in other comprehensive income; rather, all changes in the fair value of equity securities are now recognized in net income. Prior periods have not been restated to conform to the current presentation.
(2)The increase in net unrealized gains on available-for-sale securities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was net of an adjustment related to our life and annuity benefit reserves of $68.2 million and $51.4 million, respectively.
(3)Investment yield reflects net investment income as a percentage of monthly average invested assets at amortized cost.
Net investment income decreased 18% in 2020, driven primarily by the impact of lower short-term interest rates on short-term investment income. We also earned lower interest income on our fixed maturity investment portfolio due to lower average holdings of fixed maturity securities during 2020 compared to 2019 and a lower yield, as fixed maturity securities purchased in 2020 had lower interest rates than securities that matured or were called or sold in 2020. See note 4(d) of the notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 for further details on the components of net investment income.
Net investment gains were $618.0 million and $1.6 billion in 2020 and 2019, respectively. See note 4(e) of the notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 for further details on the components of net investment gains (losses). Net investment gains in both 2020 and 2019 were primarily attributable to an increase in the fair value of equity securities. Net investment gains for 2020 reflected significant market volatility experienced during the year. The impact of significant declines in the fair value of our equity portfolio in the first quarter of 2020, driven by unfavorable market value movements resulting from the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, were more than offset by increases in the fair value of our equity portfolio over the subsequent three quarters of 2020.
In 2020, the increase in net unrealized gains on available-for-sale investments was $442.1 million compared to $381.9 million in 2019. The increase in net unrealized gains on available-sale investments in both 2020 and 2019 was attributable to an increase in the fair value of our fixed maturity portfolio as a result of decreases in interest rates.
We evaluate our investment performance by analyzing taxable equivalent total investment return, which is a non-GAAP financial measure. Taxable equivalent total investment return includes items that impact net income, such as coupon interest on fixed maturity securities, changes in fair value of equity securities, dividends on equity securities and realized investment gains or losses on available-for-sale securities, as well as changes in unrealized gains or losses on available-for-sale securities, which do not impact net income. Certain items that are included in net investment income have been excluded from the calculation of taxable equivalent total investment return, such as amortization and accretion of premiums and discounts on our fixed maturity portfolio, to provide a comparable basis for measuring our investment return against industry investment returns. The calculation of taxable equivalent total investment return also includes the current tax benefit associated with income on certain investments that is either taxed at a lower rate than the statutory income tax rate or is not fully included in U.S. taxable income. We believe the taxable equivalent total investment return is a better reflection of the economics of our decision to invest in certain asset classes. We focus on our long-term investment return, understanding that the level of investment gains or losses may vary from one period to the next.
10K - 44
We believe our investment performance is best analyzed from the review of taxable equivalent total investment return over several years. The following table presents taxable equivalent total investment return before and after the effects of foreign currency movements.
(1)Includes cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash and cash equivalents.
The following table reconciles investment yield to taxable equivalent total investment return.
(1)Investment yield reflects net investment income as a percentage of monthly average invested assets at amortized cost.
(2)Adjustment includes the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates beginning in 2018.
(3)Adjustment to tax-exempt interest and dividend income to reflect a taxable equivalent basis.
(4)Adjustment to reflect the impact of time-weighting the inputs to the calculation of taxable equivalent total investment return and the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates prior to 2018.
Invested Assets
Investments, cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash and cash equivalents (invested assets) were $24.9 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to $22.3 billion at December 31, 2019, reflecting an increase of 12% in 2020 attributable to cash flows from operations of $1.7 billion and increases in the fair value of equity and fixed maturity securities totaling $1.0 billion.
The following table presents the composition of our investment portfolio.
The change in the composition of the investment portfolio from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 is primarily due to a decrease in holdings of equity securities and an increase in holdings of short-term investments during 2020. Given the dislocation in the financial markets and related uncertainty around the global credit markets following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the first quarter of 2020, we sold significant holdings of equity securities and subsequently reallocated proceeds to purchase short-term investments and fixed maturity securities. See "Developments Related to COVID-19" for
10K - 45
further discussion of actions we took in our investment portfolio in response to the pandemic. In 2020, our holdings of cash and cash equivalents also increased due to operating cash inflows and proceeds from our issuance of preferred shares, partially offset by cash used for acquisitions, all of which are further discussed in "Liquidity and Capital Resources."
Markel Ventures
Our Markel Ventures segment includes a diverse portfolio of businesses from different industries that offer various types of products and services to businesses and consumers, predominately in the United States. We measure Markel Ventures' results by its operating income and net income, as well as earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA). We consolidate the results of our Markel Ventures subsidiaries on a one-month lag, with the exception of significant transactions or events that occur during the intervening period.
In April 2020, we acquired a controlling interest in Lansing Building Products, LLC, a supplier of exterior building products and materials to professional contractors throughout the U.S., which simultaneously acquired the distribution business of Harvey Building Products to enhance its geographic reach and scale (together, Lansing).
In November 2019, we acquired VSC Fire & Security, Inc. (VSC), a Virginia-based privately held provider of comprehensive fire protection, life safety and low voltage solutions.
The following tables summarize the amounts recognized on the consolidated balance sheets and consolidated statements of income related to Markel Ventures.
(1) Debt as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 included $733.0 million and $858.8 million, respectively, of debt due to other subsidiaries of Markel Corporation, which was eliminated in consolidation.
(2) Shareholders' equity as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 included $1.2 billion and $654.3 million, respectively, of common stock, which represents Markel Corporation's investment in Markel Ventures, which was eliminated in consolidation.
10K - 46
(1) Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included intercompany interest expense of $32.0 million and $24.9 million, respectively, which was eliminated in consolidation.
Operating revenues from our Markel Ventures segment increased in 2020 due to the contribution of revenues from Lansing, which was acquired in April 2020, and VSC, which was acquired in November 2019. Operating revenues in 2020 attributable to these acquisitions totaled $915.7 million. Excluding the contributions of Lansing and VSC in 2020, operating revenues from our other Markel Ventures businesses decreased in 2020, primarily due to lower sales volumes at our transportation-related and equipment manufacturing businesses due in part to impacts attributable to the economic and social disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. These decreases were partially offset by the impact of higher sales volumes at one of our consumer and building products businesses in 2020 compared to 2019.
Operating income and EBITDA from our Markel Ventures segment increased in 2020 due in part to the acquisitions of Lansing and VSC, as well as higher sales volumes at one of our consumer and building products businesses, as previously discussed. The increase in operating income and EBITDA in 2020 was also due to a loss recognized in 2019 related to the disposition of certain components of one of our equipment manufacturing businesses. These increases were partially offset by the impact of lower operating revenues at our transportation-related businesses, as previously discussed.
Net income to shareholders from our Markel Ventures segment increased in 2020, primarily due to higher operating income, partially offset by higher interest expense and income tax expense.
See "Developments Related to COVID-19" for further discussion of impacts of the pandemic on our Markel Ventures operations.
Markel Ventures EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure. We use Markel Ventures EBITDA as an operating performance measure in conjunction with U.S. GAAP measures, including operating revenues, operating income and net income to shareholders, to monitor and evaluate the performance of our Markel Ventures segment. Because EBITDA excludes interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, it provides an indicator of economic performance that is useful to both management and investors in evaluating our Markel Ventures businesses as it is not affected by levels of debt, interest rates, effective tax rates or levels of depreciation or amortization resulting from purchase accounting.
10K - 47
The following table reconciles Markel Ventures operating income to Markel Ventures EBITDA.
The following table summarizes the cash flows attributable to Markel Ventures for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(1) Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 included a capital contribution from our holding company, Markel Corporation, of $535.0 million, which was eliminated in consolidation. There were no capital contributions from our holding company for the year ended December 31, 2019.
(2) Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 included net repayments of intercompany debt of $125.9 million, which were eliminated in consolidation. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 included net additions to intercompany debt of $252.8 million, respectively, which were eliminated in consolidation.
Other Operations
The following table presents the components of operating revenues and operating expenses that are not included in a reportable segment.
10K - 48
Insurance-Linked Securities
The decrease in operating revenues in our insurance-linked securities operations in 2020 was driven by lower revenues from our Markel CATCo operations, which are in run-off, primarily due to lower assets under management during 2020 compared to 2019 and a further reduction in the management fee rate in 2020. This decrease was partially offset by higher revenues from our Nephila operations. Higher revenues from our Nephila operations in 2020 were due to growth in our managing general agent operations, partially offset by lower investment management fees as a result of lower assets under management.
Nephila's net assets under management were $9.6 billion and $10.4 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Markel CATCo's net assets under management were $1.0 billion and $2.8 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The increase in services and other expenses in our insurance-linked securities operations in 2020 was primarily due to an increase in expenses at our Nephila operations due to growth in our managing general agent operations in 2020, partially offset by a favorable impact from acquisition-related costs in 2019 that did not recur in 2020. Services and other expenses at our Markel CATCo operations in 2020 were consistent with 2019 as the expenses associated with a legal settlement in 2020 were offset by lower professional fees and general operating expenses in 2020, as these operations are in run-off. Services and other expenses for both periods also reflect start-up costs associated with our new retrocessional insurance-linked securities fund manager, Lodgepine.
Program Services
The decrease in operating revenues in our program services operations in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to lower gross premium volume. Gross premiums in our program services operations were $2.1 billion and $2.3 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in gross premium volume was driven by the run-off of one large program and the cancellation of an in-force book of policies related to another large program resulting in a one-time unfavorable premium adjustment of $55.0 million associated with the return of unearned premium in 2020. These decreases were partially offset by gross written premiums from new programs added in 2020.
See "Developments Related to COVID-19" for discussion of actual and potential impacts of the pandemic on our insurance-linked securities and program services operations.
Interest Expense, Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt and Income Taxes
Interest Expense and Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt
Interest expense was $177.6 million in 2020 compared to $171.7 million in 2019. The change in interest expense reflects the impact of the following transactions that occurred in 2019:
•the purchase and redemption of our 6.25% and 5.35% unsecured senior notes in the third and fourth quarters of 2019,
•the repayment of our 7.125% unsecured senior notes in the third quarter of 2019 and
•the issuance of our 5.0% unsecured senior notes issued in the second quarter of 2019 and the issuance of our 3.35% and 4.15% unsecured senior notes in the third quarter of 2019.
In September 2019, we purchased a portion of our 6.25% unsecured senior notes and our 5.35% unsecured senior notes. In October 2019, we redeemed the remaining outstanding balance on these notes. In connection with these redemptions, we recognized losses on early extinguishment of debt of $17.6 million during 2019.
See note 12 of the notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 for further details about our 2019 senior long-term debt transactions.
Income Taxes
The effective tax rate was 17% in 2020 compared to 21% in 2019. The effective tax rate for 2020 differs from the effective tax rate for 2019 and the statutory rate of 21% primarily due to a tax benefit that was recognized in 2020 for accumulated losses on certain investments we sold that were not previously deductible. See note 13 of the notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 for further discussion of our income taxes.
10K - 49
Comprehensive Income to Shareholders
The following table summarizes the components of comprehensive income to shareholders.
Book Value per Common Share and Total Shareholder Return
Book value per common share increased 10% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 23% for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to net income to shareholders, as shown above. Over the past five years, we have grown book value per common share at a compound annual rate of 10% to $885.72 per share at December 31, 2020.
Our stock price per share decreased 10% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and increased 10% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Over the past five years, our stock price per share increased at a compound annual rate of 3%.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Holding Company
We seek to maintain prudent levels of liquidity and financial leverage for the protection of our policyholders, creditors and shareholders. Our debt to capital ratio was 21% at December 31, 2020 and 24% at December 31, 2019. The decrease reflects an increase in shareholders' equity in 2020, primarily due to net income to shareholders as well as proceeds from our preferred shares offering.
In May 2020, we issued 600,000 6.00% Fixed-Rate Reset Non-Cumulative Series A preferred shares, with no par value and a liquidation preference of $1,000 per share, for aggregate net proceeds after expenses of $591.9 million. Dividends, if declared by our Board of Directors, are payable semi-annually in arrears in December and June. If we do not declare and pay the full dividends for the latest completed dividend period on all outstanding Series A preferred shares, we may not (i) declare or pay a dividend on our common shares or (ii) purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire for consideration any common shares, subject to certain exceptions. In 2020, total dividends declared and paid on Series A preferred shares were $18.4 million. See note 17 of the notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 for further information regarding our Series A preferred shares.
At December 31, 2020, our holding company (Markel Corporation) held $4.1 billion of invested assets compared to $4.0 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase in holding company invested assets was primarily due to the proceeds from our preferred shares offering and dividends from our subsidiaries, offset by cash used in connection with the acquisition of Lansing. After satisfying our interest and principal obligations on our senior long-term debt and notes payable to subsidiaries, as well as any other holding company obligations, excess liquidity at Markel Corporation is available, among other things, to allocate capital to our existing businesses, complete acquisitions, build our portfolio of equity securities or repurchase shares of our common stock.
Our Board of Directors has approved the repurchase of up to $300 million of common stock under a share repurchase program. As of December 31, 2020, $240.8 million remained available for repurchases under the program. We temporarily suspended repurchases of our common shares in March 2020 in conjunction with other measures we took in response to COVID-19, and in February 2021, we announced that we are recommencing repurchases under the program. This share repurchase program has no expiration date but may be terminated by the Board of Directors at any time.
10K - 50
Our underwriting operations collect premiums and pay claims, reinsurance costs and operating expenses. Premiums collected from our underwriting operations are invested primarily in short-term investments and long-term fixed maturity securities. Short-term investments held by our insurance subsidiaries provide liquidity for projected claims, reinsurance costs and operating expenses. As a holding company, Markel Corporation receives cash from its subsidiaries as reimbursement for operating and other administrative expenses it incurs. The reimbursements are made within the guidelines of various management agreements between the holding company and its subsidiaries.
The holding company relies on dividends from its subsidiaries to meet debt service obligations and pay dividends on our preferred stock. Under the insurance laws of the various states in which our domestic insurance subsidiaries are incorporated, an insurer is restricted in the amount of dividends it may pay without prior approval of regulatory authorities. There are also regulatory restrictions on the amount of dividends that certain of our foreign subsidiaries may pay based on applicable laws in their respective jurisdictions. At December 31, 2020, our domestic insurance subsidiaries and Markel Bermuda Limited could pay ordinary dividends of $1.1 billion during the following twelve months under these laws.
We maintain a revolving credit facility, which provides up to $300 million of capacity for future acquisitions, investments and stock repurchases and for other working capital and general corporate purposes. At our discretion, up to $200 million of the total capacity may be used for letters of credit. We may increase the capacity of the facility by up to $200 million subject to obtaining commitments for the increase and satisfying certain other terms and conditions. This facility expires in April 2024. See note 12 of the notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 for further discussion of our revolving credit facility. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no borrowings outstanding on our revolving credit facility.
We were in compliance with all covenants contained in our revolving credit facility at December 31, 2020. To the extent that we are not in compliance with our covenants, our access to the revolving credit facility could be restricted. While we believe this to be unlikely, the inability to access the revolving credit facility could adversely affect our liquidity.
We have access to various capital sources, including dividends from certain of our insurance and Markel Ventures subsidiaries, holding company invested assets, undrawn capacity under our revolving credit facility and access to the debt and equity capital markets. We believe that we have sufficient liquidity to meet our capital needs. However, the availability of these sources of capital and the availability and terms of future financings will depend on a variety of factors, and could be adversely affected by, among other things, risks and uncertainties related to COVID-19. See "Developments Related to COVID-19" for further discussion of the potential impacts of COVID-19 on our liquidity and capital resources and the "Access to Capital" risk factors under Item 1A Risk Factors for more discussion regarding our access to capital sources.
Cash Flows and Invested Assets
Net cash provided by operating activities was $1.7 billion in 2020 compared to $1.3 billion in 2019. The increase in net cash flows from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by higher net premium collections in our Insurance segment.
Net cash used by investing activities was $511.7 million in 2020 compared to $535.2 million in 2019. In 2020, net cash used by investing activities included $829.5 million of net purchases of short-term investments and $550.8 million of net cash used for the acquisition of Lansing. Net cash used by investing activities in 2020 was net of $1.2 billion of proceeds from sales of equity securities, net of purchases equity securities. See "Investing Results - Invested Assets" for discussion of changes in our allocation of funds within the investment portfolio in 2020 and "Developments Related to COVID-19" for discussion of actions we took in our investment portfolio in response to the pandemic. Net cash used by investing activities in 2019 included $245.3 million of net cash used for acquisitions and $257.7 million of cash used for equity method investments, including $212.5 million of cash used to purchase a minority ownership interest in The Hagerty Group, LLC. Net cash used by investing activities in 2019 was net of $170.3 million of proceeds from maturities and sales of fixed maturity securities and sales of equity securities, net of purchases of fixed maturity securities and equity securities. Cash flow from investing activities is affected by various factors such as anticipated payment of claims, financing activity, acquisition opportunities and individual buy and sell decisions made in the normal course of our investment portfolio management.
Invested assets were $24.9 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to $22.3 billion at December 31, 2019. See "Investing Results - Invested Assets" for further discussion of changes in invested assets during 2020.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $434.6 million in 2020 compared to $359.3 million in 2019. In 2020, we issued preferred shares with net proceeds of $591.9 million, as previously discussed. In 2019, we issued unsecured senior notes with net proceeds of $1.4 billion, before expenses. We used $861.9 million of these proceeds to repay our 7.125% unsecured senior
10K - 51
notes as well as purchase and redeem two additional series of our unsecured senior notes. See note 12 of the notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 for more details regarding the components of senior long-term debt. Cash of $26.8 million and $116.3 million was used to repurchase shares of our common stock during 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual cash payment obligations at December 31, 2020.
(1)See respective notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 for further discussion of these obligations.
Reserves for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses represent future contractual obligations associated with property and casualty insurance and reinsurance contracts issued to our policyholders or other insurance companies. Information presented in the table of contractual cash payment obligations is an estimate of our future payment of claims as of December 31, 2020. Payment patterns for losses and loss adjustment expenses were generally based upon historical claims settlement patterns. Each claim is settled individually based upon its merits, and certain claims may take years to settle, especially if legal action is involved. The actual cash payments for settled claims will vary, possibly significantly, from the estimates shown in the preceding table. The unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses in this table are our gross estimates of payments for known liabilities as of December 31, 2020. The expected payments by period are the estimated payments at a future time, whereas the reserves for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses included on the consolidated balance sheet include the unamortized portion of any fair value adjustments for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses assumed in conjunction with an acquisition and any adjustments to discount reserves.
Senior long-term debt and other debt was $3.5 billion at both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. The amounts in the contractual obligations table include interest expense and exclude net unamortized premium and net unamortized debt issuance costs.
Reserves for life and annuity benefits represent future contractual obligations associated with reinsurance contracts issued to other insurance companies. Information presented in the table of contractual cash payment obligations is an estimate of our future payment of benefits as of December 31, 2020. The assumptions used in estimating the likely payments due by period are based on cedent experience, industry mortality tables, and our expense experience. Due to the inherent uncertainty in the process of estimating the timing of such payments, there is a risk that the amounts paid in any such period can be significantly different from the estimates shown in the preceding table. The life and annuity benefits in the table are our gross estimates of known obligations as of December 31, 2020. These obligations are computed on a net present value basis on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020, whereas the expected payments by period in the table are the estimated payments at a future time and do not reflect a discount of the amount payable or any adjustments for life and annuity benefit reserves.
Restricted Assets and Capital
At December 31, 2020, we had $4.7 billion of invested assets held in trust or on deposit for the benefit of policyholders or ceding companies or to support underwriting activities. Additionally, we have pledged investments and cash and cash equivalents totaling $387.2 million at December 31, 2020 as security for letters of credit that have been issued by various banks on our behalf. These invested assets and the related liabilities are included in our consolidated balance sheet. See note 4(f) of the notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 for further discussion of restrictions over our invested assets.
Our insurance operations require capital to support premium writings, and we remain committed to maintaining adequate capital and surplus at each of our insurance subsidiaries. The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) developed a model law and risk-based capital formula designed to help regulators identify domestic property and casualty insurers that may be inadequately capitalized. Under the NAIC's requirements, a domestic insurer must maintain total capital
10K - 52
and surplus above a calculated threshold or face varying levels of regulatory action. Capital adequacy of our foreign insurance subsidiaries is regulated by applicable laws of the U.K., Bermuda and other jurisdictions, including Germany. At December 31, 2020, the capital and surplus of each of our insurance subsidiaries significantly exceeded the amount of statutory capital and surplus necessary to satisfy regulatory requirements.
Developments Related to COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, COVID-19, a novel coronavirus outbreak, was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. This pandemic has caused unprecedented social and economic disruption, increased volatility of capital markets and intervention by various governments and central banks around the world. In addition to the losses incurred in our underwriting operations during 2020, and the decreased demand for certain products and services within our Markel Ventures operations, we are experiencing significant impacts across our business operations. Most of the workforce in our insurance operations is working remotely from their homes. For those employees who are returning to the office, we have taken significant measures and developed new policies and procedures to protect their health and safety. While remote working continues to be the predominate approach, and has been operating effectively, an extended period of remote work arrangements could strain our business continuity plans, introduce or increase operational and control risks, including but not limited to increased cybersecurity risks, and adversely impact our ability to effectively manage our businesses. Within our Markel Ventures operations, most of our businesses are operating on their premises, however, their ability to continue to do so may be impacted as the pandemic continues to evolve. For those employees in our insurance and Markel Ventures operations who are returning to work, or have continued work, on our premises, there is a risk that they will contract COVID-19, which could expose us to increased risk of employment related claims and litigation. Illnesses suffered by key employees, or a significant percentage of our workforce, also could prevent or delay the performance of critical business functions.
We are committed to serving the needs of our employees, customers, business partners and shareholders and continue to focus our efforts on safeguarding our people, supporting our front office and business operations and keeping our employees, customers, business partners and shareholders informed.
Other impacts we have experienced in our operations during the year ended December 31, 2020, as well as steps we are taking to respond to the economic disruption and dislocation caused by the pandemic, are discussed below, along with potential future impacts to our results of operations and financial condition. See "Critical Accounting Estimates - Goodwill and Intangible Assets" for discussion of our consideration of these impacts, among other things, on the valuation of our goodwill and intangible assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We seek to maintain prudent levels of liquidity and financial leverage for the protection of our policyholders, creditors and shareholders. We began the year in a strong liquidity position, holding $4.0 billion of invested assets at our holding company, and at December 31, 2020, our holding company held $4.1 billion of invested assets. Invested assets at the holding company as of December 31, 2020 include net proceeds from our May 2020 issuance of preferred stock totaling $591.9 million, and following two debt issuances in 2019 and the 2019 purchase and redemption of our unsecured senior notes due to mature in 2020 and 2021, we have no unsecured senior notes maturing until July 2022. We also have access to our $300 million revolving credit facility. We continue to maintain a fixed maturity portfolio comprised of high credit quality, investment grade securities with an average rating of "AA."
Significant volatility in the equity markets arising from economic uncertainty following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a significant decline in the fair value of our equity portfolio in the first quarter of 2020. Although this decline was more than offset by subsequent increases in the fair value of our equity portfolio attributable to net favorable market value movements during the rest of the year, future declines in our investment portfolio are possible and could have a material adverse impact on the Company's financial condition, results of operations and liquidity.
Given the dislocation in the financial markets and related uncertainty around the global credit markets resulting from the onset of the pandemic, we took several steps within our investment portfolio to increase our allocation to cash. Initially, we were retaining cash proceeds from maturities of short-term investments and fixed maturity securities and paused our purchases of equity securities. However, as the global markets began to stabilize, we subsequently began reallocating cash to purchase short-term investments and fixed maturity securities and on a more limited basis, equity securities. We also sold certain equity securities based on our views of the underlying fundamentals of these positions and where pricing was deemed appropriate. We also suspended repurchases of our common shares in March 2020, but subsequently recommenced our share repurchase program in February 2021. We continue to focus on expense reductions across our company.
10K - 53
Underwriting losses arising from COVID-19, as well as the 2020 Catastrophes, reduced the capital held by some of our insurance subsidiaries. Capital at our insurance subsidiaries was also impacted by declines in the fair value of equity securities following the onset of the pandemic, which subsequently recovered in the latter part of 2020. Our insurance operations may require additional capital to support premium writings, and we remain committed to maintaining adequate capital and surplus at each of our insurance subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2020, the statutory capital of all of our insurance subsidiaries significantly exceeded required capital, and we believe we are well positioned to continue to pay claims, including those arising from the pandemic, promptly in accordance with the terms of our policies.
We continue to believe we have adequate liquidity to meet our capital and operating needs, including that which may be required to support the operating needs of our subsidiaries.
Underwriting Operations
As previously discussed, our underwriting results for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $343.3 million of net losses and loss adjustment expenses directly attributed to COVID-19 (where COVID-19 was deemed the proximate cause of loss). Due to the inherent uncertainty associated with the assumptions surrounding this pandemic, these estimates are subject to a wide range of variability. While we believe our net reserves for direct losses and loss adjustment expenses for COVID-19 as of December 31, 2020 are adequate based on information currently available, we continue to closely monitor reported claims, government actions, judicial decisions and changes in local and worldwide social disruption arising from the pandemic and will adjust our estimates of gross and net losses as new information becomes available. See "Results of Operations - Underwriting Results" for further discussion on our estimate of direct losses and loss adjustment expenses attributed to COVID-19.
We also have underwriting exposure to loss impacts that are indirectly related to the COVID-19 pandemic and associated with a broader range of coverages, including coverages within our trade credit, professional liability and workers' compensation product lines, among others, as well as certain of our reinsurance product lines. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $15.0 million of net losses and loss adjustment expenses in our trade credit product line within our Insurance segment related to losses that were indirectly attributable to the pandemic. As the impacts of the pandemic continue to evolve, we expect that further losses indirectly related to the COVID-19 pandemic are likely to emerge. As an example, we provide liability coverage for health and medical institutions and professions, as well as other professions, which have been strained or otherwise impacted by the pandemic. We do not believe any other significant indirect losses have been incurred.
The widespread economic and social disruption caused by COVID-19 has created significant financial hardships for individuals and businesses worldwide. However, we do not believe there has been any material change in our exposure to credit losses.
The significant decline in economic activity during the pandemic may have a material unfavorable impact on our premium volume, due to business closures, reduced recreational activity and lower gross receipts, revenues and payrolls of our insureds, among other things. While premium volume for the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by these effects of the pandemic, the impact was not material to our underwriting results. For those policies where the underlying loss exposures have been reduced as a result of decreased economic activity or stay-at-home orders resulting from COVID-19, we also may be required to refund premiums to policyholders, however, there have been no material adjustments required to date.
Within our underwriting operations, we also are reviewing and analyzing the underwriting guidelines and procedures we use to underwrite and reinsure policies that provide coverages related to communicable diseases, viruses, pathogens and other similar risks. Where appropriate, we are taking steps to mitigate our exposure to additional or further losses related to these types of risks, including increasing pricing and adding policy terms and conditions, including exclusions. These actions may reduce premium volume in certain classes of business. With few exceptions, we also stopped writing event cancellation risks, which has reduced our future exposure to losses even if the duration of the pandemic continues to extend. Premium volume attributable to this book of business was not material.
Markel Ventures Operations
Beginning in the second quarter of 2020, the economic and social disruption created by the pandemic impacted the results of operations, financial position and cash flows of our Markel Ventures operations. Revenues across many of our businesses decreased due to changes in consumer behavior and the overall impact of current economic conditions on commercial and consumer spending, all of which impacted demand for certain products and services within our businesses. We also saw orders and contracts canceled or postponed, and as a result of reduced demand, we temporarily reduced capacity at certain of our
10K - 54
operations. While demand for products and services at most of our impacted businesses has begun to recover, since the social and economic disruption caused by the pandemic is ongoing, we expect that revenues from our Markel Ventures operations will continue to be impacted, and these impacts may continue to be material.
In order to partially mitigate the impact of decreased revenues, certain of our businesses took actions to reduce expenses, including, but not limited to, elimination of non-essential expenses, cancellation or deferral of open positions, salary reductions and workforce furloughs and reductions. Our businesses may increase borrowings, if needed, to maintain the cash flow required to operate.
Further loss of revenues in certain of our products and services businesses could also impact the carrying value of inventory, goodwill and intangible assets and other long-lived assets within our Markel Ventures operations, which may become impaired. In certain cases, revenue declines also could result in ongoing cash and working capital constraints and could impact the companies' liquidity and their ability to comply with debt covenants, and, in response, we may take steps necessary to support these operations.
As a result of the economic hardship experienced by our customers, we may modify our payment terms or offer discounts to our customers, and we also are exposed to increased credit risk. However, we do not believe there has been any material change in our exposure to credit losses.
Insurance-Linked Securities and Program Services
Through our insurance-linked securities operations, we receive management fees for investment and insurance management services based on the net asset value of the accounts we manage, and, for certain funds, incentive fees based on the annual performance of the funds managed.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, investment losses attributed to COVID-19 within the investment funds we manage were not significant; however, uncertainty around potential COVID-19 loss exposures within the funds we manage, has reduced, and may further reduce, the net asset value on which our management fees are based. Volatility in the capital markets and investor uncertainty regarding insurance industry exposure to COVID-19 also has impacted, and may continue to impact, our ability to raise additional third party capital for the funds we manage, as well as for new funds. We also have experienced, and may continue to experience, higher than anticipated investor redemptions from our funds. Deferred or reduced investment management fees could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial condition, and the associated decline in cash flows also could impact the carrying value of our goodwill and intangible assets within our ILS operations, which may become impaired. See "Critical Accounting Estimates - Goodwill and Intangible Assets" for further discussion and considerations regarding the valuation of goodwill and intangible assets attributed to our ILS operations as of December 31, 2020.
Our program services business generates fee income, in the form of ceding (program service) fees. This fee income is calculated based on the gross premium volume of the insurance programs we support. Similar to our underwriting operations, the significant decline in economic activity may have an unfavorable impact on premium volume, which may result in a reduction in fee income.
For additional risks to our businesses related to COVID-19, see the risk factor titled "The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and may continue to have, material adverse effects on us" under Item 1A Risk Factors.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Critical accounting estimates are those estimates that both are important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require us to exercise significant judgment. The preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of material contingent assets and liabilities. These estimates, by necessity, are based on assumptions about numerous factors. Actual results may differ materially from the estimates and assumptions used in preparing the consolidated financial statements. Our accounts with accounting policies that involve critical accounting estimates are unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, life and annuity benefits and goodwill and intangible assets.
10K - 55
Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
Our consolidated balance sheets included estimated unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses of $16.2 billion and reinsurance recoverables on unpaid losses of $5.7 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to $14.7 billion and $5.3 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2019. Included in these balances were unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses and reinsurance recoverables on unpaid losses attributable to our program services business and other fronting arrangements totaling $3.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $2.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our consolidated balance sheets do not include reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses attributed to unconsolidated subsidiaries or affiliates that we manage through our insurance-linked securities operations, including Markel CATCo Re and the Nephila Reinsurers.
We accrue liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses based upon estimates of the ultimate amounts payable. We maintain reserves for specific claims incurred and reported (case reserves) and reserves for claims incurred but not reported (IBNR reserves).
Reported claims are in various stages of the settlement process, and the corresponding reserves for reported claims are based upon all information available to us. Case reserves consider our estimate of the ultimate cost to settle the claims, including investigation and defense of lawsuits resulting from the claims, and may be subject to adjustment for differences between costs originally estimated and costs subsequently re-estimated or incurred. Claims are settled based upon their merits, and some claims may take years to settle, especially if legal action is involved. As of any balance sheet date, all claims have not yet been reported, and some claims may not be reported for many years. As a result, the liability for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses includes significant estimates for incurred but not reported claims.
There is normally a time lag between when a loss event occurs and when it is actually reported to us. The actuarial methods that we use to estimate losses have been designed to address the lag in loss reporting as well as the delay in obtaining information that would allow us to more accurately estimate future payments. There is also often a time lag between cedents establishing case reserves and re-estimating their reserves, and notifying us of the new or revised case reserves. As a result, the reporting lag is more pronounced in our reinsurance contracts than in our insurance contracts due to the reliance on ceding companies to report their claims to us. On reinsurance transactions, the reporting lag will generally be 60 to 90 days after the end of a reporting period, but can be longer in some cases. Based on the experience of our actuaries and management, we select loss development factors and trending techniques to mitigate the difficulties caused by reporting lags. At least annually, we evaluate and update our loss development and trending factor selections using cedent specific and industry data.
U.S. GAAP requires that IBNR reserves be based on the estimated ultimate cost of settling claims, including the effects of inflation and other social and economic factors, using past experience adjusted for current trends and any other factors that would modify past experience. IBNR reserves are generally calculated by subtracting paid losses and loss adjustment expenses and case reserves from estimated ultimate losses and loss adjustment expenses. IBNR reserves were 66% of total unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses at December 31, 2020 compared to 65% at December 31, 2019.
The following table summarizes case reserves and IBNR reserves. The amounts in the following table exclude the unamortized portion of any fair value adjustments for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses assumed in conjunction with an acquisition and any adjustments to discount reserves.
(1)Substantially all of the premium written in our program services business is ceded, resulting in reinsurance recoverables on unpaid losses of $3.3 billion and $2.9 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
10K - 56
Each quarter, our actuaries prepare estimates of the ultimate liability for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses based on established actuarial methods. Management reviews these estimates, supplements the actuarial analyses with information provided by claims, underwriting and other operational personnel and determines its best estimate of loss reserves, which is recorded in our consolidated financial statements. Our procedures for determining the adequacy of loss reserves at the end of the year are substantially similar to the procedures applied at the end of each interim period.
Any adjustments to reserves resulting from our interim or year-end reviews, including changes in estimates, are recorded as a component of losses and loss adjustment expenses in the period of the change. Reserve changes that increase previous estimates of ultimate claims cost are referred to as unfavorable or adverse development, or reserve strengthening. Reserve changes that decrease previous estimates of ultimate claims cost are referred to as favorable development.
Program Services
For our program services business, case reserves are generally established based on reports received from the general agents or reinsurers with whom we do business. Our actuaries review the case loss reserve data received for sufficiency, consistency with historical data and for consistency with other programs we write that have similar characteristics. IBNR reserves are calculated using either our program experience or, where the program data is not credible, industry experience for similar products or lines of business. Substantially all of the premium written in our program services business is ceded and net reserves for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were $8.3 million and $2.2 million, respectively.
Underwriting
For our insurance operations, we are generally notified of insured losses by our insureds or their brokers. Based on this information, we establish case reserves by estimating the expected ultimate losses from the claim (including any administrative costs associated with settling the claim). Our claims personnel use their knowledge of the specific claim along with internal and external experts, including underwriters, actuaries and legal counsel, to estimate the expected ultimate losses.
For our reinsurance operations, case reserves are generally established based on reports received from ceding companies or their brokers. For excess of loss contracts, we are typically notified of insurance losses on specific contracts and record a case reserve for the estimated expected ultimate losses from the claim. For quota share contracts, we typically receive aggregated claims information and record a case reserve based on that information. As with insurance business, we evaluate this information and estimate the expected ultimate losses.
Our liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses can generally be categorized into two distinct groups, short-tail business and long-tail business. Short-tail business refers to lines of business, such as property, accident and health, automobile, watercraft and marine hull exposures, for which losses are usually known and paid shortly after the loss actually occurs. Long-tail business describes lines of business for which specific losses may not be known and reported for some period and losses take much longer to emerge. Given the time frame over which long-tail exposures are ultimately settled, there is greater uncertainty and volatility in these lines than in short-tail lines of business. Our long-tail coverages consist of most casualty lines, including professional liability, directors' and officers' liability, products liability, general and excess liability and excess and umbrella exposures, as well as workers' compensation insurance. Some factors that contribute to the uncertainty and volatility of long-tail casualty programs, and thus require a significant degree of judgment in the reserving process, include the inherent uncertainty as to the length of reporting and payment development patterns, the possibility of judicial interpretations or legislative changes, including changes in workers' compensation benefit laws, that might impact future loss experience relative to prior loss experience and the potential lack of comparability of the underlying data used in performing loss reserve analyses.
Our ultimate liability may be greater or less than current reserves. Changes in our estimated ultimate liability for loss reserves generally occur as a result of the emergence of unanticipated loss activity, the completion of specific actuarial or claims studies or changes in internal or external factors. We closely monitor new information on reported claims and use statistical analyses prepared by our actuaries to evaluate the adequacy of our recorded reserves. We are required to exercise considerable judgment when assessing the relative credibility of loss development trends. Our philosophy is to establish loss reserves that are more likely redundant than deficient. This means that we seek to establish loss reserves that will ultimately prove to be adequate. As a result, if new information or trends indicate an increase in frequency or severity of claims in excess of what we initially anticipated, we generally respond quickly and increase loss reserves. If, however, frequency or severity trends are more favorable than initially anticipated, we often wait to reduce our loss reserves until we can evaluate experience in additional periods to confirm the credibility of the trend. In addition, for long-tail lines of business, trends develop over longer
10K - 57
periods of time, and as a result, we give credibility to these trends more slowly than for short-tail or less volatile lines of business. As part of our acquisition of underwriting operations, to the extent the reserving philosophy of the acquired business is less conservative than our reserving philosophy, the post-acquisition loss reserves will be strengthened until total loss reserves are consistent with our target level of confidence.
In establishing our liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, our actuaries estimate an ultimate loss ratio, by accident year or policy year, for each of our product lines with input from our underwriting and claims personnel. For product lines in which loss reserves are established on a policy year basis, we have developed a methodology to convert from policy year to accident year for financial reporting purposes. In estimating an ultimate loss ratio for a particular line of business, our actuaries may use one or more actuarial reserving methods and select from these a single point estimate. To varying degrees, these methods include detailed statistical analysis of past claim reporting, settlement activity, claim frequency and severity, policyholder loss experience, industry loss experience and changes in market conditions, policy forms and exposures. The actuarial methods we use include:
Initial Expected Loss Ratio Method - This method multiplies earned premiums by an expected loss ratio. The expected loss ratio is selected utilizing industry data, our historical data, frequency-severity and rate level forecasts and professional judgment.
Paid Loss Development - This method uses historical loss payment patterns to estimate future loss payment patterns. Our actuaries use the historical loss patterns to develop factors that are applied to current paid loss amounts to calculate expected ultimate losses.
Incurred Loss Development - This method uses historical loss reporting patterns to estimate future loss reporting patterns. Our actuaries use the historical loss patterns to develop factors that are applied to current reported losses to calculate expected ultimate losses.
Bornhuetter-Ferguson Paid Loss Development - This method divides the projection of ultimate losses into the portion that has already been paid and the portion that has yet to be paid. The portion that has yet to be paid is estimated as the product of three amounts: the premium earned for the exposure period, the expected loss ratio and the percentage of ultimate losses that are still unpaid. The expected loss ratio is selected by considering historical loss ratios, adjusted for any known changes in pricing, loss trends, adequacy of case reserves, changes in administrative practices and other relevant factors.
Bornhuetter-Ferguson Incurred Loss Development - This method is identical to the Bornhuetter-Ferguson paid loss development method, except that it uses the percentage of ultimate losses that are still unreported, instead of the percentage of ultimate losses that are still unpaid.
Frequency/Severity - Under this method, expected ultimate losses are equal to the product of the expected ultimate number of claims and the expected ultimate average cost per claim. Our actuaries use historical reporting patterns and severity patterns to develop factors that are applied to the current reported amounts to calculate expected ultimate losses.
Outstanding to IBNR Ratio Method - Under this method, IBNR is based on a detailed review of remaining open claims. This method assumes that the estimated future loss development is indicated by the current level of case reserves.
Other Methods - We cannot estimate losses from widespread catastrophic events, such as hurricanes and earthquakes, as well as pandemics, using the traditional actuarial methods previously described. In the initial months after a catastrophic event occurs, our actuaries estimate losses and loss adjustment expenses based on claims received to date, detailed policy and reinsurance contract level reviews, industry loss estimates and output from both industry and proprietary models, as well as analysis of our ceded reinsurance contracts. The availability of data from these procedures varies depending on the timing of the event relative to the point at which we develop our estimate. We also consider loss experience on historical events that may have similar characteristics to the underlying event. Due to the inherent uncertainty in estimating such losses, these estimates are subject to variability, which increases with the severity and complexity of the underlying event. As additional claims are reported and paid, and industry loss estimates are revised, we incorporate this new information into our analysis and adjust our estimate of ultimate losses and loss adjustment expenses.
Each actuarial method has its own set of assumptions and its own strengths and limitations, with no one method being better than the others in all situations. Our actuaries select the reserving methods that they believe will produce the most reliable estimates for the class of business being evaluated. Greater judgment may be required when we introduce new product lines or when there have been changes in claims handling practices, as the statistical data available may be insufficient. In these
10K - 58
instances, we may rely upon assumptions applied to similar lines of business, rely more heavily on industry experience, take into account changes in underwriting guidelines and risk selection or review the impact of changes in claims reserving practices with claims personnel. While we use our best judgment in establishing our estimate for loss reserves, applying different assumptions and variables could lead to significantly different loss reserve estimates.
A key assumption in most actuarial analyses is that past development patterns will repeat themselves in the future, absent a significant change in internal or external factors that influence the ultimate cost of our unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses. Our estimates reflect implicit and explicit assumptions regarding the potential effects of external factors, including economic and social inflation, judicial decisions, changes in law, general economic conditions and recent trends in these factors. Our actuarial analyses are based on statistical analysis but also consist of reviewing internal factors that are difficult to analyze statistically, including underwriting and claims handling changes. In some of our markets, and where we act as a reinsurer, the timing and amount of information reported about underlying claims are in the control of third parties. This can also affect estimates and require re-estimation as new information becomes available.
Loss reserves are established at management's best estimate, which is generally higher than the corresponding actuarially calculated point estimate due to subjective factors where management's perspective may differ from that of the actuaries. The actuarial point estimate represents our actuaries' estimate of the most likely amount that will ultimately be paid to settle the losses that have occurred at a particular point in time; however, there is inherent uncertainty in the point estimate as it is the expected value in a range of possible reserve estimates. In some cases, actuarial analyses, which are based on statistical analysis, cannot fully incorporate all of the subjective factors that affect development of losses. In other cases, management's perspective of these more subjective factors may differ from the actuarial perspective. Subjective factors where management's perspective may differ from that of the actuaries include: the credibility and timeliness of claims information received from third parties, economic and social inflation, judicial decisions, changes in law, changes in underwriting or claims handling practices, general economic conditions, the risk of moral hazard and other current and developing trends within the insurance and reinsurance markets, including the effects of competition. As a result, the actuarially calculated point estimates for each of our lines of business represent starting points for management's quarterly review of loss reserves. Management also considers the range, or variability, of reasonably possible losses determined by our actuaries when establishing its best estimate for loss reserves. The actuarial ranges represent our actuaries' estimate of a likely lowest amount and likely highest amount that will ultimately be paid to settle the losses that have occurred at particular point in time. The range determinations are based on estimates and actuarial judgements and are intended to encompass reasonably likely changes in one or more of the factors that were used to determine the point estimates. Using statistical models, our actuaries establish high and low ends of a range of reasonable reserve estimates for each of our underwriting segments. Additionally, following an acquisition of insurance operations, to the extent the reserving philosophy of the acquired business is less conservative than our reserving philosophy, the percentage by which management's best estimate exceeds the actuarial point estimate will generally be lower until we build total loss reserves that are consistent with our historic level of confidence. Management's best estimate of net reserves for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses exceeded the actuarially calculated point estimate by $587.4 million, or 5.9%, at December 31, 2020, compared to $577.5 million, or 6.5%, at December 31, 2019.
The difference between management's best estimate and the actuarially calculated point estimate in both 2020 and 2019 is primarily associated with our long-tail business due to the subjective factors previously described that affect the development of losses and represent instances where management's perspectives may differ from those of our actuaries. Management has attributed less credibility than our actuaries to favorable trends experienced on our long-tail business and has not incorporated these favorable trends into its best estimate of ultimate losses to the same extent as the actuaries.
Loss frequency and loss severity are two key measures of loss activity that often result in adjustments to actuarial assumptions relative to ultimate loss reserve estimates. Loss frequency measures the number of claims per unit of insured exposure. When the number of newly reported claims is higher than anticipated, generally speaking, loss reserves are increased. Conversely, loss reserves are generally decreased when fewer claims are reported than expected. Loss severity measures the average size of a claim. When the average severity of reported claims is higher than originally estimated, loss reserves are typically increased. When the average claim size is lower than anticipated, loss reserves are typically decreased.
Our underwriting results in 2020 included $606.4 million of favorable development on prior years' loss reserves compared to $535.3 million in 2019. In connection with our quarterly reviews of loss reserves, the actuarial methods we used have exhibited a favorable trend, predominately for the 2016 to 2019 accident years, during 2020. This trend was observed using statistical analysis of actual loss experience for those years, particularly with regard to most of our long-tail books of business within the Insurance segment, which developed more favorably than we had expected. Additionally, as loss reserves are recorded at management's best estimate, which is generally higher than the corresponding actuarially calculated point estimate, the initial reserves established by management are more likely to be redundant than deficient. As actual losses continue to be
10K - 59
lower than anticipated, it has become more likely that the underwriting results will prove to be better than originally estimated. Additionally, as most actuarial methods rely upon historical reporting patterns, the favorable trends experienced on earlier accident years have resulted in a re-estimation of our ultimate incurred losses on more recent accident years. When we experience loss frequency or loss severity trends that are more favorable than we initially anticipated, we often evaluate the loss experience over a period of several years in order to assess the relative credibility of loss development trends. In both 2020 and 2019, based upon our evaluations of claims development patterns in our long-tail, and often volatile, lines of business, our actuaries reduced their estimates of ultimate losses. Management also gave greater credibility to the favorable trends experienced on earlier accident years and upon incorporating these favorable trends into its best estimate, we reduced prior years' loss reserves on more recent accident years accordingly. While we believe it is possible that there will be additional favorable development on prior years' loss reserves in 2021, we caution readers not to place undue reliance on this favorable trend.
Changes in prior years' loss reserves, including the trends and factors that impacted loss reserve development in 2020 and 2019 as well as further details regarding the historical development of reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses and changes in methodologies and assumptions used to calculate reserves for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expense are discussed in further detail in note 9 of the notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8.
The following table summarizes our reserves for net unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses and the actuarially established high and low ends of a range of reasonable reserve estimates at December 31, 2020. As described in note 9 of the notes to consolidated financial statements included under Item 8, unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses attributable to acquisitions are recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date, which generally consists of the present value of the expected net loss and loss adjustment expense payments plus a risk premium. The net loss reserves presented in this table represent our estimated future payments for losses and loss adjustment expenses, whereas the reserves for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses included on the consolidated balance sheet include the unamortized portion of fair value adjustments recorded in conjunction with an acquisition.
(1)Due to the actuarial methods used to determine the separate ranges for each component of our business, it is not appropriate to aggregate the high or low ends of the separate ranges to determine the high and low ends of the actuarial range on a consolidated basis.
Undue reliance should not be placed on these ranges of estimates as they are only one of many points of reference used by management to determine its best estimate of ultimate losses. Further, actuarial ranges may not be a true reflection of the potential variability between loss reserves estimated at the balance sheet date and the ultimate cost of settling claims. Actuarial ranges are developed based on known events as of the valuation date, while ultimate losses are subject to events and circumstances that are unknown as of the valuation date.
Over the past two years, we have experienced favorable development on prior years' loss reserves of 6% of beginning of year net loss reserves. It is difficult for management to predict the duration and magnitude of an existing trend and, on a relative basis, it is even more difficult to predict the emergence of factors or trends that are unknown today but may have a material impact on loss reserve development. In assessing the likelihood of whether the favorable trends previously discussed will continue and whether other trends may develop, we believe that a reasonably likely movement in prior years' loss reserves during 2021 would range from favorable development of less than 1%, or $100 million, to favorable development of approximately 6%, or $650 million, of December 31, 2020 net loss reserves. See "Developments Related to COVID-19" for further discussion of factors related to the pandemic that could impact our net loss reserve estimates.
Life and Annuity Benefits
We have a run-off block of life and annuity reinsurance contracts which subject us to mortality, longevity and morbidity risks. The related reserves are compiled by our actuaries on a reinsurance contract-by-contract basis and are computed on a discounted basis using standard actuarial techniques and cash flow models. Since the development of our life and annuity reinsurance reserves is based upon cash flow projection models, we must make estimates and assumptions based on cedent experience, industry mortality tables, and expense and investment experience, including a provision for adverse deviation. The assumptions used to determine policy benefit reserves are generally locked-in for the life of the contract unless an unlocking
10K - 60
event occurs. We review the adequacy of reserves for life and annuity reinsurance benefits quarterly. To the extent existing policy reserves, together with the present value of future gross premiums and expected investment income earned thereon, are not adequate to cover the present value of future benefits, settlement and maintenance costs, the locked-in assumptions are revised to current best estimate assumptions and a charge to earnings for life and annuity benefits is recognized at that time. Life and annuity benefits are also adjusted to the extent unrealized gains on the investments supporting the policy benefit reserves would result in a reserve deficiency if those gains were realized.
Our consolidated balance sheets included reserves for life and annuity benefits of $1.1 billion and $1.0 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During 2020 and 2019, we increased our reserves for life and annuity benefits by $68.2 million and $51.4 million, respectively, as a result of decreases in the market yield on the investment portfolio supporting the policy benefit reserves, and decreased the change in net unrealized holding gains included in other comprehensive income by corresponding amounts. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the cumulative adjustment to life and annuity benefits attributable to unrealized gains on the underlying investment portfolio totaled $119.6 million and $51.4 million, respectively.
Because of the assumptions and estimates used in establishing reserves for life and annuity benefit obligations and the long-term nature of these reinsurance contracts, the ultimate liability may be greater or less than the estimates. The average discount rate for the life and annuity benefit reserves was 2.3% as of December 31, 2020. The accretion of this discount is recognized in the statement of income and comprehensive income within services and other expenses. Invested assets and the related investment income that support the life and annuity reinsurance contracts are reported in the Investing segment. We expect the results from our life and annuity business will continue to reflect losses in future periods due to the accretion of the discount on the life and annuity benefit reserves, which are forecast to pay out over the next 40 to 50 years. Services and other revenues attributable to the life and annuity business represent ongoing premium adjustments on existing contracts.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 included goodwill and intangible assets of $4.4 billion as follows:
(1)Amounts included in Other reflect our operations that are not included in a reportable segment, including our insurance-linked securities operations and our program services operations.
Goodwill and intangible assets are recorded as a result of business acquisitions. Goodwill represents the excess of the amount paid to acquire a business over the net fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition. Indefinite-lived and other intangible assets are recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date. The determination of the fair value of certain assets acquired, including goodwill and intangible assets, and liabilities assumed involves significant judgment and the use of valuation models and other estimates, which require assumptions that are inherently subjective. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded $497.1 million and $232.0 million, respectively, of goodwill and intangible assets in connection with acquisitions.
Intangible assets with definite lives are reviewed for impairment when events or circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually, or when events or circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. A significant amount of judgment is required in performing impairment tests, including the optional assessment of qualitative factors for the annual impairment test, which is used to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. This assessment serves as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test.
We completed our annual tests for impairment as of October 1, 2020 based upon results of operations through September 30, 2020. We elected to perform a qualitative assessment for certain reporting units and performed a quantitative assessment for other reporting units.
When performing our qualitative assessments, we considered macroeconomic factors such as industry conditions and market conditions, which, for some of our reporting units, reflected significant impacts attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. We
10K - 61
also considered reporting unit-specific events, actual financial performance versus expectations and management's future business expectations, which, in some instances, were also affected by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the amount by which the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded its carrying value at the date of the last quantitative assessment. As part of our qualitative assessment of recently acquired reporting units with material goodwill, we considered the fact that the businesses had been acquired in orderly transactions between market participants, and our purchase price represented fair value at acquisition. For those recent acquisitions for which we elected to perform a qualitative assessment, there were no events since acquisition that had a significant adverse impact on the fair value of these reporting units through the assessment date. Based on the results of our qualitative assessments, we believe it is more likely than not that the fair value of each of these reporting units exceeded its respective carrying amount as of the assessment date and December 31, 2020 and none of these reporting units are at risk of a material impairment of goodwill. We considered similar factors to determine if there were any indicators requiring an assessment of the recoverability of our definite lived intangible assets and concluded there were not. However, a longer than anticipated recovery or further deterioration in market conditions related to the general economy or the specific industries in which we operate, a sustained trend of weaker than anticipated financial performance within a reporting unit beyond that which we considered or included in our assessments, or an increase in the market-based weighted average cost of capital, among other factors, could significantly impact the impairment analysis and may result in future goodwill or intangible asset impairment charges.
For those reporting units for which we used a quantitative approach to assess goodwill for impairment, we estimated the fair value primarily using an income approach based on a discounted cash flow model. The cash flow projections used in the discounted cash flow model included management's best estimate of future growth and margins. The discount rates used to determine the fair value estimates were developed based on a capital asset pricing model using market-based inputs as well as an assessment of the inherent risk in projected future cash flows. The estimated fair value of each of our reporting units for which we performed a quantitative analysis significantly exceeded its respective carrying amount as of the assessment date, except as discussed below. As there were no significant events or changes in circumstances impacting our reporting units between the assessment date and December 31, 2020, we also believe the estimated fair value of each of these reporting units significantly exceeded its respective carrying amount as of December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, the carrying value of our Nephila fund management reporting unit included goodwill of $401.9 million. This Nephila reporting unit serves as an insurance and investment fund manager that offers a broad range of investment products, including insurance-linked securities, catastrophe bonds, insurance swaps and weather derivatives. Nephila receives management fees for these services based on the net asset value of the accounts managed and, for certain funds, incentive fees based on the annual performance of the funds managed. This reporting unit is a component of our Nephila operations, which were acquired in late 2018 and recorded at fair value at that time. Given the limited time since acquisition, its carrying value continues to closely approximate fair value, making our impairment assessment more sensitive to changes in assumptions used to calculate fair value. Since acquiring this business in 2018, investment performance in the broader ILS market has been adversely impacted by consecutive years of elevated catastrophe losses and uncertainty around potential COVID-19 loss exposures. These events, as well as recent volatility in the capital markets, also have impacted investor decisions around allocation of capital to ILS, which in turn have impacted our assumptions for capital raises and redemptions within the funds we manage. Our cash flow assumptions for the Nephila fund management reporting unit reflect management's best estimate of the reporting unit's future cash flows, based on information currently available, however, these assumptions are inherently uncertain, require a high degree of estimation and judgment and are subject to change depending on the outcome of future events. Changes to these assumptions or an increase in the market-based weighted average cost of capital could have an adverse impact on the fair value of the Nephila fund management reporting unit, which could result in an impairment of goodwill.
See the risk factor titled "Impairment in the value of our goodwill or other intangible assets could have a material adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition" within Item 1A Risk Factors for further discussion of risks associated with our goodwill and intangible assets.
Safe Harbor and Cautionary Statement
This report contains statements concerning or incorporating our expectations, assumptions, plans, objectives, future financial or operating performance and other statements that are not historical facts. These statements are "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such statements may use words such as "anticipate," "believe," "estimate," "expect," "intend," "predict," "project" and similar expressions as they relate to us or our management.
There are risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from predicted results in forward-looking statements. Factors that may cause actual results to differ are often presented with the forward-looking statements themselves.
10K - 62
Additional factors that could cause actual results to differ from those predicted are set forth under Item 1 Business, Item 1A Risk Factors and Item 7 Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in this report or are included in the items listed below:
•current global economic, market and industry conditions, as well as significant volatility, uncertainty and disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, including governmental, legislative, judicial or regulatory actions or developments affecting our businesses;
•our expectations about future results of our underwriting, investing, Markel Ventures and other operations are based on current knowledge and assume no significant man-made or natural catastrophes, no significant changes in products or personnel and no adverse changes in market conditions;
•the effect of cyclical trends on our underwriting, investing, Markel Ventures and other operations, including demand and pricing in the insurance, reinsurance and other markets in which we operate;
•actions by competitors, including the use of technology and innovation to simplify the customer experience, increase efficiencies, redesign products, alter models and effect other potentially disruptive changes in the insurance industry, and the effect of competition on market trends and pricing;
•our efforts to develop new products, expand in targeted markets or improve business processes and workflows may not be successful and may increase or create new risks (e.g., insufficient demand, change to risk exposures, distribution channel conflicts, execution risk, increased expenditures);
•the frequency and severity of man-made and natural catastrophes (including earthquakes, wildfires and weather-related catastrophes) may exceed expectations, are unpredictable and, in the case of wildfires and weather-related catastrophes, may be exacerbated if, as many forecast, changing conditions in the oceans and atmosphere result in increased hurricane, flood, drought or other adverse weather-related activity;
•we offer insurance and reinsurance coverage against terrorist acts in connection with some of our programs, and in other instances we are legally required to offer terrorism insurance; in both circumstances, we actively manage our exposure, but if there is a covered terrorist attack, we could sustain material losses;
•emerging claim and coverage issues, changing legal and social trends, and inherent uncertainties in the loss estimation process can adversely impact the adequacy of our loss reserves and our allowance for reinsurance recoverables;
•reinsurance reserves are subject to greater uncertainty than insurance reserves, primarily because of reliance upon the original underwriting decisions made by ceding companies and the longer lapse of time from the occurrence of loss events to their reporting to the reinsurer for ultimate resolution;
•inaccuracies (whether due to data error, human error or otherwise) in the various modeling techniques and data analytics (e.g., scenarios, predictive and stochastic modeling, and forecasting) we use to analyze and estimate exposures, loss trends and other risks associated with our insurance and insurance-linked securities businesses could cause us to misprice our products or fail to appropriately estimate the risks to which we are exposed;
•changes in the assumptions and estimates used in establishing reserves for our life and annuity reinsurance book (which is in runoff), for example, changes in assumptions and estimates of mortality, longevity, morbidity and interest rates, could result in material increases in our estimated loss reserves for such business;
•adverse developments in insurance coverage litigation or other legal or administrative proceedings could result in material increases in our estimates of loss reserves;
•initial estimates for catastrophe losses are often based on limited information, are dependent on broad assumptions about the nature and extent of losses, coverage, liability and reinsurance, and those losses may ultimately differ materially from our expectations;
•changes in the availability, costs, quality and providers of reinsurance coverage, which may impact our ability to write or continue to write certain lines of business or to mitigate the volatility of losses on our results of operations and financial condition;
•the ability or willingness of reinsurers to pay balances due may be adversely affected by industry and economic conditions, deterioration in reinsurer credit quality and coverage disputes, and collateral we hold, if any, may not be sufficient to cover a reinsurer's obligation to us;
•after the commutation of ceded reinsurance contracts, any subsequent adverse development in the re-assumed loss reserves will result in a charge to earnings;
•regulatory actions can impede our ability to charge adequate rates and efficiently allocate capital;
10K - 63
•general economic and market conditions and industry specific conditions, including extended economic recessions or expansions; prolonged periods of slow economic growth; inflation or deflation; fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity and energy prices and interest rates; volatility in the credit and capital markets; and other factors;
•economic conditions, actual or potential defaults in corporate bonds, municipal bonds, mortgage-backed securities or sovereign debt obligations, volatility in interest and foreign currency exchange rates and changes in market value of concentrated investments can have a significant impact on the fair value of our fixed maturity securities and equity securities, as well as the carrying value of our other assets and liabilities, and this impact may be heightened by market volatility and our ability to mitigate our sensitivity to these changing conditions;
•economic conditions may adversely affect our access to capital and credit markets;
•the effects of government intervention, including material changes in the monetary policies of central banks, to address financial downturns and economic and currency concerns;
•the impacts that political and civil unrest and regional conflicts may have on our businesses and the markets they serve or that any disruptions in regional or worldwide economic conditions generally arising from these situations may have on our businesses, industries or investments;
•the impacts that health epidemics and pandemics, including the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as actions of local, state and federal authorities in response thereto, may have on our business operations and claims activity;
•the impact on our businesses in the event of a repeal, in part or in whole, or modification of U.S. health care reform legislation and regulations;
•changes in U.S. tax laws, regulations or interpretations, or in the tax laws, regulations or interpretations of other jurisdictions in which we operate, and adjustments we may make in our operations or tax strategies in response to those changes;
•a failure or security breach of enterprise information technology systems that we use or a failure to comply with data protection or privacy regulations;
•outsourced providers may perform poorly, breach their obligations to us or expose us to enhanced risks;
•our acquisitions may increase our operational and internal control risks for a period of time;
•we may not realize the contemplated benefits, including cost savings and synergies, of our acquisitions;
•any determination requiring the write-off of a significant portion of our goodwill and intangible assets;
•the failure or inadequacy of any methods we employ to manage our loss exposures;
•the loss of services of any executive officer or other key personnel could adversely impact one or more of our operations;
•the manner in which we manage our global operations through a network of business entities could result in inconsistent management, governance and oversight practices and make it difficult for us to implement strategic decisions and coordinate procedures;
•our substantial international operations and investments expose us to increased political, civil, operational and economic risks, including foreign currency exchange rate and credit risk;
•the political, legal, regulatory, financial, tax and general economic impacts, and other impacts we cannot anticipate, related to the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the European Union (Brexit), which could have adverse consequences for our businesses, particularly our London-based international insurance operations;
•our ability to obtain additional capital for our operations on terms favorable to us;
•our compliance, or failure to comply, with covenants and other requirements under our revolving credit facility, senior debt and other indebtedness and our preferred shares;
•our ability to maintain or raise third party capital for existing or new investment vehicles and risks related to our management of third party capital;
•the effectiveness of our procedures for compliance with existing and future guidelines, policies and legal and regulatory standards, rules, laws and regulations;
•the impact of economic and trade sanctions and embargo programs on our businesses, including instances in which the requirements and limitations applicable to the global operations of U.S. companies and their affiliates are more restrictive than, or conflict with, those applicable to non-U.S. companies and their affiliates;
10K - 64
•regulatory changes, or challenges by regulators, regarding the use of certain issuing carrier or fronting arrangements;
•our dependence on a limited number of brokers for a large portion of our revenues and third-party capital;
•adverse changes in our assigned financial strength, debt or preferred share ratings or outlook could adversely impact us, including our ability to attract and retain business, the amount of capital our insurance subsidiaries must hold and the availability and cost of capital;
•changes in the amount of statutory capital our insurance subsidiaries are required to hold, which can vary significantly and is based on many factors, some of which are outside our control;
•losses from litigation and regulatory investigations and actions; and
•a number of additional factors may adversely affect our Markel Ventures operations, and the markets they serve, and negatively impact their revenues and profitability, including, among others: adverse weather conditions, plant disease and other contaminants; changes in government support for education, healthcare and infrastructure projects; changes in capital spending levels; changes in the housing and commercial construction markets; liability for environmental matters; volatility in the market prices for their products; and volatility in commodity prices and interest and foreign currency exchange rates.
Results from our underwriting, investing, Markel Ventures and other operations have been and will continue to be potentially materially affected by these factors. In addition, with respect to previously reported developments at Markel CATCo and the decision to place both the Markel CATCo Reinsurance Fund Ltd., a Bermuda exempted mutual fund company comprised of multiple segregated accounts, and Markel CATCo Re Ltd. (Markel CATCo Re) into run-off:
•the inquiries by the U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and Bermuda Monetary Authority into loss reserves recorded in late 2017 and early 2018 at Markel CATCo Re (the Markel CATCo Inquiries) may result in adverse findings, reputational damage, the imposition of sanctions, increased costs, litigation and other negative consequences; and
•management time and resources may be diverted to address the Markel CATCo Inquiries, as well as related litigation.
By making forward-looking statements, we do not intend to become obligated to publicly update or revise any such statements whether as a result of new information, future events or other changes. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements, which speak only as at their dates.