Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, or MD&A, describes principal factors affecting the results of our operations, financial condition and liquidity, as well as our critical accounting policies and estimates that require significant judgment and thus have the most significant potential impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. This section provides an analysis of our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. For the discussion and analysis covering the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, please refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
Overview
We are a global provider of instruments, systems, subsystems and process control solutions that measure, monitor, deliver, analyze, power and control critical parameters of advanced manufacturing processes to improve process performance and productivity for our customers. Our products are derived from our core competencies in pressure measurement and control, flow measurement and control, gas and vapor delivery, gas composition analysis, electronic control technology, reactive gas generation and delivery, power generation and delivery, vacuum technology, lasers, photonics, optics, precision motion control, vibration control and laser-based manufacturing systems solutions. We also provide services relating to the maintenance and repair of our products, installation services and training. Our primary served markets include semiconductor, industrial technologies, life and health sciences, research and defense.
Recent Events
Impact of COVID-19
The World Health Organization formally declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a pandemic in March 2020. We have devoted considerable resources to address the impact of the pandemic on our employees and their families, our customers and our community, as well as on our business, which has had to adapt to changes in our manufacturing capacity, disruptions to our supply chain, fluctuations in demand for our products and services and the imposition of government mandates.
In January 2020, we created a global COVID-19 task force to manage our response to the pandemic, as it had begun to impact our operations in China and in anticipation that it could affect us globally. As described in additional detail in “Human Capital-Health and Safety and Pandemic Response” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we have taken a range of actions to protect our employees and maintain our operations, focusing on the following key areas:
Ensuring the health and safety of our workforce by:
•
Expediting social distancing and facility sanitation measures
•
Establishing a work-from-home policy and a return-to-work policy
•
Implementing and applying key safety precautions
Maintaining continuity of operations by:
•
Securing critical components amid disruptions to our supply chain
•
Addressing rapid changes in workforce availability to ensure timely response to our customers’ needs
•
Harnessing our global services footprint to respond to the repair and maintenance needs of our customers
While our operations and financial performance in certain areas of our business have been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the negative impact on our financial results for year ended December 31, 2020 was minimal due to strong demand for our products from our semiconductor customers. Beginning in late 2020 and continuing into 2021, various countries, including the United States, started providing vaccines for COVID-19. Although this is a positive step in combating the virus, it is unclear if or when the global vaccination rate will reach a point of collective immunity and reduce the transmission rate of the virus. The situation remains dynamic and there remains significant uncertainty as to the length and severity of the pandemic, the continued actions that may be taken by government authorities, the impact on our business and on the business of our customers and suppliers, the long-term economic implications and the other factors identified in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe the longer the COVID-19 pandemic continues, the greater the adverse impact the pandemic could have on our business, financial condition and operating results. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to our business, financial condition and operating results.
Acquisitions
On February 1, 2019, we completed our acquisition of ESI. At the effective time of the ESI Merger and pursuant to the terms and conditions of the merger agreement, each share of ESI’s common stock that was issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the ESI Merger was converted into the right to receive $30.00 in cash, without interest and subject to deduction of any required withholding tax. We paid the former ESI stockholders aggregate consideration of approximately $1.03 billion, excluding related transaction fees and expenses, and non-cash consideration related to the exchange of share-based awards of approximately $31 million for a total purchase consideration of approximately $1.06 billion. We funded the payment of the aggregate cash consideration with a combination of our available cash on hand and the proceeds from our 2019 Incremental Term Loan Facility, as defined and as described further below.
Segments and Markets
The Vacuum & Analysis segment provides a broad range of instruments, components and subsystems which are derived from our core competencies in pressure measurement and control, flow measurement and control, gas and vapor delivery, gas composition analysis, electronic control technology, reactive gas generation and delivery, power generation and delivery, and vacuum technology.
The Light & Motion segment was created in conjunction with the Newport Merger. The Light & Motion segment provides a broad range of instruments, components and subsystems which are derived from our core competencies in lasers, photonics, optics, precision motion control and vibration control.
The Equipment & Solutions segment was created in conjunction with the ESI Merger. The Equipment & Solutions segment provides a range of products including laser-based systems for PCB manufacturing, which include flexible interconnect PCB processing systems and high-density interconnect solutions for rigid PCB manufacturing and substrate processing and MLCC test systems.
Semiconductor Market
A significant portion of our sales is derived from products sold to semiconductor capital equipment manufacturers and semiconductor device manufacturers. Our products are used in major semiconductor processing steps, such as depositing thin films of material onto silicon wafer substrates, etching, cleaning, lithography, metrology and inspection.
Approximately 59% and 49% of our net revenues for the years 2020 and 2019, respectively, were from sales to semiconductor capital equipment manufacturers and semiconductor device manufacturers.
We anticipate that the semiconductor market will continue to account for a substantial portion of our sales. While the semiconductor device manufacturing market is global, major semiconductor capital equipment manufacturers are concentrated in China, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and the United States.
Net revenues in our semiconductor market increased by $457.4 million, or 49%, in 2020, compared to 2019, with volume increases in net semiconductor revenues of $436.2 million and $23.8 million in the Vacuum & Analysis and Light & Motion segments, respectively. These increases were a function of strong demand for semiconductor capital equipment across memory, foundry and logic manufacturing applications. The semiconductor capital equipment industry is subject to rapid demand shifts, which are difficult to predict, and we cannot be certain as to the timing or extent of future demand or any future weakness in the semiconductor capital equipment industry.
Advanced Markets
In addition to the semiconductor market, our products are used in the industrial technologies, life and health sciences, research and defense markets.
Industrial Technologies
Industrial technologies encompasses a wide range of diverse applications, such as flexible and rigid PCB processing/fabrication, glass coating, laser marking, measurement and scribing, natural gas and oil production, environmental monitoring and electronic thin films. Electronic thin films are a primary component of numerous electronic products including flat panel displays, light emitting diodes, solar cells and data storage media. Industrial technologies manufacturers are located in developed and developing countries across the globe.
Life and Health Sciences
Our products for life and health sciences are used in a diverse array of applications, including bioimaging, medical instrument sterilization, medical device manufacturing, analytical, diagnostic and surgical instrumentation, consumable medical supply manufacturing and pharmaceutical production. Our life and health sciences customers are located globally.
Research and Defense
Our products for research and defense are sold to government, university and industrial laboratories for applications involving research and development in materials science, physical chemistry, photonics, optics and electronics materials. Our products are also sold for monitoring and defense applications including surveillance, imaging and infrastructure protection. Major equipment providers and research laboratories are concentrated in China, Europe, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and the United States.
Approximately 41% and 51% of our net revenues in the years 2020 and 2019, respectively, were from advanced markets.
Net revenues from customers in our advanced markets decreased by $27.2 million, or 3%, in 2020, compared to 2019, with decreases of $59.8 million and $20.8 million from our Light & Motion and Vacuum & Analysis segments, respectively, offset by an increase of $53.4 million from our Equipment & Solutions segment. Revenues from our research and defense market were adversely affected by COVID-19 related university and research laboratory closures in the first half of 2020. Revenues from our life and health sciences market was impacted by a reduction in elective medical procedures. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in revenues from our industrial technologies market, primarily within the Equipment & Solutions segment.
International Markets
A significant portion of our net revenues is from sales to customers in international markets. International net revenues accounted for approximately 55% and 53% of our total net revenues in 2020 and 2019, respectively. A significant portion of our international net revenues was from China, Germany, Israel, Japan and South Korea. We expect international net revenues will continue to represent a significant percentage of our total net revenues for the foreseeable future. In particular, we expect that the proportion of our sales to Asian customers will continue to increase, due in large part to our acquisition in February 2019 of ESI, as most of the customers we inherited from the acquisition are located in Asia. Long-lived assets located outside of the United States accounted for approximately 28% and 39% of our total long-lived assets in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Long-lived assets include, property, plant and equipment, net, right-of-use assets, and certain other assets and exclude goodwill, intangible assets and long-term tax-related accounts. Long-lived assets located outside of the United States decreased as a percentage of total long-lived assets in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to an increase in right-of-use assets from new leases in the United States in 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The MD&A discusses our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, pension plan valuations, inventory, warranty costs, stock-based compensation expense, intangible assets, goodwill and other long-lived assets, in-process research and development and income taxes. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect the most significant judgments, assumptions and estimates we use in preparing our consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition. We account for revenue using Accounting Standards Codification 606 (“ASC 606”). We apply ASC 606 using the following steps:
•
Identify the contract with a customer
•
Identify the performance obligations in the contract
•
Determine the transaction price
•
Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract
•
Recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation
Revenue under ASC 606 is recognized when or as obligations under the terms of a contract with our customer has been satisfied and control has transferred to the customer. The majority of our performance obligations, and associated revenue, are transferred to customers at a point in time, generally upon shipment of a product to the customer or receipt of the product by the customer and without significant judgments. Installation services are not significant and are usually completed in a short period of time (normally less than two weeks) and therefore, recorded at a point in time when the installation services are completed, rather than over time as they are not material. Extended warranty, service contracts, and repair services, which are transferred to the customer over time, are recorded as revenue as the services are performed. For repair services, we make an accrual at each quarter end based upon historical repair times within our product groups to record revenue based upon the estimated number of days completed to date, which is consistent with ratable recognition. Customized products with no alternative future use to us, and that have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date, are also recorded over time. We consider this to be a faithful depiction of the transfer to the customer of revenue over time as the work is performed or service is delivered, ratably over time. The adjustments for custom products were not material for 2020 or 2019.
Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Performance obligations promised in a contract are identified based on the products or services that will be transferred to the customer that are both capable of being distinct, whereby the customer can benefit from the product or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available from third parties or from us, and are distinct in the context of the contract, whereby the transfer of the product or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. Sales, value add, and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. Our normal payment terms are 30 to 60 days but vary by the type and location of our customers and the products or services offered. The time between invoicing and when payment is due is not significant. For certain products and services and customer types, we require payment before the products or services are delivered to, or performed for, the customer. None of our contracts as of December 31, 2020 contained a significant financing component.
We periodically enter into contracts with our customers in which a customer may purchase a combination of goods and or services, such as products with installation services or extended warranty obligations. These contracts include multiple promises that we evaluate to determine if the promises are separate performance obligations. Once we determine the performance obligations, we then determine the transaction price, which includes estimating the amount of variable consideration to be included in the transaction price, if any. To the extent the transaction price includes variable consideration, we estimate the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price utilizing either the expected value method or the most likely amount method depending on the method we expect to better predict the amount of consideration to which it will be entitled. There are no constraints on the variable consideration recorded. We then allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract based on a relative stand-alone selling price charged separately to customers or using an expected cost-plus margin method. The corresponding revenues are recognized when or as the related performance obligations are satisfied, which are noted above. The impact of variable consideration has been immaterial.
We sometimes sell separately-priced service contracts and extended warranty contracts related to certain of our products, especially our laser products. The separately priced contracts generally range from 12 to 60 months. We normally receive payment at the inception of the contract or beginning of an annual period and recognize revenue over the term of the agreement in proportion to the costs expected to be incurred in satisfying the obligations under the contract.
We monitor and track the amount of product returns, provide for sales return allowances and reduce revenue at the time of shipment for the estimated amount of such future returns, based on historical experience. While product returns have historically been within our expectations and the provisions established, there is no assurance that we will continue to experience the same return rates that we have in the past. Any significant increase in product return rates could have a material adverse impact on our operating results for the period or periods in which such returns materialize.
While we maintain a credit approval process, significant judgments are made by management in connection with assessing our customers’ ability to pay at the time of shipment. Despite this assessment, from time to time, our customers are unable to meet their payment obligations. We continuously monitor our customers’ credit worthiness, and use our judgment in establishing a provision for estimated credit losses based upon our historical experience and any specific customer collection issues that we have identified. While such credit losses have historically been within our expectations and the provisions established, there is no assurance that we will continue to experience the same credit loss rates that we have in the past. A
significant change in the liquidity or financial position of our customers could have a material adverse impact on the collectability of accounts receivable and our future operating results. Bad debt expense was immaterial in 2020 and 2019.
Inventory. We value our inventory at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out method) or market. We regularly review inventory quantities on hand and record a provision to write-down excess and obsolete inventory to its estimated net realizable value, if less than cost, based primarily on our estimated forecast of product demand. Once our inventory value is written-down and a new cost basis has been established, the inventory value is not increased due to demand increases. Demand for our products can fluctuate significantly. A significant increase in the demand for our products could result in a short-term increase in the cost of inventory purchases as a result of supply shortages or a decrease in the cost of inventory purchases as a result of volume discounts, while a significant decrease in demand could result in an increase in the charges for excess inventory quantities on hand. In addition, our industry is subject to technological change, new product development and product technological obsolescence that could result in an increase in the amount of obsolete inventory quantities on hand. Therefore, any significant unanticipated changes in demand or technological developments could have a significant impact on the value of our inventory and our reported operating results. Excess and obsolete expense was $24.8 million and $24.7 million for 2020 and 2019 respectively.
Warranty Costs. We provide for the estimated costs to fulfill customer warranty obligations upon the recognition of the related revenue. We provide warranty coverage for our products for periods ranging from 12 to 36 months, with the majority of our products for periods ranging from 12 to 24 months. Short-term accrued warranty obligations, which expire within one year, are included in other current liabilities and long-term accrued warranty obligations are included in other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. We estimate the anticipated costs of repairing our products under such warranties based on the historical costs of the repairs and any known specific product issues. The assumptions we use to estimate warranty accruals are re-evaluated periodically in light of actual experience and, when appropriate, the accruals are adjusted. Our determination of the appropriate level of warranty accrual is based upon estimates. Should product failure rates differ from our estimates, actual costs could vary significantly from our expectations. Defective products will be either repaired or replaced, generally at our option, upon meeting certain criteria.
Pension Plans. Several of our non-U.S. subsidiaries have defined benefit pension plans covering employees of those subsidiaries. Some of the plans are unfunded, as permitted under the plans and applicable laws. For financial reporting purposes, the calculation of net periodic pension costs was based upon a number of actuarial assumptions, including a discount rate for plan obligations, an assumed rate of return on pension plan assets and an assumed rate of compensation increase for employees covered by the plan. All of these assumptions were based upon our judgment, considering all known trends and uncertainties. Actual results that differ from these assumptions would impact future expense recognition and the cash funding requirements of our pension plans.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense. We record compensation expense for all stock-based compensation awards to employees and directors based upon the estimated fair market value of the underlying instrument. Accordingly, stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based upon the fair value of the award.
We typically issue restricted stock units (“RSUs”) as stock-based compensation. We assumed certain stock appreciation rights (“SARs”) as a result of the Newport Merger and the ESI Merger. We also provide employees the opportunity to purchase our shares through an Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”). For RSUs, the fair value is the closing market price of the stock on the date of grant. We estimate the fair value of SARs and shares issued under our ESPP using the Black-Scholes pricing model, which is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. These variables include our expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, expected life, risk free interest rate and expected dividends. Management determined that blended volatility, a combination of historical and implied volatility, is more reflective of market conditions and a better indicator of expected volatility than historical or implied volatility alone.
Certain RSUs involve stock to be issued upon the achievement of performance conditions (“performance shares”) under our stock incentive plans. Such performance shares become available, subject to time-based vesting conditions if, and to the extent that, financial performance criteria for the applicable period are achieved. Accordingly, the number of performance shares earned will vary based on the level of achievement of financial performance objectives for the applicable period. Until such time that our financial performance can ultimately be determined, each quarter we estimate the number of performance shares to be earned based on an evaluation of the probability of achieving the financial performance objectives. Such estimates are revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods when the underlying factors change our evaluation of the probability of achieving the financial performance objectives. Accordingly, share-based compensation expense associated with performance shares may differ significantly from the amount recorded in the current period.
As part of the Newport Merger in 2016 and the ESI Merger in 2019, we assumed all SARs granted under any Newport equity plan or ESI equity plan, whether vested or unvested, that were outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the Newport Merger and the ESI Merger. For SARs, the converted number of shares, fair value, vesting schedule and expiration dates are all based on the original grant date information. The stock-based compensation expense reflects the remaining fair value for all unvested SARs as of the acquisition dates, recognized over the remaining time to vest.
The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based compensation awards represents management’s best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Intangible Assets, Goodwill and Other Long-Lived Assets. As a result of our acquisitions, we have identified intangible assets and generated significant goodwill. Definite-lived intangible assets are valued based on estimates of future cash flows and amortized over their estimated useful life. Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgment, including assumptions about appropriate discount rates as well as forecasted revenue, gross profit and operating margins.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are subject to annual impairment testing as well as testing upon the occurrence of any event that indicates a potential impairment. Intangible assets and other long-lived assets are also subject to an impairment test if there is an indicator of impairment. If our expectations of future results and cash flows are significantly diminished, intangible assets and goodwill may be impaired and the resulting charge to operations may be material. When we determine that the carrying value of intangibles or other long-lived assets may not be recoverable based upon the existence of one or more indicators of impairment, we use the projected undiscounted cash flow method to determine whether an impairment exists, and then measure the impairment using discounted cash flows. To measure impairment for goodwill, we compare the fair value of our reporting units by measuring discounted cash flows to the book value of the reporting units. Goodwill would be impaired if the resulting implied fair value was less than the recorded book value of the goodwill.
The estimation of useful lives and expected cash flows require us to make significant judgments regarding future periods that are subject to some factors outside of our control. Changes in these estimates can result in significant revisions to the carrying value of these assets and may result in material charges to the results of operations.
We have elected to perform our annual goodwill impairment test as of October 31 of each year, or more often if events or circumstances indicate that there may be impairment. Goodwill is the amount by which the cost of acquired net assets exceeded the fair value of those net assets on the date of acquisition. We allocate goodwill to reporting units at the time of acquisition or when there is a change in the reporting structure and base that allocation on which reporting units will benefit from the acquired assets and liabilities. Reporting units are defined as operating segments or one level below an operating segment, referred to as a component. The estimated fair value of our reporting units was based on discounted cash flow models derived from internal earnings and internal and external market forecasts. Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgment, including assumptions about appropriate discount and perpetual growth rates, as well as forecasted revenue growth rates and gross profit and operating margins. Discount rates are based on a weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”), which represents the average rate a business must pay its providers of debt and equity. The WACC used to test goodwill is derived from a group of comparable companies. Assumptions in estimating future cash flows are subject to a high degree of judgment and complexity. We make every effort to forecast these future cash flows as accurately as possible with the information available at the time the forecast is developed.
In performing our annual goodwill impairment test, we are permitted to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. In performing the qualitative assessment, we consider certain events and circumstances specific to the reporting unit and to the entity as a whole, such as macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, overall financial performance and cost factors when evaluating whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. We are also permitted to bypass the qualitative assessment and proceed directly to the quantitative test. If we choose to undertake the qualitative assessment and we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we would then proceed to the quantitative impairment test. In the quantitative assessment, we compare the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount, which includes goodwill. If the fair value exceeds the carrying value, no impairment loss exists. If the fair value is less than the carrying amount, a goodwill impairment loss is measured and recorded.
As of October 31, 2020, we performed our annual impairment assessment of goodwill using a qualitative assessment for all of the reporting units within the Vacuum & Analysis and Light & Motion segments. We determined that it was more likely than not that the fair values were more than the carrying values for each of the reporting units within these segments. The Equipment & Solutions segment consists of one reporting unit. As of October 31, 2020, we performed our annual impairment assessment of goodwill for this reporting unit using a quantitative assessment and determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of this reporting unit exceeded its carrying amount.
For the quantitative assessment for the Equipment & Solutions reporting unit, we estimated that the fair value exceeded its carrying value by 10%. The Equipment & Solutions goodwill amount is $474.3 million and $474.9 million as of October 31, 2020 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Key assumptions in the goodwill impairment valuation model are forecasted revenues based upon external and internal data, gross margin and operating expense estimates, discount rate and terminal growth rate. A change in any of these key assumptions could result in this reporting unit being impaired in the future.
We will continue to monitor and evaluate the carrying value of goodwill. If market and economic conditions or business performance deteriorate, this could increase the likelihood of us recording an impairment charge.
Income Taxes. We evaluate the realizability of our net deferred tax assets and assess the need for a valuation allowance on a quarterly basis. The future benefit to be derived from our deferred tax assets is dependent upon our ability to generate sufficient future taxable income in each jurisdiction of the right type to realize the assets. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our net deferred tax assets to the amount that is expected to be realized. To the extent we establish a valuation allowance an expense is recorded within the provision for income taxes line in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income.
Accounting for income taxes requires a two-step approach to recognize and measure uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if, based on the technical merits, it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon audit, including resolutions of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We re-evaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, effectively settled issues under audit and new audit activity. Any change in these factors could result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the tax provision.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, the percentage of total net revenues of certain line items included in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income data:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019
Net Revenues
Net product revenues increased $403.5 million in 2020, compared to 2019, due to an increase of $437.1 million in net product revenues from our semiconductor customers, primarily due to higher volume increases that were a function of strong demand for semiconductor capital equipment across memory, foundry and logic manufacturing applications, partially offset by a decrease of $33.6 million in net product revenues from customers in our advanced markets.
Net service revenues consisted mainly of fees for services related to the maintenance and repair of our products, sales of spare parts, and installation and training. Service revenues increased $26.7 million in 2020, compared to 2019, due to an increase of $20.3 million in net service revenues from our semiconductor customers and an increase of $6.4 million in net service revenues from customers in our advanced markets.
Total international net revenues, including product and service, were $1.3 billion in 2020 compared to $1.0 billion for 2019. The increase in 2020 was primarily due to increases in net revenues in China, Germany, Israel, Japan and South Korea.
The following table sets forth our net revenues by reportable segment:
Net Revenues
Net revenues for our Vacuum & Analysis segment increased $415.4 million in 2020, compared to 2019, due to a volume increase of $436.2 million from our semiconductor customers, offset by a decrease of $20.8 million from our advanced market customers, primarily from customers in our industrial technologies market.
Net revenues for our Light & Motion segment decreased $36.0 million in 2020, compared to 2019, due to a decrease of $59.8 million from our advanced market customers, primarily from customers in our industrial technologies market, offset by an increase of $23.8 million from our semiconductor customers.
Net revenues from our Equipment & Solutions segment increased $50.8 million in 2020, compared to 2019, due to an increase of $53.4 million from our advanced market customers, primarily from an increase of $52.9 from customers in our industrial technologies market.
The following table sets forth gross profit as a percentage of net revenues by product and service:
Gross Profit
Gross profit as a percentage of net product revenues increased by 1.8 percentage points in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to higher revenue volumes, partially offset by unfavorable product mix and higher variable compensation.
Gross profit as a percentage of net service revenues decreased by 1.3 percentage points in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to lower utilization of service technicians and higher variable compensation, partially offset by favorable product mix.
The following table sets forth gross profit as a percentage of net revenues by reportable segment:
Gross Profit
Gross profit as a percentage of net revenues for our Vacuum & Analysis segment increased by 2.1 percentage points in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to higher revenue volumes, partially offset by higher variable compensation.
Gross profit as a percentage of net revenues for our Light & Motion segment decreased by 1.5 percentage points in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to lower revenue volumes, unfavorable product mix and higher variable compensation.
Gross profit as a percentage of net revenues for our Equipment & Solutions segment for 2019, includes the inventory step-up adjustment to fair value from purchase accounting of $7.6 million related to the ESI Merger. Excluding this adjustment, the gross margin for 2019 would have been 40.7%. The remaining increase in gross margin in 2020 was the result of higher revenue volumes and improved overhead absorption.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased $9.0 million in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to an increase of $12.1 million in compensation-related costs and $1.5 million in professional fees, partially offset by a decrease of $4.1 million in project materials.
Our research and development efforts are primarily focused on developing and improving our instruments, components, subsystems, process control and systems solutions to improve process performance and productivity.
We have thousands of products and our research and development efforts primarily consist of a large number of projects related to these products, none of which is individually material to us. Current projects typically have durations of 3 to 30 months, depending upon whether the product is an enhancement of existing technology or a new product. Our products have continuously advanced as we strive to meet our customers’ evolving needs. We have developed, and continue to develop, new products to address industry trends, such as the shrinking of integrated circuit critical dimensions and technology inflections, and, in the flat panel display and solar markets, the transition to larger substrate sizes, which require more advanced processing and process control technology, the continuing drive toward more complex and accurate components and devices within the handset and tablet market, the transition to 5G for both devices and infrastructure, supporting the growth in units and via counts of the High Density Interconnect PCB drilling market, and the industry transition to electric cars in the automotive market. In addition, we have developed, and continue to develop, products that support the migration to new classes of materials, ultra-thin layers, and 3D structures that are used in small geometry manufacturing. Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and related expenses for personnel engaged in research and development, fees paid to consultants, material costs for prototypes and other expenses related to the design, development, testing and enhancement of our products.
We believe that the continued investment in research and development and ongoing development of new products are essential to the expansion of our markets. We expect to continue to make significant investment in research and development activities. We are subject to risks from products not being developed in a timely manner, as well as from rapidly changing customer requirements and competitive threats from other companies and technologies. Our success primarily depends on our products being designed into new generations of equipment for the semiconductor industry and advanced technology markets. We develop products that are technologically advanced so that they are positioned to be chosen for use in each successive generation of semiconductor capital equipment and advanced market applications. If our products are not chosen to be designed into our customers’ products, our net revenues may be reduced during the lifespan of those products.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $22.8 million during 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to an increase of $30.3 million in compensation-related costs, of which $16.9 million was variable compensation, $3.1 million in information technology costs and $2.0 million in professional fees, partially offset by decreases of $9.2 million in travel costs and $1.5 million of marketing and trade show costs, mainly as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and a decrease of $1.1 million in occupancy costs.
Acquisition and Integration Costs
Acquisition and integration costs incurred during 2020 and 2019 related to the ESI Merger, which closed on February 1, 2019. In 2020, costs consisted of cash bonus and stock-based compensation for certain ESI executives assisting in the integration process. In 2019, costs consisted primarily of compensation costs for certain executives from ESI who had change in control provisions in their respective ESI employment agreements that were accounted for as dual-trigger arrangements and other stock vesting accelerations and consulting and professional fees associated with the ESI Merger.
Restructuring and other
In 2020, restructuring and other charges primarily consisted of duplicate facility costs attributed to entering into new facility leases, costs related to the exit of certain product groups and costs related to the pending closure of a facility in Europe. Such costs were offset by an insurance reimbursement related to a legal settlement.
In 2019, restructuring and other charges primarily consisted of severance costs related to an organization-wide reduction in workforce, the consolidation of service functions in Asia, the movement of certain products to lower cost regions and costs incurred from the closure of a facility in Europe. In addition, we recorded a charge for a legal settlement from a contractual obligation we assumed as part of the Newport Merger.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets decreased by $12.2 million in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to certain intangible assets in our Light & Motion segment that became fully amortized.
Asset Impairment
In 2020, we recorded impairment charges related to the pending closure of a facility in Europe, of which $1.2 million related to the impairment of long-lived assets and $1.1 million related to the impairment of goodwill.
In 2019, we recorded $4.7 million of impairment charges related to a minority interest investment in a private company.
COVID-19 Related Net Credits
In 2020, we recorded costs and credits related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which related to U.S. and foreign payroll tax-related credits for maintaining our workforce during the pandemic, offset by costs, which included shift premiums and bonuses.
Fees and Expenses Related to Repricing of Term Loan Facility
In 2019, we recorded fees and expenses related to Amendment No. 6 to our Term Loan Credit Agreement, as defined and as described further below, which included the fifth repricing of our Term Loan Facility, as defined and as described further below, and a consolidation of the two existing tranches into one tranche with a maturity date in February 2026. We also recorded fees and expenses related to Amendment No. 5 to our Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Gain on Sale of Long-Lived Assets
In 2019, we recorded a net gain on the sale of two properties in Boulder, Colorado and three properties in Portland, Oregon.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net, decreased by $11.0 million in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to lower interest expense as a result of lower interest rates and lower average debt balances as a result of a prepayment of $50.0 million made during the first quarter of 2020 and regularly scheduled principal payments made during each quarter of 2020.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net for 2020 and 2019 primarily related to changes in foreign exchange rates.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rates for the years 2020 and 2019 were 17.2% and 21.1%, respectively. Our 2020 effective tax rate was lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate, mainly due to the geographic mix of income earned by the international subsidiaries being taxed at rates lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate, the deduction for foreign derived intangible income and research credit offset by the tax effects of non-deductible executive compensation and the global intangible low taxed income inclusion.
Our 2019 effective tax rate was higher than the U.S. statutory tax rate due to the global intangible low taxed income inclusion, the tax effects of non-deductible executive compensation and gain on intercompany sale of assets, offset by the deduction for foreign derived intangible income, the geographic mix of income earned by our international subsidiaries being taxed at rates lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate and the impact of various tax credits.
As of December 31, 2020, the total gross unrecognized tax benefits, which excludes interest and penalties, was $47.0 million. As of December 31, 2019, the total gross unrecognized tax benefits, which excludes interest and penalties, was $43.5 million. The net increase was primarily attributable to the addition of a reserve related to executive compensation, partially offset by a release of income tax reserves related to the expiration of statutes of limitations.
We accrue interest and, if applicable, penalties for any uncertain tax positions. Interest and penalties are classified as a component of income tax expense. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we accrued interest on unrecognized tax benefits of approximately $0.7 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
Over the next 12 months, it is reasonably possible that we may recognize approximately $4.3 million of previously net unrecognized tax benefits, excluding interest and penalties, related to various U.S. federal, state and foreign tax positions primarily due to the expiration of statutes of limitations.
We are subject to examination by U.S. federal, state and foreign tax authorities. The U.S. federal statute of limitations remains open for tax years 2017 through the present. The statute of limitations for our tax filings in other jurisdictions varies between fiscal years 2015 through present. We also have certain federal credit carry-forwards and state tax loss and credit carry-forwards that are open to examination for tax years 2000 through the present.
In 2020, we recorded a net benefit to income tax expense of $1.3 million, excluding interest and penalties, due to reserve releases related to the expiration of certain statutes of limitations for previously open tax years. In 2019, we recorded a net benefit to income tax expense of $1.7 million, excluding interest and penalties, due to reserve releases related to the expiration of certain statutes of limitations for previously open tax years and the effective settlement of an Internal Revenue Service audit.
The United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the European Union (the “EU”) became final on December 31, 2020. Additional withholding taxes on inter-company distributions due to the United Kingdom’s departure from the EU are expected to have an impact on tax expense. The amount of the impact cannot be determined, as it relies on the amount of earnings of the affiliated entities and the timing of distributions from those entities.
Our future effective tax rate depends on various factors, including the impact of tax legislation, further interpretations and guidance from U.S. federal and state governments on the impact of proposed regulations issued by the IRS, as well as the geographic composition of our pre-tax income and changes in income tax reserves for unrecognized tax benefits. We monitor these factors and timely adjust our estimates of the effective tax rate accordingly. We expect the geographic mix of pre-tax income will continue to have a favorable impact on our effective tax rate. However, the geographic mix of pre-tax income can change based on multiple factors, resulting in changes to the effective tax rate in future periods. While we believe we have adequately provided for all tax positions, amounts asserted by taxing authorities could materially differ from our accrued positions as a result of uncertain and complex application of tax law and regulations. Additionally, the recognition and measurement of certain tax benefits include estimates and judgment by management. Accordingly, we could record additional provisions or benefits for U.S. federal, state, and foreign tax matters in future periods as new information becomes available.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable investments totaled $836.0 million at December 31, 2020, an increase of $312.0 million compared to $524.0 million at December 31, 2019. The primary driver in our current and anticipated future cash flows is and will continue to be cash generated from operations, consisting primarily of our net income, excluding non-cash charges and changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Our total cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable investments at December 31, 2020 consisted of $431.7 million held in the United States and $404.3 million held by our foreign subsidiaries. We believe that our current cash and investments position and available borrowing capacity, together with the cash anticipated to be generated from our operations, will be sufficient to satisfy our estimated working capital, planned capital expenditure requirements, and any future cash dividends declared by our Board of Directors or share repurchases through at least the next 12 months and the foreseeable future.
In periods when our sales are growing, higher sales to customers will result in increased trade receivables, and inventories will generally increase as we build products for future sales. This may result in lower cash generated from operations. Conversely, in periods when our sales are declining, our trade accounts receivable and inventory balances will generally decrease, resulting in increased cash from operations.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $513.2 million for 2020 and resulted from net income of $350.1 million, which included non-cash net charges of $152.1 million and a decrease in working capital of $11.0 million. The decrease in working capital consisted of a decrease in other current and non-current assets of $40.9 million, primarily from the collection of income tax receivables, an increase in income taxes payable of $21.6 million, an increase in accounts payable of $21.0 million, an increase in current and non-current accrued compensation of $19.4 million, primarily due to higher variable compensation, and an increase in other current and non-current liabilities of $5.1 million, offset by an increase in inventories of $52.2 million and an increase in trade accounts receivable of $44.8 million, both of which were the result of increased business levels in 2020.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $244.5 million for 2019 and resulted from net income of $140.4 million, which included non-cash net charges of $192.5 million, offset by an increase in working capital of $88.4 million. The increase in working capital consisted primarily of an increase in inventories of $29.3 million, a decrease in accounts payable of $24.1 million, a decrease in income taxes payable of $12.4 million, an increase in other current and non-current assets of $9.8 million, a decrease in other current and non-current liabilities of $8.4 million and a decrease in current and non-current compensation of $4.2 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $202.4 million for 2020 and was due to net purchases of short-term investments of $117.5 million and purchases of property, plant and equipment of $84.9 million, which included the buildout of three newly leased facilities in 2020. Net cash used in investing activities was $947.2 million for 2019 and was due to the payment of a portion of the purchase price for the ESI Merger of $988.6 million, net of cash acquired, and purchases of property, plant and equipment of $63.9 million, offset by net sales and maturities of short-term investments of $63.2 million and proceeds from the sale of long-lived assets of $42.1 million.
Net cash used in financing activities was $121.5 million for 2020 and was primarily due to a repayment of our Term Loan Facility of $59.0 million, dividend payments made to common stockholders of $44.0 million and net payments related to tax payments for employee stock awards of $20.6 million, offset by net short-term borrowings of $2.3 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $476.2 million for 2019 and was from net proceeds of $530.7 million, mainly from our 2019 Incremental Term Loan Facility, as defined and as described further below, used to finance the ESI Merger, offset by dividend payments made to common stockholders of $43.5 million and net payments related to tax payments for employee stock awards of $11.0 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid cash dividends of $44.0 million in the aggregate or $0.80 per share. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we paid cash dividends of $43.5 million in the aggregate or $0.80 per share. Future dividend declarations, if any, as well as the record and payment dates for such dividends, are subject to the final determination of our Board of Directors. Holders of our common stock are entitled to receive dividends when and if they are declared by our Board of Directors. Under the terms of our Term Loan Facility and our ABL Facility, as defined and described further below, we may be restricted from paying dividends under certain circumstances.
On February 8, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.20 per share to be paid on March 5, 2021 to shareholders of record as of February 22, 2021.
Senior Secured Term Loan Credit Facility
In connection with the completion of the Newport Merger, we entered into a term loan credit agreement (the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”) with Barclays Bank PLC, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the lenders from time to time party thereto (the “Lenders”), that provided a senior secured term loan credit facility in the original principal amount of $780.0 million (the “2016 Term Loan Facility”), subject to increase at our option and subject to receipt of lender commitments in accordance with the Term Loan Credit Agreement (the 2016 Term Loan Facility, together with the 2019 Incremental Term Loan Facility and 2019 Term Loan Refinancing Facility (each as defined below), the “Term Loan Facility”). Prior to the effectiveness of Amendment No. 6 (as defined below), the 2016 Term Loan Facility had a maturity date of April 29, 2023. As of December 31, 2020, borrowings under the Term Loan Facility bear interest per annum at one of the following rates selected by us: (a) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (1) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50%, (2) the “prime
rate” quoted in The Wall Street Journal, (3) a LIBOR rate determined by reference to the costs of funds for U.S. dollar deposits for an interest period of one month adjusted for certain additional costs, plus 1.00%, and (4) a floor of 1.75%, plus, in each case, an applicable margin; or (b) a LIBOR rate determined by reference to the costs of funds for U.S. dollar deposits for the interest period relevant to such borrowing adjusted for certain additional costs, subject to a LIBOR rate floor of 0.0%, plus an applicable margin. We have elected the interest rate as described in clause (b) of the foregoing sentence. The Term Loan Credit Agreement provides that, unless an alternate rate of interest is agreed, all loans will be determined by reference to the base rate if the LIBOR rate cannot be ascertained, if regulators impose material restrictions on the authority of a lender to make LIBOR rate loans, or for other reasons. The 2016 Term Loan Facility was issued with original issue discount of 1.00% of the principal amount thereof.
We subsequently entered into four separate repricing amendments to the 2016 Term Loan Facility, which decreased the applicable margin for LIBOR borrowings from 4.0% to 1.75%, with a LIBOR rate floor of 0.75%. As a consequence of the pricing of the 2019 Incremental Term Loan Facility (defined below), the applicable margin for the 2016 Term Loan Facility was increased to 2.00% (from 1.75%) with respect to LIBOR borrowings and 1.00% (from 0.75%) with respect to base rate borrowings.
We incurred $28.7 million of deferred finance fees, original issue discount and repricing fees related to the term loans under the 2016 Term Loan Facility, which are included in long-term debt in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and are being amortized to interest expense over the estimated life of the term loans using the effective interest method.
On February 1, 2019, in connection with the completion of the ESI Merger, we entered into an amendment (“Amendment No. 5”) to the Term Loan Credit Agreement. Amendment No. 5 provided an additional tranche B-5 term loan commitment in the original principal amount of $650.0 million (the “2019 Incremental Term Loan Facility”), all of which was drawn down in connection with the closing of the ESI Merger. Pursuant to Amendment No. 5, we also effectuated certain amendments to the Term Loan Credit Agreement which make certain of the negative covenants and other provisions less restrictive. Prior to the effectiveness of Amendment No. 6 (as defined below), the 2019 Incremental Term Loan Facility had a maturity date of February 1, 2026 and bore interest at a rate per annum equal to, at our option, a base rate or LIBOR rate (as described above) plus, in each case, an applicable margin equal to 1.25% with respect to base rate borrowings and 2.25% with respect to LIBOR borrowings. The 2019 Incremental Term Loan Facility was issued with original issue discount of 1.00% of the principal amount thereof.
We incurred $11.4 million of deferred finance fees and original issue discount fees related to the term loans under the 2019 Incremental Term Loan Facility, which are included in long-term debt in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and are being amortized to interest expense over the estimated life of the term loans using the effective interest method.
On September 27, 2019, we entered into an amendment (“Amendment No. 6”) to the Term Loan Credit Agreement. Amendment No. 6 refinanced all existing loans outstanding under the 2016 Term Loan Facility and 2019 Incremental Term Loan Facility (“Existing Term Loans”) for a tranche B-6 term loan commitment in the original principal amount of $896.8 million (“2019 Term Loan Refinancing Facility”). Each lender of the Existing Term Loans that elected to participate in the 2019 Term Loan Refinancing Facility was deemed to have exchanged the aggregate outstanding principal amount of its Existing Term Loans for an equal aggregate principal amount of tranche B-6 term loans under the 2019 Term Loan Refinancing Facility. On the effective date of Amendment No. 6 and immediately prior to the exchanges described above, we made a voluntary prepayment of $50.0 million, which was applied to the Existing Term Loans on a pro rata basis.
We incurred $2.2 million of original issue discount fees related to the term loans under the 2019 Term Loan Refinancing Facility, which are included in long-term debt in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and are being amortized to interest expense over the estimated life of the term loans using the effective interest method.
As of December 31, 2020, the remaining balance of deferred finance fees and original issue discount of the Term Loan Facility was $9.4 million. A portion of the deferred finance fees and original issue discount have been accelerated in connection with the various debt prepayments and extinguishments between 2016 and 2020.
The 2019 Term Loan Refinancing Facility matures on February 2, 2026, and bears interest at a rate per annum equal to, at our option, a base rate or LIBOR rate (as described above) plus, in each case, an applicable margin equal to 0.75% with respect to base rate borrowings and 1.75% with respect to LIBOR borrowings. The 2019 Term Loan Refinancing Facility was issued with original issue discount of 0.25% of the principal amount thereof.
We are required to make scheduled quarterly payments each equal to 0.25% of the original principal amount of the 2019 Term Loan Refinancing Facility with the balance due on February 2, 2026.
As of December 31, 2020, after total principal prepayments of $575.0 million (which included a $50.0 million prepayment made during 2020) and regularly scheduled principal payments of $21.6 million, the total outstanding principal balance of the Term Loan Facility was $833.4 million and the interest rate was 1.9%.
Under the Term Loan Credit Agreement, we are required to prepay outstanding term loans, subject to certain exceptions, with portions of our annual excess cash flow as well as with the net cash proceeds of certain of our asset sales, certain casualty and condemnation events and the incurrence or issuance of certain debt.
All obligations under the Term Loan Facility are guaranteed by certain of our domestic subsidiaries and are collateralized by substantially all of our assets and the assets of such subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions and exclusions.
The Term Loan Credit Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, affirmative and negative covenants and provisions relating to events of default. If an event of default occurs, the lenders under the Term Loan Facility will be entitled to take various actions, including the acceleration of amounts due under the Term Loan Facility and all actions generally permitted to be taken by a secured creditor. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants under the Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Interest Rate Swap Agreements
We enter into various interest rate swap agreements, as described further below that exchange the variable LIBOR interest rate to a fixed rate, to manage the exposure to interest rate fluctuations associated with the variable LIBOR interest rate paid on the outstanding balance of the 2019 Incremental Term Loan Facility.
Senior Secured Asset-Based Revolving Credit Facility
On February 1, 2019, in connection with the completion of the ESI Merger, we entered into an asset-based revolving credit agreement with Barclays Bank PLC, as administrative agent and collateral agent, the other borrowers from time to time party thereto, and the lenders and letters of credit issuers from time to time party thereto (the “ABL Credit Agreement”), that provides a senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility of up to $100.0 million, subject to a borrowing base limitation (the “ABL Facility”). On April 26, 2019, we entered into a First Amendment to the ABL Credit Agreement, which amended the borrowing base calculation for eligible inventory prior to an initial field examination and appraisal requirements. The borrowing base for the ABL Facility at any time equals the sum of: (a) 85% of certain eligible accounts; plus (b) prior to certain notice and field examination and appraisal requirements, the lesser of (i) 20% of net book value of eligible inventory in the United States and (ii) 30% of the borrowing base, and after the satisfaction of such requirements, the lesser of (i) the lesser of (A) 65% of the lower of cost or market value of certain eligible inventory and (B) 85% of the net orderly liquidation value of certain eligible inventory and (ii) 30% of the borrowing base; minus (c) reserves established by the administrative agent, in each case, subject to additional limitations and examination requirements for eligible accounts and eligible inventory acquired in an acquisition after February 1, 2019. The ABL Facility includes borrowing capacity in the form of letters of credit up to $25.0 million.
Borrowings under the ABL Facility bear interest at a rate per annum equal to, at our option, any of the following, plus, in each case, an applicable margin: (a) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (1) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50%, (2) the “prime rate” quoted in The Wall Street Journal, (3) a LIBOR rate determined by reference to the costs of funds for U.S. dollar deposits for an interest period of one month adjusted for certain additional costs, plus 1.00% and (4) a floor of 0.00%; and (b) a LIBOR rate determined by reference to the costs of funds for U.S. dollar deposits for the interest period relevant to such borrowing adjusted for certain additional costs, with a floor of 0.00%. The initial applicable margin for borrowings under the ABL Facility is 0.50% with respect to base rate borrowings and 1.50% with respect to LIBOR borrowings. Commencing with the completion of the first fiscal quarter ending after the closing of the ABL Facility, the applicable margin for borrowings thereunder is subject to upward or downward adjustment each fiscal quarter, based on the average historical excess availability during the preceding quarter.
In addition to paying interest on any outstanding principal under the ABL Facility, we are required to pay a commitment fee in respect of the unutilized commitments thereunder equal to 0.25% per annum. We must also pay customary letter of credit fees and agency fees.
Under the ABL Facility, we are required to prepay amounts outstanding under the ABL Facility (1) if amounts outstanding under the ABL Facility exceed the lesser of (a) the commitment amount and (b) the borrowing base, in an amount required to reduce such shortfall, (2) if amounts outstanding under the ABL Facility in any currency other than U.S. dollars exceed the sublimit for such currency, in an amount required to reduce such shortfall, and (3) during any period in which we have excess availability less than the greater of (a) 10.0% of the lesser of (x) the commitment amount and (y) the borrowing base and (b) $8.5 million for 3 consecutive business days, until the time when we have excess availability equal to or greater than the greater of (A) 10.0% of the lesser of (i) the commitment amount and (ii) the borrowing base and (B) $8.5 million for 30 consecutive days, or during the continuance of an event of default, with immediately available funds in its blocked accounts.
There is no scheduled amortization under the ABL Facility. The principal amount outstanding under the ABL Facility is due and payable in full on the fifth anniversary of the closing date.
All obligations under the ABL Facility are guaranteed by certain of our domestic subsidiaries, and are collateralized by substantially all of our assets and the assets of such subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions and exclusions.
From the time when we have excess availability less than the greater of (a) 10.0% of the lesser of (1) the commitment amount and (2) the borrowing base and (b) $8.5 million, until the time when we have excess availability equal to or greater than the greater of (a) 10.0% of the lesser of (1) the commitment amount and (2) the borrowing base and (b) $8.5 million for 30 consecutive days, or during the continuance of an event of default, the ABL Credit Agreement requires us to maintain a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the ABL Credit Agreement) tested on the last day of each fiscal quarter of at least 1.0 to 1.0.
The ABL Credit Agreement also contains customary representations and warranties, affirmative covenants and provisions relating to events of default. If an event of default occurs, the lenders under the ABL Facility will be entitled to take various actions, including the acceleration of amounts due under the ABL Facility and all actions permitted to be taken by a secured creditor. We have not borrowed against the ABL Facility to date.
Lines of Credit and Short-Term Borrowing Arrangements
Our Japanese subsidiaries have lines of credit and a financing facility with various financial institutions, the majority of which generally expire and are renewed at three-month intervals, with the remaining having no expiration date. The lines of credit and financing facility provided for aggregate borrowings as of December 31, 2020 of up to an equivalent of $32.5 million U.S. dollars. Total borrowings outstanding under these arrangements were $5.5 million and $3.1 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We have provided financial guarantees for certain unsecured borrowings and have standby letters of credit, some of which do not have fixed expiration dates. At December 31, 2020, our maximum exposure as a result of these financial guarantees and standby letters of credit was approximately $5.1 million.
Sale of Long-Lived Assets
In August of 2019, we sold two of our buildings in Boulder, Colorado and three of our buildings in Portland, Oregon. Total net cash proceeds received for these two transactions was $41.2 million and we recognized a net gain on the sale of these long-lived assets of $6.8 million.
Contractual Obligations
Future contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are as follows:
(1)
As of December 31, 2020, we have entered into purchase commitments for certain inventory components and other equipment and services used in our normal operations. The majority of these purchase commitments covered by these arrangements are for periods less than one year and aggregate to approximately $268.2 million.
(2)
The majority of this balance relates to deferred tax liabilities.
Derivatives
We enter into derivative instruments for risk management purposes only, including derivatives designated as hedging instruments and those utilized as economic hedges. We operate internationally, and in the normal course of business, are exposed to fluctuations in interest rates and foreign exchange rates. These fluctuations can increase the costs of financing, investing and operating the business. We have used derivative instruments, such as forward exchange contracts and an interest rate hedge to manage certain foreign currency and interest rate exposures.
By nature, all financial instruments involve market and credit risks. We enter into derivative instruments with major investment grade financial institutions and no collateral is required. We have policies to monitor the credit risk of these counterparties. While there can be no assurance, we do not anticipate any material non-performance by any of these counterparties.
Interest Rate Swap Agreements
We enter into various interest rate swap agreements that exchange the variable LIBOR interest rate to a fixed rate to manage the exposure to interest rate fluctuations associated with the variable LIBOR interest rate paid on the outstanding balance of the 2019 Incremental Term Loan Facility, as described above.
The interest rate swaps are recorded at fair value on the balance sheet and changes in the fair value are recognized in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income. To the extent that these arrangements are no longer an effective hedge, any ineffectiveness measured in the hedging relationships is recorded immediately in earnings in the period it occurs.
Foreign Exchange Contracts
We hedge a portion of our forecasted foreign currency denominated intercompany sales of inventory, over a maximum period of eighteen months, using foreign exchange forward contracts accounted for as cash-flow hedges related to British, Euro, Japanese, South Korean and Taiwanese currencies. To the extent these derivatives are effective in offsetting the variability of the hedged cash flows, and otherwise meet the hedge accounting criteria, changes in the derivatives’ fair value are not included in current earnings but are included in accumulated other comprehensive income in stockholders’ equity. These changes in fair value will subsequently be reclassified into earnings, as applicable, when the forecasted transaction occurs. To the extent that a previously designated hedging transaction is no longer an effective hedge, any ineffectiveness measured in the hedging relationship is recorded immediately in earnings in the period it occurs. The cash flows resulting from forward exchange contracts are classified in the consolidated statements of cash flows as part of cash flows from operating activities. We do not enter into derivative instruments for trading or speculative purposes.
We also enter into forward exchange contracts to hedge certain balance sheet amounts. To the extent the hedge accounting criteria is not met, the related foreign currency forward contracts are considered as economic hedges and changes in the fair value of these contracts are recorded immediately in earnings in the period in which they occur. These include hedges that are used to reduce exchange rate risks arising from the change in fair value of certain foreign currency-denominated assets and liabilities (i.e., payables, receivables) and other economic hedges where the hedge accounting criteria were not met.
We had forward exchange contracts with notional amounts totaling $176.2 million outstanding at December 31, 2020 of which $62.2 million was outstanding to exchange South Korean won to U.S. dollars and $61.5 million was outstanding to exchange Japanese yen to U.S. dollars. We had forward exchange contracts with notional amounts totaling $154.7 million outstanding at December 31, 2019 of which $51.7 million was outstanding to exchange South Korean won to U.S. dollars and $45.9 million was outstanding to exchange Japanese yen to U.S. dollars.
As of December 31, 2020, the unrealized loss that will be reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income to earnings over the next twelve months is immaterial. Gains and losses on forward exchange contracts that qualify for hedge accounting are classified in cost of products in 2020 and 2019, and totaled a gain of $1.7 and $5.7 million, respectively. There were no ineffective portions of the derivatives recorded in 2020 and 2019.
We hedge certain intercompany accounts receivable and intercompany loans with forward exchange contracts. Typically, as these derivatives hedge existing amounts that are denominated in foreign currencies, the derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting. Realized and unrealized gains and losses on forward exchange contracts that do not qualify for hedge accounting are recognized immediately in earnings. The net foreign exchange losses on these derivatives were immaterial in each of 2020 and 2019. Foreign currency gains or losses are classified in other expense, net. The cash flows resulting from forward exchange contracts are classified in our consolidated statements of cash flows as part of cash flows from operating activities. We do not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for trading purposes.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any financial partnerships with unconsolidated entities, such as entities often referred to as structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities, which are often established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for other contractually narrow or limited purposes. Accordingly, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably expected to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In March 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-04, “Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting.” This standard provides temporary optional expedients and exceptions to accounting guidance on contract modifications and hedge accounting to ease entities’ financial reporting burdens, as the market transitions from the LIBOR and other interbank offered rates to alternative reference rates. The standard was effective upon issuance and generally can be applied through December 31, 2022. In January 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-01, “Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Scope.” The amendments in this update clarify that certain optional expedients and exceptions in Topic 848 for contract modifications and
hedge accounting apply to derivative instruments that use an interest rate for margining, discounting, or contract price alignment that is modified as a result of reference rate reform. Amendments in this update to the expedients and exceptions in Topic 848 capture the incremental consequences of the scope clarification and tailor the existing guidance to derivative instruments affected by the discounting transition. The amendments in this update do not apply to contract modifications made after December 31, 2022, new hedging relationships entered into after December 31, 2022, and existing hedging relationships evaluated for effectiveness in periods after December 31, 2022, except for hedging relationships existing as of December 31, 2022, that apply certain optional expedients in which the accounting effects are recorded through the end of the hedging relationship (including periods after December 31, 2022). We are in the process of evaluating the requirements of these standards and have not yet determined the impact of adoption on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Income Taxes (Topic 740).” This standard simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740. The amendments also improve consistent application and simplify U.S. GAAP for other areas of Topic 740 by clarifying and amending existing guidance. This standard is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022. We evaluated the requirements of this ASU and the impact of pending adoption on our consolidated financial statements. We do not expect that the impact of these changes will be material to our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.