ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
References to the “Company,” “Ascendant Digital Acquisition Corp.,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Ascendant Digital Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on February 11, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses that we have not yet selected (“Business Combination”). We have not selected any specific business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, engaged in any substantive discussions directly or indirectly, with any business combination target with respect to an initial business combination with us. While we may pursue an initial business combination target in any industry, we intend to focus our search on companies in what we call the “Attention Economy”, which refers to various converging sectors within interactive (digital) entertainment, film/television, music, print and digital books (including magazine and comics publications), e-sports, live events and other forms of consumer entertainment and enabling services and technologies. Our Sponsor is Ascendant Sponsor LP, a Cayman Islands exempted limited partnership. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our registration statements for the Initial Public Offering became effective on July 23, 2020. On July 28, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 41,400,000 Units, including the issuance of 5,400,000 Units as a result of the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $414.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $23.4 million, inclusive of approximately $14.5 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 10,280,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant with the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $10.3 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement in July 2020, $414.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in the Trust Account, located in the United States, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and will be invested by the trustee only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Recent Developments
On March 1, 2021, we entered into a Business Combination Agreement with Beacon Street Group, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“BSG”), all of the members of BSG party thereto and Shareholder Representative Services LLC, a Colorado limited liability company, solely in its capacity as the representative of the Sellers thereunder. The transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement are referred to herein as the “Business Combination.” The time of the closing of the Business Combination is referred to herein as the “Closing.” The date of the Closing of the Business Combination is referred to herein as the “Closing Date.”
Business Combination Agreement
At the end of the day immediately prior to the Closing Date, subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, the Company will migrate to and domesticate as a Delaware corporation in accordance with Section 388 of the Delaware General Corporation Law, as amended, and the Cayman Islands Companies Act (As Revised) (the “Domestication”).
By virtue of the Domestication and subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, including approval of the Company’s shareholders: (i) each of the then issued and outstanding Class B ordinary shares of the Company, par value $0.0001 per share (each, a “Cayman Class B Share”), will convert automatically, on a one-for-one basis, into a Class A ordinary share of the Company, par value $0.0001 per share (each, a “Cayman Class A Share”); (ii) immediately following the conversion described in clause (i), each of the then issued and outstanding Cayman Class A Shares will convert automatically, on a one-for-one basis, into a share of Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of Company (after the Domestication) (the “Class A Common Stock”); and (iii) each of the then issued and outstanding warrants representing the right to purchase one Cayman Class A Share will convert automatically into a warrant to acquire one share of Class A Common Stock pursuant to the related warrant agreement.
Substantially simultaneously with or immediately following the Domestication and subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, the Company will also file (a) a certificate of incorporation with the Secretary of State of Delaware in the form attached to the Business Combination Agreement (the “Company Domesticated Charter”) and (b) adopt bylaws in the form attached to the Business Combination Agreement (the “Company Domesticated Bylaws”), to (among other things) establish a capital structure for the Company containing Class A Common Stock and shares of Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share of Company (after the Domestication) (the “Class B Common Stock”). The shares of Class B Common Stock will have the same voting rights as the shares of Class A Common Stock but the shares of Class B Common Stock will have no economic rights, in each case as set forth in the Company Domesticated Charter and Company Domesticated Bylaws.
Subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain conditions set forth in the Business Combination Agreement, at the Closing, the Company will contribute a subscription amount (the “Subscription Amount”) to BSG in exchange for units and warrants in BSG. Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, the Subscription Amount will be an amount of cash determined by BSG and will be not less than $85,000,000 nor more than $150,000,000; provided, that, notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Subscription Amount determined by BSG will be greater than the Available Distributable Cash (as defined below), the Subscription Amount will automatically be deemed to be an amount equal to the Available Distributable Cash.
Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, the “Available Distributable Cash” will be an aggregate amount equal to, as of immediately prior to the Closing, the sum of (without duplication): (a) all amounts in the Company’s trust account, less amounts required for the redemptions of Cayman Class A Shares by the Company’s current shareholders, plus (b) the aggregate proceeds, if any, actually received by the Company from the Subscriptions (as defined and discussed below) plus (c) all other cash and cash equivalents of the Company minus (d) the aggregate amount of unpaid transaction costs incurred by the parties to the Business Combination Agreement.
At the Closing, the Company will also purchase certain units of BSG from the Sellers for cash consideration (the “Cash Consideration”) in an amount equal to (i) the Available Acquiror Closing Cash (as defined below), less (ii) the aggregate amount of unpaid transaction costs incurred by the parties to the Business Combination Agreement as of the Closing, provided, that, under no circumstances will the Cash Consideration be more than $374,000,000 or less than $0. Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, the “Available Acquiror Closing Cash” will be an aggregate amount equal to, as of immediately prior to the Closing, the sum of (without duplication): (a) all amounts in the Company’s trust account, less amounts required for the redemptions of Cayman Class A Shares by the Company’s current shareholders plus (b) the aggregate proceeds, if any, actually received by the Company from the Subscriptions plus (c) all other cash and cash equivalents of the Company minus (d) the Subscription Amount.
Additionally, at the Closing, the Company will issue to the Sellers, for nominal consideration, a certain number of shares of Class B Common Stock equal to the aggregate number of units of the Company retained by the Sellers at the Closing (collectively, the “Retained Units”), with each Seller receiving its pro rata share of such shares of Class B Common Stock and Retained Units. Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, the Retained Units will be a number of common units of the Company equal to the quotient of (a) $2,910,923,000 (being the agreed equity value to the Sellers) minus the Cash Consideration, divided by (b) $10.00.
Following the Closing, the combined Company will be organized in an “Up-C” structure in which substantially all of the assets and the business of the combined Company will be held by BSG and its subsidiaries, and the Company’s only direct assets will consist of units and warrants of BSG. Assuming that none of the Company’s current shareholders exercise their right to redeem their Cayman Class A Shares, and subject to adjustment for cash on hand and working capital, as of immediately following the Closing and without giving effect to the Sponsor Earn Out Shares (as defined and discussed below) or outstanding warrants to purchase Cayman Class A Shares, the Company is expected to own, directly or indirectly, approximately 20.1% of the issued and outstanding units of BSG at the Closing and will control BSG as the sole manager of BSG in accordance with the terms of the BSG Third A&R Operating Agreement and all remaining units of the Company will be owned by the Sellers.
Upon consummation of the Transactions, the Company will change its name to “Beacon Street Group, Inc.”
Under the Business Combination Agreement, the obligations of the parties (or, in some cases, some of the parties) to consummate the Business Combination are subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain customary closing conditions of the respective parties, including, without limitation: (i) the approval and adoption of the Business Combination Agreement and transactions contemplated thereby and certain other matters by requisite vote of the Company’s shareholders; (ii) if required, the expiration or termination of any applicable waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, as amended; (iii) the absence of a Company Material Adverse Effect (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement) since the date of the Business Combination Agreement; and (iv) material compliance by the parties with their respective pre-Closing and Closing obligations and the accuracy of each party’s representations and warranties in the Business Combination Agreement, in each case subject to certain materiality standards contained in the Business Combination Agreement. In addition, BSG’s obligation to consummate the Business Combination is subject to the condition that the sum of (x) the funds remaining in the Company’s trust account (after giving effect to redemptions of Cayman Class A Shares by the Company’s current shareholders) and (y) the aggregate amount the Company actually receives from the Subscriptions, but in each case before giving effect to the consummation of the Closing and the payment of the aggregate amount of unpaid transaction costs incurred by the parties to the Business Combination Agreement, be equal to or exceed $150,000,000.
Subscription Agreements
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, we entered into subscription agreements with certain accredited and institutional investors (the “Subscription Agreements”), pursuant to which, and on the terms and subject to the conditions of which, such investors have committed to purchase an aggregate of 15,000,000 shares of Class A Common Stock (together, the “Subscriptions”) at a price of $10.00 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $150,000,000, to be issued immediately following the Domestication and substantially concurrently with the Closing.
Sponsor Support Agreement
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, Ascendant Sponsor LP (the “Sponsor”), our Company and BSG have entered into an agreement (the “Sponsor Support Agreement”), pursuant to which, among other things, the Sponsor agreed to vote in favor of adoption of the Business Combination Agreement and the Transactions, and agreed to waive any and all anti-dilution rights described in our current organizational documents with respect to the Cayman Class B Shares held by the Sponsor that may be implicated by the Business Combination.
The foregoing description of the Proposed Business Combination, the Subscription and Agreements, and the Sponsor Support Agreement does not purport to be complete. For further information refer to the full agreements the Company filed with the SEC on March 2, 2021 on a Current Report on Form 8-K on March 2, 2021.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from February 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, was in preparation for an Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the period from February 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $140,000, which consisted of approximately $350,000 of general and administrative expenses, including $50,000 of general and administrative expenses with related party, offset by approximately $210,000 of interest on the investments held in the Trust Account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On July 28, 2020, we consummated the Public Offering of 41,400,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $414,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 10,280,000 private placement warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $10,280,000.
Following the Public Offering, and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $414,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $23,397,617 related to the Public Offering, including $14,490,000 in underwriting discounts.
For the period from February 11. 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was approximately $593,000, which consisted of our net loss of approximately $140,000, adjusted for general and administrative expenses paid by related party of approximately $28,000 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of approximately $210,000, as well as changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used approximately $271,000 of cash.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $414.2 million. We may withdraw interest to pay our taxes, if any. Through December 31, 2020, we have not withdrawn any amounts to pay for our tax obligations. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable) to complete our business combination. To the extent that our share capital is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of approximately $0.9 million and working capital of approximately $1.0 million . We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
We monitor the adequacy of our working capital in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Support Agreement
We agreed to pay our Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month, commencing on the effective date of the Initial Public Offering, for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services provided to members of the management team. Upon completion of the Initial Business Combination or the liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. We incurred and paid $50,000 in these fees for the period from the effective date of our Initial Public Offering through December 31, 2020, respectively.
Other Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, Forward Purchase Securities and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, if any, are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until the termination of the applicable lock-up period for the securities to be registered. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus to purchase up to 10,800,000 additional Units at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On August 4, 2020, the underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $8.3 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, the underwriters are entitled to a deferred underwriting commission of $0.35 per unit, or approximately $14.5 million in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Forward purchase agreement
In connection with the consummation of the Public Offering, we entered into a forward purchase agreement with NEXON Co. Ltd. (“Nexon”), pursuant to which Nexon has subscribed to purchase from us up to 25,000,000 forward purchase units, consisting of one Class A ordinary share (the “Forward Purchase Shares”), and one-half of one warrant to purchase one Class A ordinary share (the “Forward Purchase Warrants”), for $10.00 per unit, or an aggregate amount of up to $250,000,000, in a private placement that will close concurrently with the closing of our Initial Business Combination. Nexon’s commitment under the forward purchase agreement is subject to, among other conditions, the approval of its investment committee. The Forward Purchase Shares and Forward Purchase Warrants will be identical to the Class A ordinary shares and warrants, respectively, included in the units being sold in the Public Offering, except that they will be subject to certain transfer restrictions and registration rights, as described herein.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in net gain on investments held in Trust Account in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 39,576,710 shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the accompanying balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period, excluding ordinary shares subject to forfeiture. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 30,980,000 shares of Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted per share is the same as basic loss per share for the periods presented.
Our statements of operations include a presentation of income per share for ordinary shares subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per share, basic and diluted for Class A ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the investment income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable income franchise taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A ordinary shares outstanding since the initial issuance. Net loss per share, basic and diluted for Class B ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net income, less income attributable to Class A ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material impact on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.