Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the forward-looking statements disclaimer set forth at the beginning of this annual report, the risk factors set forth in Item 1A of this annual report, and our financial statements and the notes to those statements set forth in Item 8 of this annual report.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
CONSOLIDATED
REAL ESTATE
Real estate operating revenues include the sales of real estate inventory and sales commissions from resales of properties by our wholly-owned subsidiary, Kapalua Realty Company, Ltd.
During the six months ended June 30, 2020, Kapalua Realty Company, Ltd., provided licensed, general brokerage services for properties in the Kapalua Resort and surrounding areas. Effective July 1, 2020, we entered into an office lease agreement and license agreement with a real estate company to provide general brokerage services to the area. Under terms of the license agreement, monthly royalty fees are received for the use of certain of our trademarks.
Sales commissions of $0.2 million and $0.9 million were earned during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. A corresponding decrease in commissions paid resulted in lower operating costs and expenses. In addition, legal defense costs related primarily to the project formerly known as The Ritz-Carlton Club and Residences, Kapalua Bay were incurred in 2019.
In December 2020, a 5.1 acre, agricultural zoned parcel in West Maui was sold for $0.6 million to the County of Maui for expanded storage capacity of its recycled water system.
Real estate development expenditures were $0.4 million and $0.3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Real estate development and sales are cyclical and depend on a number of factors. Results for one period are therefore not necessarily indicative of future performance trends in this business segment. Following the closing of the diligence period, among the satisfaction of other contingencies.
LEASING
Leasing operating revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were comprised of $4.3 million of revenues from commercial, agricultural, and industrial leases, $0.5 million of licensing fees from our registered trademarks and trade names, and $1.1 million of revenue from potable and non-potable water system sales. This compares to $6.0 million of revenues from commercial, agricultural, and industrial leases, $0.9 million of licensing fees from our registered trademarks and trade names, and $1.2 million of revenue from potable and non-potable water system sales for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The decrease in operating revenues was primarily due to lower percentage rental income from our commercial leasing portfolio. The impact of COVID-19 on tenants’ sales activity resulted in lower percentage rental income recognized in 2020. Continued restrictions on public gatherings, such as stay-at-home orders, and the threat of COVID-19 or other infectious disease has and will likely have an adverse effect on our tenants’ ability to pay rent. Rent abatements of $0.4 million were granted to tenants during 2020. Additional reserves of $185,000 were also recorded to increase our allowance for doubtful accounts to $220,000 as of December 31, 2020.
The decrease in leasing operating costs and expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to lower repairs and maintenance costs for our commercial leasing portfolio properties. In addition, expenses related to the repair of non-potable irrigation ditch and transmission systems damaged from Tropical Storm Olivia in October 2018 were reduced by insurance reimbursements of $0.2 million in 2020.
Our leasing operations face substantial competition from other property owners in Maui and Hawaii.
RESORT AMENITIES
Our Resort Amenities segment includes the operations of the Kapalua Club, a private, non-equity club providing its members special programs, access and other privileges at certain of the amenities at the Kapalua Resort including a 30,000 square foot full-service spa, a private pool-side dining beach club, and two 18-hole championship golf courses. The Kapalua Club does not own or operate any resort amenities and the member dues collected are primarily used to pay contracted fees to provide access for its members to the spa, beach club and other resort amenities.
In March 2020, access to certain facilities and amenities was restricted due to regulations related to COVID-19. The decrease in operating revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to a partial refund of member dues as a result of these restrictions. Contracted fee expense correspondingly decreased in 2020. Member dues may be affected in future periods depending on the impact of COVID-19 on public health measures and regulations.
The increase in operating costs and expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to the closure of the Kapalua Plantation Golf Course for renovations from February to December 2019 and an increase in contracted golf course fees charged to the Company in the first quarter of 2020.
OTHER INCOME
The Company held a 51% ownership interest in Kapalua Bay Holdings, LLC (“KBH”). In 2009, the investment was written down to zero. In May 2020, as part of the dissolution of KBH, we received $0.9 million as a return of cash collateral related to an owner controlled insurance program.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was approximately $0.1 million and $0.2 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our average interest rate on borrowings was 4.12% for 2020, compared to 5.77% for 2019, and average borrowings were $0.3 million in 2020 compared to $1.8 million in 2019.
INCOME TAXES
In December 2017, The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (“TCJA”) was signed into law. The TCJA includes significant changes to the U.S. corporate income tax system, including a Federal corporate rate reduction from 35% to 21%, elimination of Alternative Minimum Tax (“AMT”) and refund of AMT credit carryforward, limitations on the deductibility of interest expense and executive compensation, and the transition of U.S. international taxation from a worldwide tax system to a territorial tax system. The TCJA also establishes new tax laws that will affect future periods, including, but not limited to: (1) reducing the U.S. federal corporate tax rate; (2) limiting deductible interest expense; (3) modifying the tax treatment of like-kind exchanges; (4) generally eliminating U.S. federal income taxes on dividends from foreign subsidiaries; (5) imposing a new provision designed to tax global intangible low-tax income; (6) creating the base erosion anti-abuse tax, a new minimum tax; (7) limiting the use of Net Operating Loss (“NOL”) carryforwards created in tax years beginning after December 31, 2017; (8) modifying the limitations on the use of foreign tax credits to reduce our U.S. income tax liability; and (9) further restricting the deductibility of certain executive compensation and fringe benefits.
In accordance with TCJA, $91.3 million of AMT NOL carry forwards were eliminated and $5.0 million of income tax benefit recognized from its unused AMT credit carry forwards in 2018. We subsequently received notices in 2019 and 2020 that refunds have been applied by the U.S. Department of the Treasury toward a “Non-Tax Federal Debt.” We believe these refunds were misapplied in error and intend to pursue collection of the amount; however, the entire $5.0 million income tax benefit from its unused AMT credit carry forwards has been written off against the valuation allowance in 2020 until further clarification on this matter is received.
DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
In December 2019, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement to sell the assets of Kapalua Water Company, Ltd. (“KWC”) and Kapalua Waste Treatment Company, Ltd. (“KWT”) located in the Kapalua Resort for a purchase price of approximately $4.3 million, including a Capital Expenditures Adjustment, as defined in the agreement, to be determined at closing. The sale is subject to certain closing conditions, including completion of due diligence and approval by the Hawaii Public Utilities Commission (“PUC”). As part of the agreement, the purchaser commits to serve the future expansion areas of Kapalua as they are developed. Furthermore, we agree to deliver water from our wells and ditches to certain delivery points at defined rates over an initial period of 20 years from the date of closing.
Under terms of the agreement, the purchase price will not include approximately $3.6 million of water system infrastructure and other related assets conveyed to us by the owner of a 125-acre portion of the Kapalua Mauka project. Accordingly, upon classification of the KWC and KWT assets as held for sale at December 31, 2019, these assets were written-down to its fair value and included as part of our discontinued operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
IMPACT OF COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a pandemic. In response to the pandemic, many federal, state, local, and foreign governments have put in place, and others in the future may put in place, travel restrictions, “shelter-in-place” orders, and similar government orders and restrictions in an attempt to control the spread and mitigate the impact of the disease. Such restrictions or orders have resulted in the mandatory closure of “non-essential” businesses, increased unemployment rates, “social distancing” restrictions, reduced tourist activity, work-from-home policies, and other changes that have led to significant disruptions to businesses and global financial markets. The overall impact of the pandemic on our business and future results of operations is highly uncertain and subject to change, and we are not able to accurately predict the magnitude or scope of such impacts at this time.
In the State of Hawaii, the Governor issued “stay-at-home” orders for its residents and visitors beginning in March 2020, followed by subsequent “safer-at-home” and “act with care” proclamations. In addition, the Governor issued emergency proclamations ordering all transpacific passengers to a mandatory 14-day self-quarantine. Quarantine, travel restrictions and other public health measures to reduce the spread of COVID-19 continue to have an adverse impact on most businesses in the State of Hawaii, including our own. According to visitor statistics from the Hawaii Tourism Authority, passenger volume to Maui County for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 611,799 and 2,246,523, respectively, a decrease of 73%. In its fourth quarter report, the State of Hawaii’s Department of Business, Economic Development & Tourism (“DBEDT”) projected Hawaii’s economic growth rate, as measured by the real gross domestic product, declined by 11.2% in 2020.
Beginning in October 2020, travelers to the State of Hawaii may avoid the quarantine rules under a pre-travel testing program if proof of a negative result from a valid COVID-19 Nucleic Acid Amplification Test is presented. DBEDT projects visitor arrivals to Hawaii will increase to 6.2 million in 2021, 7.7 million in 2022, and 8.8 million in 2023 resulting in visitor spending increases of 105.6% in 2021, 27.2% in 2022, and 14.1% in 2023.
The duration of the disruption on global, national, and local economies cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. However, should the existence of the COVID-19 pandemic continue for an extended period, our future business operations, including the results of operations, cash flows and financial position will be significantly affected. We continue to monitor the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as mitigating emergency assistance programs, such as the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) and Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 (“CAA”), on us, our customers, and our vendors. Appropriate remote work arrangements have been established for our employees in order to maintain our financial reporting systems.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity
We had cash on hand of $0.9 million and $0.7 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We also had $14.8 million and $14.0 million of available credit under a $15.0 million revolving line of credit facility with First Hawaiian Bank (“Credit Facility”) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Credit Facility matures on December 31, 2021. Interest on borrowings is calculated at LIBOR plus 3.50%. We have pledged our 800-acre Kapalua Mauka project and approximately 30,000 square feet of commercial leased space in the Kapalua Resort as security for the Credit Facility. Net proceeds from the sale of any collateral are required to be repaid toward outstanding borrowings and will permanently reduce the Credit Facility’s revolving commitment amount. There are no commitment fees on the unused portion of the Credit Facility.
The terms of the Credit Facility include various representations, warranties, affirmative, negative and financial covenants and events of default customary for financings of this type. Financial covenants include a minimum liquidity (as defined) of $2.0 million, a maximum of $45.0 million in total liabilities, and a limitation on new indebtedness.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants under the Credit Facility.
Cash Flows
Net cash flow provided by our operating activities totaled $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest payments on our long-term debt totaled $21,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Minimum funding contributions of $0.6 million were made to our defined benefit pension plan in January 2021. We are not required to make any additional contributions in 2021.
Future Cash Inflows and Outflows
Our business initiatives for the next twelve months include investing in our operating infrastructure and continued planning and entitlement efforts on our development projects. At times, this may require borrowing under our Credit Facility or other indebtedness, repayment of which may be dependent on selling of our real estate assets at acceptable prices in condensed timeframes.
Our indebtedness could have the effect of, among other things, increasing our exposure to general adverse economic and industry conditions, limiting our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and industry, and limiting our ability to borrow additional funds.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our accounting policies are described in “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” Note 1 to our financial statements set forth in Item 8 of this annual report. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires the use of accounting estimates. Some of these estimates and assumptions involve a high level of subjectivity and judgment and therefore the impact of a change in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the amounts reported in our financial statements. The accounting policies and estimates that we have identified as being critical to our financial statements are as follows:
•
Our long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the long-lived asset may not be recoverable. These asset impairment loss analyses contain uncertainties because they require management to make assumptions and apply considerable judgments to, among others, estimates of the timing and amount of future cash flows, expected useful lives of the assets, uncertainty about future events, including changes in economic conditions, changes in operating performance, changes in the use of the assets, and ongoing costs of maintenance and improvements of the assets; thus, the accounting estimates may change from period to period. If management uses different assumptions or if different conditions occur in future periods, our financial condition or future operating results could be materially impacted.
•
Deferred development costs, principally predevelopment costs and offsite development costs related to various projects in the planning stages by our real estate segment, totaled $8.9 million at December 31, 2020. Based on our future development plans for the Kapalua Resort and other properties, and the estimated value of these future projects, we have concluded that our deferred development costs will be recoverable from our future development projects. Our assumptions and estimates could be subject to significant change because of the long-term nature of our development plans and the uncertainty of when or if certain projects will be developed.
•
Assets are classified as held for sale when management approves and commits to a plan to sell the property; the property is available for immediate sale in its present condition, subject only to terms that are usual and customary; an active program to locate a buyer and other actions required to complete the plan to sell have been initiated; the sale of the property is probable and is expected to be completed within one year; the property is being actively marketed for sale at a price that is reasonable in relation to its current fair value; and actions necessary to complete the plan of sale indicate that it is unlikely that significant changes to the plan will be made or that the plan will be withdrawn. Assets held for sale are stated at the lower of net book value or estimated fair value less cost to sell.
•
Sales of real estate assets that are considered central to our ongoing major operations are classified as real estate sales revenue, along with any associated cost of sales, in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Sales of real estate assets that are considered peripheral or incidental transactions to our ongoing major or central operations are reflected as net gains or losses in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
•
If the sale of a real estate asset represents a strategic shift that has, or will have, a major effect on our operations, such as the discontinuance of a business segment, then the operations of the property, including any interest expense directly attributable to it, are classified as discontinued operations, and amounts for all prior periods presented are reclassified from continuing operations to discontinued operations. The disposal of an individual property generally will not represent a strategic shift and, therefore, will typically not meet the criteria for classification as discontinued operations.
•
Determining pension expense and obligations for our defined benefit pension plan utilizes actuarial estimates of participants’ age at retirement, life span, the long-term rate of return on investments and other factors. In addition, pension expense is sensitive to the discount rate utilized to value the pension obligation. These assumptions are subject to the risk of change as they require significant judgment and have inherent uncertainties that management or its consulting actuaries may not control or anticipate. A detailed discussion of our defined benefit pension plans is contained in Note 6 to our financial statements set forth in Item 8 of this annual report.
•
Management calculates the income tax provision, current and deferred income taxes, and tax credits along with the valuation allowance based upon various complex estimates and interpretations of income tax laws and regulations. Deferred tax assets and tax credits are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent that it is more likely than not that they will not be realized. To the extent we begin to generate taxable income in future years, and it is determined the valuation allowance is no longer required, the tax benefit for the remaining deferred tax assets and tax credits will be recognized at such time. A detailed discussion of our income taxes is contained in Note 8 to our financial statements set forth in Item 8 of this annual report.
•
Our results of operations could be affected by significant litigation or contingencies adverse to the Company, including, but not limited to, liability claims, environmental matters, and contract terminations. We record accruals for legal matters when the information available indicates that it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. We make adjustments to these accruals to reflect the impact and status of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel and other information and events that may pertain to a particular matter. Predicting the outcome of claims and lawsuits and estimating related costs and exposure involves substantial uncertainties that could cause actual costs to vary materially from those estimates. In making determinations of likely outcomes of litigation matters, we consider many factors. These factors include, but are not limited to, the nature of specific claims, our experience with similar types of claims, the jurisdiction in which the matter is filed, input from outside legal counsel, the likelihood of resolving the matter through alternative dispute resolution mechanisms and the matter’s current status. A detailed discussion of significant litigation matters and contingencies is contained in Note 12 to our financial statements set forth in Item 8 of this annual report.
IMPACT OF INFLATION AND CHANGING PRICES
Most of the land we own was acquired from 1911 to 1932 and is carried at cost. At the Kapalua Resort, some of the fixed assets were constructed and placed in service in the mid-to-late 1970’s. Depreciation expense would be considerably higher if fixed assets were stated at current replacement cost.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any significant off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K.