ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto. Unless the context indicates otherwise, all dollar amounts in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are in thousands.
Executive Overview
Miller Industries, Inc. is The World’s Largest Manufacturer of Towing and Recovery Equipment®, with domestic manufacturing subsidiaries in Tennessee and Pennsylvania, and foreign manufacturing subsidiaries in France and the United Kingdom. We offer a broad range of equipment to meet our customers’ design, capacity and cost requirements under our Century®, Vulcan®, Challenger®, Holmes®, Champion®, Chevron™, Eagle®, Titan®, Jige™ and Boniface™ brand names. In this Item 7 - “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” the words “Miller Industries,” “the Company,” “we,” “our,” “ours” and “us” refer to Miller Industries, Inc. and its subsidiaries or any of them.
Our management focuses on a variety of key indicators to monitor our overall operating and financial performance. These indicators include measurements of revenue, operating income, gross margin, net income, earnings per share, capital expenditures and cash flow.
We derive revenues primarily from product sales made through our network of domestic and foreign independent distributors. Our revenues are sensitive to a variety of factors including general economic conditions as well as demand for, and price of, our products, our technological competitiveness, our reputation for providing quality products and reliable service, competition within our industry, and the cost and availability of raw materials (including aluminum, steel and petroleum-related products) and component parts.
Our history of innovation in the towing and recovery industry has been an important factor behind our growth over the last decade and we believe that our continued emphasis on research and development will be a key factor in our future growth. Our domestic plant expansion and modernization projects have installed sophisticated robotics and implemented other advanced technologies to optimize our manufacturing processes.
We opened our free-standing R&D facility in Chattanooga in 2019, where we pursue various innovations in our products and manufacturing processes, some of which are intended to enhance the safety of our employees and reduce our environmental impact. Our latest new product, the M100, which we believe to be the world’s largest tow truck, was introduced in the fall of 2019.
All of our domestic facilities have undergone substantial expansion and modernization projects during the period 2016 to 2020, as we have invested over $97,000 on property, plant and equipment over this five-year period, including approximately $25,000 on our Pennsylvania consolidation and expansion project and approximately $29,000 on building and equipment improvements at our two Tennessee locations. These projects not only increased our production capacity, but also included installing sophisticated robotics and implementing other advanced technologies to optimize our manufacturing process.
Our industry is cyclical in nature. Until the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the overall demand for our products and resulting revenues in recent years have been positively affected by favorable economic conditions, such as lower fuel prices, and positive consumer sentiment in our industry. However, historically, the overall demand for our products and our resulting revenues have at times been negatively affected by:
● wavering levels of consumer confidence;
● volatility and disruption in domestic and international capital and credit markets and the resulting decrease in the availability of financing, including floor plan financing, for our customers and towing operators;
● significant periodic increases in fuel and insurance costs and their negative effect on the ability of our customers to purchase towing and related equipment; and
● the overall effects of global, political, economic and health conditions.
We remain concerned about the continuing effects of these factors on the towing and recovery industry, and we continue to monitor our overall cost structure to see that it remains in line with business conditions.
In addition, we have been and will continue to be affected by changes in the prices that we pay for raw materials, particularly aluminum, steel, petroleum-related products and other raw materials, which represent a substantial part of our total cost of operations. Prices in raw materials can be affected by tariffs and quantitative restrictions, such as those that were imposed by the U.S. government in 2018. Historically, we have implemented price increases on our products to offset price increases in the raw materials that we use. We also developed alternatives to some of the components used in our production process that incorporate these raw materials, and our suppliers have implemented these alternatives in the production of our component parts. We continue to monitor raw material prices and availability in order to more favorably position the Company in this dynamic market.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, the Company owed $0 and $4,998 under its primary credit facility.
Recent Developments
In the first half of the first quarter of 2021, we experienced significant delays in deliveries to our distributors caused by changes we made to our legacy business processes during the implementation of our new enterprise software system as well as supply chain and weather related disruptions. The business process changes during the first half of the quarter had a significant impact on deliveries, particularly of higher margin products. Continued implementation of the software system is not expected to have this level of impact on our manufacturing processes, as they were due primarily to the initial data conversion and deployment of a newly created information framework. This framework is the foundation of our migration to a multi-tenant cloud environment which includes global ERP, human capital management, data analytics and artificial intelligence. As first mentioned in our third quarter 2019 Form 10-Q, this migration and upgrade will be done in three phases over three years and this implementation marks the successful completion of phase one of this long-term investment in our future. We expect to substantially improve our administrative efficiency and customer service levels as the full capabilities of our new software system are rolled out.
The supply chain disruptions we experienced were due primarily to continued impacts from COVID-19. In addition, extreme weather conditions across parts of the U.S and tightening availability of freight trucks caused delays in delivering products to our facilities as well as to our customers. These factors along with our new software system implementation caused substantial downward pressures on our revenues, margins and earnings during the first half of the first quarter of 2021. The business process improvements critical to developing our new software system are now essentially operational, allowing our delivery schedule to return to meeting current customer demand. The supply chain issues have been greatly reduced as of this filing but could recur. Based on our strong backlog and the current status of our process improvements, we believe we have the opportunity to substantially improve our operating results in 2021 beyond the first quarter.
Impact of COVID-19
The spread of the COVID-19 virus during the year ended December 31, 2020 has caused an economic downturn on a global scale, as well as significant volatility in the financial markets. We are considered a critical infrastructure industry, as defined by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. During the month of March 2020, we enacted limited shutdowns of all of our domestic facilities to make appropriate modifications to our operations because of COVID-19, which allowed us to continue to serve our customers, while taking precautions to provide a safe work environment for our employees and customers. Since that time and through the present, we have been rotating our workforce every four days, and have designated periods of non-production time for sanitation efforts, and have adjusted work schedules to maximize our capacity while adhering to recommended precautions such as social distancing, and have established and implemented work from home provisions where possible. As part of our ongoing safety measures, we temporarily suspend operations from time to time to clean and disinfect areas within our facilities. We enacted such limited suspensions from time to time at certain of our domestic facilities during 2020. Our international operations have also been affected by various comparable requirements of governmental agencies and safety related operational adjustments. These safety modifications continue to have an adverse impact on our plant productivity, although the impact has been less severe as we have become more accustomed to working under them. We are unable to predict when we may be able to safely relax these new operating measures that were adopted as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In March 2020, we drew $25,000 on our existing credit facility for working capital needs and as a precautionary measure to ensure future short-term cash flow requirements were met during the heightened uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. However, during the year we repaid the balance in full, as our cash position was stronger than anticipated. At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $57,521, which were substantially unchanged at February 26, 2021. Although our cash position is strong, we continue
to consider other steps that could be implemented to conserve liquidity in these uncertain times, including possible delays of certain capital expenditures. We have not taken any loans or grants under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, also referred to as the CARES Act, or other governmental programs, and have no plans to do so.
While we have experienced no material disruptions in our supply of parts, components and materials due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have had material curtailments of new chassis deliveries due to shutdowns and production slowdowns at our suppliers’ facilities during the second and third quarters of 2020. During the second quarter, most of these facilities were operating at a reduced capacity, but returned to operating at levels sufficient to meet our requirements by the end of the third quarter. We also have experienced reductions in orders for our products since the beginning of the pandemic, although demand has steadily improved since the second quarter. This depressed demand along with the decreases in deliveries of chassis caused us to temporarily shut our domestic plants in Pennsylvania and Greeneville, Tennessee for several weeks at the end of the second quarter and for the first few weeks of the third quarter. Our international plants also were adversely impacted and experienced shutdowns during the second quarter. While all of our plants have now reopened, the possibility of new shutdowns of one or more of our facilities due to the COVID-19 pandemic remains. This decrease in our production levels, coupled with our health and safety-related adjustments to operations, materially negatively impacted our revenues during the year, but also served to strengthen our current backlog of orders. Our revenues recovered substantially from the second quarter levels. However, the impacts of chassis delivery curtailments and the somewhat softened demand from towing equipment operators are still uncertain, and we are continuing to monitor these factors to determine how they might impact our future production.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to unfold and certain states and localities continue to experience surges in COVID-19 cases from time to time. The extent of the pandemic’s effect on our operational and financial performance will depend in large part on future developments, which cannot be predicted with confidence at this time. Future developments include the duration, scope and severity of the pandemic, including as a result of the emergence of new strains of the virus and any future resurgences of COVID-19 or variant strains, the actions taken to contain or mitigate its impact, the impact on governmental programs and budgets, the development of treatments or vaccines, the demand for new equipment from towing equipment operators, and the resumption of widespread economic activity. We are continuing to monitor orders from our customers for COVID-19 pandemic related changes. While we know that COVID-19 related changes to our operating processes have and will continue to impact our production levels for so long as they are in place, due to the inherent uncertainty of the unprecedented and rapidly evolving situation, we are unable to predict with any confidence the likely impact of the continuing COVID-19 pandemic on our future operations. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may experience materially adverse impacts to our business due to any resulting economic recession or depression, or to a general reduction in miles driven on roadways due to a decrease in travel.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which require us to make estimates. Certain accounting policies are deemed “critical,” as they require management’s highest degree of judgment, estimations and assumptions. A discussion of critical accounting policies, the judgments and uncertainties affecting their application and the likelihood that materially different amounts would be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions follows:
Accounts Receivable
We extend credit to customers in the normal course of business. Collections from customers are continuously monitored and an allowance for doubtful accounts is maintained based on historical experience and any specific customer collection issues. While such bad debt expenses have historically been within expectations and the allowance established, there can be no assurance that we will continue to experience the same credit loss rates as in the past.
Inventory
Inventory costs include materials, labor and factory overhead. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, determined on a first-in, first-out basis. Appropriate consideration is given to obsolescence, valuation and other factors in determining net realizable value. Revisions of these estimates could result in the need for adjustments.
Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets may not be fully recoverable. When a determination has been made that the carrying amount of long-lived asset may not be fully recovered, the amount of impairment is measured by comparing an asset’s estimated fair value to its carrying value. The determination of fair value is based on projected future cash flows discounted at a rate determined by management, or if available, independent appraisals or sales price negotiations. The estimation of fair value includes significant judgment regarding assumptions of revenue, operating costs, interest rates, property and equipment additions, and industry competition and general economic and business conditions among other factors. We believe that these estimates are reasonable; however, changes in any of these factors could affect these evaluations. Based on these estimates, we believe that our long-lived assets are appropriately valued.
Goodwill
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually or if an event or circumstance occurs that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below the carrying amount. Goodwill is reviewed for impairment utilizing a qualitative assessment and, if necessary, a quantitative assessment. If we perform a qualitative analysis of goodwill and determine that fair value more likely than not exceeds the carrying value of the reporting unit, no further testing is needed. Alternatively, if we elect to utilize a quantitative assessment, an impairment loss would be recognized to the extent that the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying value of the goodwill. We cannot predict the occurrence of certain events or changes in circumstances that might adversely affect the carrying value of goodwill. Such events might include, but are not limited to, the impact of the economic environment or a material change in a relationship with significant customers.
Warranty Reserves
We estimate expense for product warranty claims at the time products are sold. These estimates are established using historical information about the nature, frequency, and average cost of warranty claims. We review trends of warranty claims and take actions to improve product quality and minimize warranty claims. We believe the warranty reserve is adequate; however, actual claims incurred could differ from the original estimates, requiring adjustments to the accrual.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best assessment of estimated current and future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in both the United States and foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the consolidated income tax expense.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements, which will result in deductible or taxable amounts in the future. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. The assumptions about future taxable income require significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we use to manage the underlying businesses.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in multiple jurisdictions. Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740 states that a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation process, on the basis of the technical merits.
We (1) record unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities in accordance with ASC 740 and (2) adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes because of the evaluation of new information not previously available to us. Because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the unrecognized tax benefit liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which new information is available.
Revenues
Under our accounting policies, revenues are recognized when obligations under the terms of a contract with a customer are satisfied. Generally, this occurs upon shipment, which is when control has transferred to independent distributors or other customers. From time to time, revenue is recognized under a bill and hold arrangement. Recognition of revenue on bill and hold arrangements occurs when control transfers to the customer. Our policy requires the reason for the bill and hold arrangement to be substantive, and the product to be separately identified as belonging to the customer, ready for physical transfer, and unavailable to be used or directed to another customer.
Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration expected to be received in exchange for the transfer of products. Sales and other taxes collected concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. Warranty related costs are recognized as an expense at the time products are sold. Depending on the terms of the arrangement, for certain contracts the Company may defer the recognition of a portion of the consideration received because a future obligation has not yet been satisfied, such as an extended service contract. An observable stand-alone selling price for separate performance obligations or a cost plus margin approach is utilized when one is not available.
While we manufacture only the bodies of wreckers and car carriers, which are installed on truck chassis manufactured by third parties, we frequently purchase truck chassis for resale to our customers. Sales of company-purchased truck chassis are included in net sales. Margin percentages are substantially lower on completed recovery vehicles containing company-purchased chassis.
Foreign Currency Translation
The functional currency for our foreign operations is the applicable local currency. The translation from the applicable foreign currencies to U.S. dollars is performed for balance sheet accounts using current exchange rates in effect at the balance sheet date, historical rates for equity and the weighted average exchange rate during the period for revenue and expense accounts. Foreign currency translation adjustments are included in shareholders’ equity. Intercompany transactions denominated in a currency other than the functional currency are remeasured into the functional currency. Gains and losses resulting from foreign currency transactions are included in other (income) expense, net in our consolidated statements of income.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the years indicated, the components of the consolidated statements of income expressed as a percentage of net sales.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net sales were $651,286 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $818,166 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 20.4%. The decrease in our revenue stream was largely attributable to chassis supply chain issues, shutdown periods due to soft demand, and health and safety-related adjustments to operations, all attributable to impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Net domestic sales decreased during the period from $697,002 to $556,540, and net foreign sales decreased from $121,164 to $94,746 during the same period. Net sales in the fourth quarter were $178,337, which reflected continued recovery from the pandemic impacted level of $128,529 in the second quarter of the year.
Costs of operations decreased 20.6% to $572,928 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $721,678 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Overall, costs of operations as a percentage of net sales decreased from 88.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 88.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to differences in product mix.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $39,714 from $43,394 for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to decreases in travel related expenses and other professional fees. As a percentage of net sales, selling, general and administrative expenses increased to 6.1% for 2020 from 5.3% for 2019, primarily due to fixed period costs relative to reduced sales levels.
Interest expense, net decreased to $1,215 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $2,378 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Decreases in interest expense, net were primarily due to decreases in interest on distributor floor plan activity, decreases in interest on the credit facility, and decreases in interest to chassis suppliers.
When the Company has transactions that are denominated in a currency other than its functional currency, the Company is exposed to foreign currency transaction risk and must record gains and losses through other (income) expense when the related balance sheet items are remeasured in the functional currency of the Company. Other (income) expense, net is composed primarily of these foreign currency exchange gains and losses, with the remainder being composed of gains and losses on disposals of equipment. The Company experienced a net foreign currency exchange gain of $685 for 2020 compared to a net exchange loss of $274 for 2019.
The provision for income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 reflects a combined federal, state and foreign tax rate of 21.7% and 22.4%, respectively, which corresponds to a tax provision of $8,267 for 2020 as compared to $11,274 for 2019. Our tax rate in 2020 compares favorably to 2019 primarily due to increases in R&D tax credit estimates for 2020. For more information on the effective tax rate, see Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, despite the unique challenges of the continuing COVID-19 pandemic, the Company experienced strengthening demand and increased operations at its domestic production facilities in comparison to the prior two quarters due to a steadying supply chain, more normalized operations and the absence of domestic shutdowns, which led to improved revenues during the period. In addition, the Company continued to experience reduced selling, general and administrative costs due to reduced travel and accrued expense adjustments for cancelled trade shows and various other marketing events. For these reasons, net income for the fourth quarter substantially exceeded that from the previous three quarters of the year.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
For a comparison of the 2019 to 2018 reporting periods, see Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - “Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on March 4, 2020 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash provided by operating activities during 2020 was $60,709, compared to $35,132 provided during 2019. Cash provided by operating activities is generally attributable to the receipt of payments from our customers as settlement of their contractual obligation once we have fulfilled all performance obligations related to our contracts with them. These cash receipts are netted with payments for purchases of inventory, payments for materials used in manufacturing, and other payments that are necessary in the ordinary course of our operations, such as those for utilities and taxes. Our decreased revenue stream during the 2020 caused less cash to be used for purposes of new production while receivables from higher sales levels of the prior year continued to flow in, resulting in substantially greater cash provided by operating activities during the year. During 2020, we have largely used available cash flow from operations to pay for capital expenditures, to pay dividends and to repay the debt balance under our credit facility. Cash from operations in 2019 was favorably impacted by increases in revenue growth resulting from our incremental increases in production capacities and favorable changes in inventory levels.
Cash used in investing activities during 2020 was $17,224, compared to $17,063 used during 2019. The cash used in investing activities for 2020 and 2019 was primarily for the purchase of property, plant and equipment, including a significant equipment upgrade project at our Greeneville, Tennessee location.
Cash used in financing activities during 2020 was $13,631, compared to $18,597 used during 2019. The cash used in financing activities in 2020 was primarily attributable to dividend payments of $8,212, net payments on the credit facility of $4,998, net payments on our French subsidiary’s loan of $400, and an immaterial amount of payments on finance lease obligations. The cash used in financing activities in 2019 was primarily attributable to net payments on the credit facility of $10,002, dividend payments of $8,208, net payments on our French subsidiary’s loan of $367, and an immaterial amount of payments on finance lease obligations.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $57,521. Our primary cash requirements include working capital, capital expenditures, the funding of any declared cash dividends and principal and interest payments on indebtedness. At December 31, 2020, we had commitments of approximately $7,068 for the acquisition of property and equipment, which includes $1,736 on a fabrication equipment upgrade project at our Greeneville, Tennessee location. As of December 31, 2020, we also had commitments of $5,266 in software license fees. We expect our primary sources of cash to be cash flow from operations and cash and cash equivalents on hand at December 31, 2020, with borrowings under our credit facility being available as needed. We expect these sources to be sufficient to satisfy our cash needs during 2021 and for the next several years. However, our ability to satisfy our cash needs will substantially depend upon a number of factors including our future operating performance, taking into account the economic, regulatory and other factors discussed above and elsewhere in this Annual Report, as well as financial, business and other factors, many of which are beyond our control.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, $22,787 and $18,103, respectively, of the Company’s cash and temporary investments were held by foreign subsidiaries based in the local currency. We do not currently have plans to repatriate undistributed foreign earnings to the United States and have not determined any timeline or amount for any such future distributions.
During 2019, in addition to investments in manufacturing equipment technology, the Company purchased a facility in Chattanooga to be used in research and development and various other activities. During 2020, the Company took advantage of temporary shutdown periods and engaged in a project to significantly upgrade fabrication equipment at its Greeneville, Tennessee location.
For a discussion of the 2019 reporting period, see Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - “Liquidity and Capital Resources” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on March 4, 2020 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Contractual Obligations
The following is a summary of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
(1) Amounts do not include potential contingent obligations of $56,822 under repurchase commitments with third-party lenders in the event of independent distributor customer default.
(2) Purchase obligations represent open purchase orders for raw materials and other components issued in the normal course of business.
(3) Represents commitments to various capital projects and equipment acquisitions.
Credit Facility and Other Obligations
Credit Facility
On December 21, 2020, we amended and restated our loan agreement with First Horizon Bank (formerly known as First Tennessee Bank National Association), which governs our existing $50,000 unsecured revolving credit facility, to (i) renew and extend the maturity date from May 31, 2022 to May 31, 2027 and make certain other conforming changes, (ii) amend the tangible net worth covenant to increase the minimum required compliance level thereunder from $160,000 to $190,000 (the Company’s tangible net worth at December 31, 2020 was approximately $271,000), and (iii) allow for the sale and leaseback of certain equipment. The credit facility contains customary representations and warranties, events of default, and financial, affirmative and negative covenants for loan agreements of this kind. Covenants under the credit facility restrict the payment of cash dividends if the Company would be in violation of the minimum tangible net worth test or the leverage ratio test in the current loan agreement as a result of the dividend, among various restrictions. We have been in compliance with these covenants throughout 2019 and 2020. In the absence of a default, all borrowings under the credit facility bear interest at the LIBOR Rate plus 1.00% or 1.25% per annum. The Company will pay a non-usage fee under the current loan agreement at a rate per annum equal to between 0.15% and 0.35% of the unused amount of the credit facility, which fee is paid quarterly.
Outstanding Borrowings
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no borrowings outstanding under the credit facility. The Company continued to collect on accounts receivable while less cash was used on working capital expenditures during the period of lower demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, thus increasing cash available for payments on the credit facility. As of December 31, 2019, the Company owed $4,998 under the credit facility.
Our French subsidiary, Jige International S.A., had an agreement with Banque Européenne du Crédit Mutuel for an unsecured fixed rate loan which matured at September 30, 2020. At December 31, 2019, the Company had $368 in outstanding borrowings under the loan agreement, all of which was classified as short-term obligations on the consolidated balance sheets.
Changes in interest rates affect the interest paid on indebtedness under our credit facility because the outstanding amounts of indebtedness under our current credit facility are subject to variable interest rates. Under our credit facility, the non-default rate of interest is equal to the LIBOR Market Index Rate plus 1.00% or 1.25% per annum, depending on our leverage ratio, for a rate of interest of 1.14% at December 31, 2020. A one percent change in the interest rate on our variable-rate debt would not have materially impacted our financial position, results of operations or cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Long-Term Obligations
Prior to applying a discount rate to our lease liabilities, we had approximately $1,575 in non-cancellable operating lease obligations and $38 in non-cancellable finance lease obligations at December 31, 2020. Leases with original contractual terms less than one year were excluded from non-cancellable lease obligations.
We are in the process of implementing an enterprise software solution which we expect to substantially improve our administrative efficiency and customer service levels. We have $5,266 in remaining contractual payments under our agreement with the software provider, which extends through 2025.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recently Issued Standards
In December 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Updated (“ASU”) 2019-12 Income Taxes (Topic 740), which among other things will require the Company to recognize franchise tax that is partially based on income as an income-based tax. The update will be effective for financial statements issued for annual periods, and interim periods within these annual periods, beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The Company plans to apply the amendments in the update on a modified retrospective basis. The adoption of this update will not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Recently Adopted Standards
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company adopted ASU 2018-15 Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40). The purpose of the standard is to align the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred in cloud computing arrangements that are service contracts with the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred to develop or obtain internal-use software. The Company applied the amendments in the update prospectively to all implementation costs incurred after the date of the adoption. The adoption of this update did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements or related disclosures.