ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
Business. GTX Corp and its subsidiaries (currently, Global Trek Xploration, Inc. and LOCiMOBILE, Inc.) are engaged in businesses that design, develop and sell various interrelated and complementary products and services in the Personal Location Services marketplace. Global Trek Xploration focuses on hardware and software design and development of products and services by offering a Global Positioning System (“GPS”), Bluetooth Low Energy (“BLE”) and cellular location platform that enables subscribers to track in real time the whereabouts of people, pets or high valued assets through a miniaturized transceiver module, wireless connectivity gateway, middleware and viewing portal. LOCiMOBILE, Inc. has developed and owns LOCiMobileTM, and Track My Work Force (“TMWF”), a suite of mobile tracking applications that turn the iPhone, Android, and other GPS enabled handsets into a tracking device which can then be tracked from handset to handset or through our Location Data Center tracking portal and which allows the user to send a map to the recipient’s phone showing the user’s location.
Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report.
The following table represents our statement of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenues
Revenues as a whole in fiscal 2020 decreased by 29% or $441,542 in comparison to fiscal 2019 mostly as a direct result of the overall setbacks and the restrictive lockdowns due to COVID, which in turn brought about a reduction in IP and subscription revenues, however we still managed to grow our product revenues, grow our customer base, expand our product lines, maintain good profit margins, and reduced our general expenses. Product sales increased 109% or $432,395 in fiscal 2020 in comparison to fiscal 2019, which is a attributable to our pivot in early March 2020 to expand our health and safety product line into the Personal Protective Equipment (“PPE”) business.
We increased our customer base by at least 2,000 for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s customer base and revenue streams were comprised of approximately 63.95% B2B (Wholesale Distributors and Enterprise Institutions), 33.61% B2C (consumers and government agencies who bought on the behalf of consumers, through our online ecommerce platform and through Amazon, Google and iTunes), 1.87% IP (our monetization campaign from consulting, licensing and asserting our patents) and 0.56% Military and Law Enforcement.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s customer base and revenue streams were comprised of approximately 39.59% B2B (Wholesale Distributors and Enterprise Institutions), 8.80% B2C (consumers and government agencies who bought on the behalf of consumers, through our online ecommerce platform and through Amazon, Google and iTunes), 50.83% IP (our monetization campaign from consulting, licensing and asserting our patents) and 0.78% Military and Law Enforcement.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold increased by 210% or $405,472 during fiscal 2020 in comparison to fiscal 2019, primarily due to less IP and subscription revenues, which are high margin, to lower margin PPE revenues. As a result, total gross margin, decreased from 87% in fiscal 2019 to 44% in fiscal 2020.
Wages and benefits
Wages and benefits for fiscal 2020 remained fairly steady, increasing only $15,790 or 3% as compared to fiscal 2019, primarily to an increase in warehouse and shipping personnel.
Professional fees
Professional fees consist of costs attributable to consultants and contractors who primarily spend their time on legal, accounting, product development, business development, corporate advisory services and shareholder communications. Such costs decreased $14,868 or 6% in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. As a result, some professional fees decreased as more responsibilities were transferred from outside contractors and consultants to in-house personnel.
Sale and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased by 163% or $17,390 during 2020 in comparison to 2019. Primarily due to initiating a PPE campaign in order to target a larger customer base.
General and administrative
General and administrative costs during fiscal 2020 decreased by $50,791 or 22%, in comparison to fiscal 2019, mostly due to reductions in depreciation and amortization, travel and entertainment expenses affected by COVID-19, and the stay-at-home mandates. We expect these numbers to increase as we ramp up our overall business after the COVID crisis.
Other expense/income, net
Other expense/income in 2019 was a net expense of ($773,649), however in 2020 we had a net increase or income of $258,805 which decreased net other income/expense by $1,032,453, or 133%. This is primarily as a net result of non-cash gains from the sale of marketable securities, gains from the extinguishment of debt, the elimination of any derivative expenses, and the lowering of interest expense as we decrease and paydown our debt.
Net loss
Net loss during fiscal 2020 decreased by $217,918, or 37%, in comparison to the net loss incurred during fiscal 2019 primarily as a net result of strong product sales, lowering overall operating expense, non-cash gains from the sale of marketable securities, gains from the extinguishment of debt, the elimination of any derivative expenses, and overall interest expenses were reduced as a result of the lower amount of outstanding debt.
On an earnings per share basis, we saw a reduction in share loss from ($0.01) in 2019 to ($0.00) in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $76,912 in cash and $290,292 of other current assets, and $3,184,397 of current liabilities, resulting in a working capital deficit of $2,894,105 compared to $125,200 in cash and a working capital deficit of approximately $3,630,942 as of December 31, 2019.
Net cash used in operating activities was $556,556 for fiscal 2020 compared to net cash used of $140,934 for fiscal 2019. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was largely attributed to the net change in non-cash items that includes: stock based compensation, repatriation of retention bonuses, gain on the extinguishment of debt, lower amortizations of debt discount and the interest and financing costs on note assignments and the net change in operating assets and liabilities that includes increased spending for inventory, the payment of accounts payable and accrued expenses, including interest expense attributable to the reduction in debt.
Net cash provided by investing activities during fiscal 2020 and 2019 was $146,200 and $42,778, respectively and consisted of proceeds from the sale of marketable securities.
Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2020 was $362,068 and consisted of proceeds totaling $227,870 received from advances under CARE loans, $139,319 from two lines of credit and $250,000 in proceeds from the sale of preferred shares of stock with payments on debt and the lines of credit of $255,121. Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2019 was $153,500 and consisted of proceeds totaling $50,000 received from advances under a term loan agreement, $105,000 from two lines of credit and $150,000 in proceeds from the sale of preferred shares of stock with payments on debt and the lines of credit of $151,500. Thus, reducing our borrowings through notes by $445,000 or 79% from 2019 to 2020.
We expect to continue to generate revenues from all our business units from existing product sales, recurring subscriptions, software and Intellectual Property licensing, military and professional services. We also expect to see new revenues come in from recently launched products and products that are scheduled for launch throughout 2021 however, even though existing product sales and recurring subscriptions are starting to become more consistent, the amount of revenues is still unpredictable and may not be sufficient to fund all our working capital needs. Accordingly, we anticipate that we will have negative cash flow from our operations and, therefore, will have to raise additional capital in order to fund our operations in 2021.
In order to continue funding our working capital needs and our product development costs we continued to draw upon our Lines of Credit with an accredited investor and our bank (see Notes Payable Footnote #c & #d for more information), which resulted in $139,319 of draws and repayments of $215,604 against this balance in fiscal year 2020. Additionally, during 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (“SPA”) with three accredited investors which led to a $250,000 infusion of cash in return for Preferred B shares, Preferred C shares and Warrants.
In 2019, we entered into one (1) term loan agreement with an accredited investor and continued to draw upon our Lines of Credit with an accredited investor and our bank, which resulted in $105,000 of draws against this balance in fiscal year 2019. This line of credit with the accredited investor carries an 8.5% interest rate, with no prepayment penalty. Additionally, at the end of 2019, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (“SPA”) with an accredited investor which led to a $150,000 infusion of cash in return for Preferred B shares and Warrants.
Subsequent to October of 2018 and through the beginning 2021, except for a government backed PPP loan, the Company has not taken any new debt.
In addition to continuing to incur normal operating expenses, we intend to continue our research and development efforts for our various technologies and products, including hardware, software, interface customization, and website development, and we also expect to further develop our sales, marketing and manufacturing programs associated with the commercialization, licensing and sales of our GPS devices and technology. We currently do not have sufficient capital on hand to fully fund our proposed research and development activities, which lack of product development may negatively affect our future revenues.
As noted above, based on budgeted revenues and expenditures, unless revenues increase significantly, we believe that our existing and projected sources of liquidity may not be sufficient to satisfy our cash requirements for the next twelve months. Accordingly, we will need to raise additional funds in 2021. The sale of additional equity securities will result in additional dilution to our existing stockholders. Sale of debt securities could involve substantial operational and financial covenants that might inhibit our ability to follow our business plan. Any additional funding that we obtain in a financing is likely to reduce the percentage ownership of the Company held by our existing security-holders. The amount of this dilution may be substantial based on our current stock price, and could increase if the trading price of our common stock declines at the time of any financing from its current levels. We may also attempt to raise funds through corporate collaboration and licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional funds through collaboration and licensing arrangements, we may be required to grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us. There can be no assurance that financing will be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. If we are unable to obtain the needed additional funding, we may have to further reduce our current level of operations, or, may even have to totally discontinue our operations.
We are subject to many risks associated with early stage businesses, including the above discussed risks associated with the ability to raise capital. Please see the section entitled “Risk Factors” for more information regarding risks associated with our business.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There are no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Inflation
Inflation and changing prices have had no effect on our net sales and revenues or on our income from continuing operations over our two most recent fiscal years.
Going Concern
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis which assumes the Company will be able to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business for the foreseeable future. The Company has incurred net losses of $368,407 and $586,325 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, has incurred losses since inception resulting in an accumulated deficit of $24,177,926 as of December 31, 2020, and has negative working capital of $2,894,105 as of December 31, 2020. A significant part of our negative working capital position at December 31, 2020 consisted of $956,661, of amounts due to various accredited investors of the Company for convertible promissory notes, loans and a letter of credit. The Company anticipates further losses in the development of its business.
The ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company generating profitable operations in the future and/or obtaining the necessary financing to meet its obligations and repay its liabilities arising from normal business operations when they come due. The Company’s ability to raise additional capital through the future issuances of debt or equity is unknown. The obtainment of additional financing, the successful development of the Company’s contemplated plan of operations, or its attainment of profitable operations are necessary for the Company to continue operations. The ability to successfully resolve these factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The consolidated financial statements of the Company do not include any adjustments that may result from the outcome of these aforementioned uncertainties.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. Because a precise determination of many assets and liabilities is dependent upon future events, the preparation of financial statements for a period necessarily involves the use of estimates which have been made using careful judgment.
The financial statements have, in management’s opinion, been properly prepared within reasonable limits of materiality and within the framework of the significant accounting policies summarized below.
We have identified the following critical accounting policies that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. The following is a review of the more critical accounting policies and methods used by us.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), (“ASC 606”). The underlying principle of ASC 606 is to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers at the amount expected to be collected. ASC 606 creates a five-step model that requires entities to exercise judgment when considering the terms of contract(s), which include (1) identifying the contract or agreement with a customer, (2) identifying our performance obligations in the contract or agreement, (3) determining the transaction price, (4) allocating the transaction price to the separate performance obligations, and (5) recognizing revenue as each performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company does not have any significant contracts with customers requiring performance beyond delivery, and contracts with customers contain no incentives or discounts that could cause revenue to be allocated or adjusted over time. Shipping and handling activities are performed before the customer obtains control of the goods and therefore represent a fulfillment activity rather than a promised service to the customer. Revenue and costs of sales are recognized when control of the products transfers to our customer, which generally occurs upon shipment from our facilities. The Company’s performance obligations are satisfied at that time.
We derive our revenues primarily from hardware sales, subscription services fees, IP licensing and professional services fees. Hardware includes our SmartSole, Military and other Stand-Alone Devices. Subscription services revenues consist of fees from customers accessing our cloud-based software solutions and subscription or license fees for our platform. Professional services and other revenues consist primarily of fees from implementation services, configuration, data services, training and managed services related to our solutions. IP licensing is related to our agreement with Inventergy whereby we have partnered in order to monetize our IP portfolio (see Note 3, below).
Product sales
At the inception of each contract, we assess the goods and services promised in our contracts and identify each distinct performance obligation. The Company recognizes revenue upon the transfer of control of promised products or services to the customer in an amount that depicts the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to for the related products or services. For the large majority of the Company’s sales, transfer of control occurs once product has shipped and title and risk of loss have transferred to the customer.
Services Income
The Company’s software solutions are available for use as hosted application arrangements under subscription fee agreements without licensing perpetual rights to the software. Subscription fees from these applications are recognized over time on a ratable basis over the customer agreement term beginning on the date the Company’s solution is made available to the customer. Our subscription contracts are generally one to three months in length. Amounts that have been invoiced are recorded in accounts receivable and deferred revenues or revenues, depending on whether the revenue recognition criteria have been met.
The majority of our professional services arrangements are recognized on a time and materials basis. Professional services revenues recognized on a time and materials basis are measured monthly based on time incurred and contractually agreed upon rates. Certain professional services revenues are based on fixed fee arrangements and revenues are recognized based on the proportional performance method. In some cases, the terms of our time and materials and fixed fee arrangements may require that we defer the recognition of revenue until contractual conditions are met. Data services and training revenues are generally recognized as the services are performed.
Licensing Revenue
Licensing revenue recorded by the Company relates exclusively to the Company’s License and Partnership agreement with Inventergy which provides for ongoing licensing based on monetization of IP licenses. The Company recognizes revenue for licensing under ASC 606, which provides revenue recognition constraints by requiring the recognition of revenue at the later of the following: 1) sale or usage of the products or 2) satisfaction of the performance obligations. The Company has satisfied its performance obligations and therefore recognizes licensing revenue when the sales to which the licensing relate are completed. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 the Company recognized 15 settlements for a total of $20,000 in licensing revenue and $763,000, respectively.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s customer base was comprised of approximately 69.95% B2B (Wholesale Distributors and Enterprise Institutions), 33.61% B2C (consumers and government agencies who bought on the behalf of consumers, through our online ecommerce platform and through Amazon, Google and iTunes), 1.87% IP (our monetization campaign from consulting, licensing and asserting our patents) and 0.56% Military and Law Enforcement. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s customer base was comprised of approximately 39.59% B2B (Wholesale Distributors and Enterprise Institutions), 8.80% B2C (consumers and government agencies who bought on the behalf of consumers, through our online ecommerce platform and through Amazon, Google and iTunes), 50.83% IP (our monetization campaign from consulting, licensing and asserting our patents) and 0.78% Military and Law Enforcement.
Product Warranty
The Company’s warranty policy provides repair or replacement of products (excluding GPS Shoe devices) returned for defects within ninety days of purchase. Warranty liabilities are recorded at the time of sale for the estimated costs that may be incurred under our standard warranty. As of December 31, 2020, products returned for repair or replacement have been immaterial. Accordingly, a warranty liability has not been deemed necessary.
Derivative Instruments
Our debt or equity instruments may contain embedded derivative instruments, such as conversion options, which in certain circumstances may be required to be bifurcated from the associated host instrument and accounted for separately as a derivative instrument liability.
Our derivative instrument liabilities are re-valued at the end of each reporting period, with changes in the fair value of the derivative liability recorded as charges or credits to income, in the period in which the changes occur. For bifurcated conversion options that are accounted for as derivative instrument liabilities, we determine the fair value of these instruments using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. This model requires assumptions related to the remaining term of the instrument and risk-free rates of return, our current Common Stock price and expected dividend yield, and the expected volatility of our Common Stock price over the life of the option.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense is recorded for stock and stock options awarded in return for services rendered. The expense is measured at the grant-date fair value of the award and recognized as compensation expense on a straight-line basis, which is generally commensurate with the vesting period. The Company estimates forfeitures that it expects will occur and records expense based upon the number of awards expected to vest.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to footnote for management’s discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.