Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
General
Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries (the "Company") is a global professional services firm offering clients advice in the areas of risk, strategy and people. The Company’s 76,000 colleagues advise clients in over 130 countries. With annual revenue over $17 billion, the Company helps clients navigate an increasingly dynamic and complex environment through four market-leading businesses. Marsh advises individual and commercial clients of all sizes on insurance broking and innovative risk management solutions. Guy Carpenter develops advanced risk, reinsurance and capital strategies that help clients grow profitably and pursue emerging opportunities. Mercer delivers advice and technology-driven solutions that help organizations redefine the world of work, reshape retirement and investment outcomes, and unlock health and well being for a changing workforce. Oliver Wyman Group serves as critical strategic, economic and brand advisor to private sector and governmental clients.
The Company conducts business through two segments:
•Risk and Insurance Services includes risk management activities (risk advice, risk transfer and risk control and mitigation solutions) as well as insurance and reinsurance broking and services. The Company conducts business in this segment through Marsh and Guy Carpenter.
•Consulting includes health, wealth and career consulting services and products, and specialized management, economic and brand consulting services. The Company conducts business in this segment through Mercer and Oliver Wyman Group.
We describe the primary sources of revenue and categories of expense for each segment below, in our discussion of segment financial results. A reconciliation of segment operating income to total operating income is included in Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 in this report.
Acquisitions and dispositions impacting the Risk and Insurance Services and Consulting segments are discussed in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements.
For information on fiscal 2018 results and similar comparisons, see "Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
This MD&A contains forward-looking statements as that term is defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. See "Information Concerning Forward-Looking Statements" at the outset of this report.
Business Update Related To COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the Coronavirus (COVID-19) a pandemic. The pandemic has impacted essentially every geography in which the Company operates. Governments implemented various restrictions around the world, including closure of non-essential businesses, travel, shelter-in-place requirements for citizens and other restrictions. The Company has taken a number of precautionary steps to safeguard its businesses and colleagues from COVID-19, including implementing travel restrictions, arranging work from home capabilities and flexible work policies.
In the second and third quarters of 2020, the Company began re-opening offices in various locations around the world, while ensuring that it continued to adhere to guidelines and orders issued by national, state and local governments. The timing of additional office re-openings will vary based on the conditions and restrictions in each location. In the fourth quarter, there was a surge in COVID-19 infections in many parts of the world, leading to renewed lock-downs and increased government restrictions. The safety and well-being of our colleagues continues to be our first priority. Several vaccines have been or are in various stages of approval. However, the speed of distribution and the impact on colleagues' ability to return to the office remains uncertain. The vast majority of the Company’s colleagues have continued and will continue working in a remote work environment for most of 2021. The Company expects it will continue its ability to service clients effectively while colleagues remain in a remote work environment.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had an adverse impact on the Company’s revenue growth, primarily in our businesses that are discretionary in nature, which was partly mitigated through disciplined expense management by implementing restrictions on travel and other cost containment measures. However, the ultimate extent of the COVID-19 impact to the Company will depend on numerous evolving factors and future developments that it is not able to predict. Factors that could adversely affect the Company’s financial statements related to the financial and operational impact of COVID-19 are outlined in the "Risk Factors” section of this report.
Acquisition of JLT
On April 1, 2019, the Company completed the acquisition (the "Transaction") of all of the outstanding shares of Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc ("JLT"), a public company organized under the laws of England and Wales. In accordance with the terms of the Transaction, JLT shareholders received £19.15 in cash for each JLT share, which valued JLT’s existing share capital at approximately £4.3 billion (or approximately $5.6 billion based on the exchange rate of U.S. $1.31:£1) on the Transaction closing date. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has substantially integrated JLT into all of its business operations.
After the acquisition of JLT, the Company assumed the legal liabilities of JLT’s litigation and regulatory exposures as of April 1, 2019. Please see the "Risk Factors" section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for risks associated with the acquisition and Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements which discusses certain errors and omission matters related to the acquisition.
JLT's results of operations for the period April 1, 2019 through December 31, 2019 are included in the Company’s results of operations for 2019. In accordance with applicable accounting guidance, JLT's results of operations for the period January 1 through March 31, 2019 and for the year ended 2018 are not included in the Company's results of operations and therefore, affect comparability. The Company’s results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were impacted by JLT related acquisition, restructuring and integration costs as well as legacy MMC restructuring programs as discussed in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Consolidated operating income was $3.1 billion in 2020 compared with $2.7 billion in 2019, reflecting the impact of a 3% increase in revenue and an increase in expenses of 1%. On an underlying basis, revenue increased 1%, reflecting an increase of 3% in Risk & Insurance Services offset by a decrease in Consulting of 2%. On an underlying basis, expenses decreased 2%, reflecting a decrease in JLT
integration and restructuring and acquisition-related costs and savings realized from the completion of integration efforts to date. The expense decrease also reflects lower travel and entertainment, meeting costs and outside services resulting from the Company’s restrictions on travel and cost containment measures taken in light of COVID-19 and lower expenses recoverable from clients. These decreases were partly offset by higher incentive compensation, severance and a JLT legacy E&O provision of $161 million recorded in 2020, which is discussed in Note 16 of the consolidated financial statements.
Income before income taxes increased 14% to $2.8 billion as compared to $2.4 billion in 2019, reflecting the change in operating income discussed in the preceding paragraph, partially offset by lower investment income.
Diluted earnings per share increased 16% to $3.94 in 2020 compared with $3.41 in 2019. This increase is a result of the factors discussed above, and a lower effective tax rate in 2020.
Risk and Insurance Services operating income increased $513 million, or 28%, in 2020 compared with 2019. Revenue increased 8%, reflecting increases of 3% on an underlying basis and 1% from acquisitions, partly offset by a 1% decrease from the impact of foreign currency translation. Expense increased 3% reflecting decreases of 2% on an underlying basis and 1% from the impact of foreign currency translation, partly offset by an increase of 2% from acquisitions. The decrease in underlying expenses is primarily due to lower JLT integration, restructuring and acquisition related costs and savings realized from the completion of integration efforts to date. The decrease also reflects lower travel and entertainment and meeting costs resulting from the Company’s restrictions on travel and cost containment measures taken in light of COVID-19, partly offset by higher severance.
Consulting operating income decreased $216 million, or 18%, to $1.0 billion in 2020 compared with 2019, reflecting the impact of a decrease in revenue of 2% and an increase in expense of 1%. Revenue decreased 2% on an underlying basis and 1% from the impact of dispositions. On an underlying basis, expense increased 1% primarily due to a JLT legacy E&O provision of $161 million recorded in 2020, higher JLT integration and restructuring related costs as well as higher severance, partly offset by lower travel, entertainment and meeting costs resulting from the Company’s restrictions on travel and cost containment measures taken in light of COVID-19 and lower expenses recoverable from clients.
The following chart summarizes the activity related to the restructuring and noteworthy items discussed in more detail below:
In 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company’s results of operations and earnings per share were impacted by the following items:
•Restructuring costs, excluding JLT: Includes severance, adjustments to restructuring liabilities for future rent under non-cancellable leases and other real estate exit costs, and restructuring costs related to the integration of recent acquisitions. These costs are discussed in more detail in Note 14 of the consolidated financial statements.
•JLT integration and restructuring costs: Includes severance, lease related exit costs as well as consulting costs from the JLT Transaction. These costs are discussed in more detail in Note 14 of the consolidated financial statements.
•JLT acquisition related costs: Includes advisor fees and stamp duty taxes related to the closing of the JLT Transaction and retention costs. Also includes the loss on the sale of JLT's aerospace business, which is included in revenue.
•JLT legacy E&O provision: In 2020, reflects a provision for a legacy JLT E&O relating to suitability of financial advice provided to individuals for defined benefit pension transfers. This provision is discussed in more detail in Note 16 of the consolidated financial statements.
•Change in fair value of acquisition related derivatives: In connection with the JLT Transaction, to hedge the risk of appreciation of the GBP-denominated purchase price relative to the U.S. dollar, in September 2018, the Company entered into a deal contingent foreign exchange contract (the "FX Contract") to, solely upon consummation of the JLT Transaction, purchase £5.2 billion and sell a corresponding amount of U.S. dollars at a contracted exchange rate. The FX Contract is discussed in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements. An unrealized loss of $325 million related to the fair value changes to this derivative was recognized in the consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2018, largely due to the depreciation of the GBP from September 2018. In 2019, the Company recorded a gain of $31 million upon final settlement of the FX Contract.
In addition, to hedge the economic risk of increases in interest rates prior to its issuance of senior notes in January 2019, in the fourth quarter of 2018, the Company entered into treasury lock contracts related to $2 billion of the expected debt issuance. These economic hedges were not designated as accounting hedges. The Company recorded an unrealized loss of $116 million related to the changes in the fair value of these derivatives in the consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2018. In January 2019, upon issuance of the $5 billion of senior notes, the Company settled the treasury lock contracts and made a payment to its counter party for $122 million.
JLT also had a number of foreign exchange contracts to hedge the risk of foreign exchange movements between the U.S. dollar and the GBP, related to JLT’s U.S. dollar denominated revenue in the U.K. Prior to the acquisition, these derivative contracts were designated as cash flow hedges. Upon completion of the JLT Transaction, these derivative contracts were not re-designated as cash flow hedges by the Company. The contracts were settled in June 2019. The change in fair value between the acquisition date and the settlement date resulted in a charge of $26 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The charge is recorded as a change in fair value of acquisition related derivative contracts in the consolidated statement of income.
•JLT related interest income and expense: To secure funding for the Transaction, the Company entered into a bridge loan agreement with aggregate commitments of £5.2 billion in September 2018. The Company paid the customary upfront fees related to the bridge loan, which were amortized as interest expense based on the period of time the facility was expected to be in effect. The Company recorded interest expense of approximately $30 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 related to the amortization of the bridge loan fees and an additional $6 million in 2019 upon termination of the bridge loan agreement in connection with the closing of the JLT Transaction. The Company recorded approximately $47 million of interest expense related to the senior notes issued in the first quarter of 2019 and $25 million of interest income from the investment of the proceeds prior to the closing of the JLT Transaction.
•Investment loss-Alexander Forbes ("AF"): The Company recorded an impairment charge of $83 million in the 2018 consolidated statement of income for an other than temporary decline in the value of the investment. During 2020, the Company sold approximately 242 million shares of the common stock of AF. Upon completion of the sales of these shares, the investment in AF was accounted at fair value, with investment gains and losses recorded as investment income (loss) in the consolidated statement of income.
•Pension settlement charge: The Defined Benefit Pension Plans in the U.K. and certain other countries allow participants an option for the payment of a lump sum distribution from plan assets before retirement in full satisfaction of the retirement benefits due to the participant as well as any survivor’s benefit. The Company’s policy in accordance with applicable U.S. GAAP is to treat these lump sum payments as a partial settlement of the plan liability if they exceed the sum of service cost plus interest cost components of net period pension cost of a plan for the year ("settlement thresholds"). The amount of lump sum payments in 2018 exceeded the settlement thresholds in two of the U.K. plans. The Company recorded non-cash settlement charges, primarily related to these plans of $42 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, of which approximately 90% impacted Risk and Insurance Services. In 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded $3 million and $7 million, respectively, of non-cash pension settlement charges related to certain of its non U.S. plans.
JLT Integration and Restructuring Costs
The Company is completing its integration of JLT, which is discussed in more detail in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements. The costs incurred in connection with the integration and restructuring of the combined businesses, primarily related to severance, real estate rationalization and technology, consulting fees related to the management of the integration processes and legal fees related to the rationalization of legal entity structures. The Company incurred costs of $251 million in 2020 and $335 million in 2019 and expects the remaining costs of $139 million to be incurred in 2021 of which $134 million will be cash expenditures. Through December 31, 2020, the Company has exceeded the initial estimated savings of $350 million. The Company now expects approximately $425 million of annualized savings when the integration is completed in 2021.
Consolidated Revenue and Expense
Revenue - Components of Change
The Company conducts business in many countries. As a result, foreign exchange rate movements may impact period-to-period comparisons of revenue. Similarly, certain other items such as the revenue impact of acquisitions and dispositions, including transfers among businesses, may impact period-to-period comparisons of revenue. Underlying revenue measures the change in revenue from one period to another by isolating these impacts.
The calculation of underlying revenue growth for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, is calculated as if MMC and JLT were a combined company as of January 1, 2019, but excludes the impact of currency and other acquisitions, dispositions, and transfers among businesses. Combined prior year revenue information for MMC and JLT for the year ended December 31, 2019 are presented below. The unaudited 2019 JLT revenue amounts in the "2019 including JLT" column reflect historical JLT revenue information following IFRS, adjusted to conform with U.S. GAAP and the Company's specific accounting policies, primarily related to development of constraints and subsequent release of those constraints related to the reinsurance business. The decrease in revenue due to the disposal of JLT's Aerospace business is reflected in the acquisitions/dispositions column beginning in June 2019, when the sale was completed. See the reconciliation of non-GAAP measures within MD&A. All other acquisitions/dispositions activity is included in the acquisitions/dispositions column. Underlying expense growth is calculated in a similar manner.
The impact of foreign currency exchange fluctuations, acquisitions and dispositions, including transfers among businesses, on the Company’s operating revenues by segment are as follows:
The following table provides more detailed revenue information for certain of the components presented above:
Revenue
Consolidated revenue was $17 billion in 2020, an increase of 3%, or 1% on an underlying basis. Revenue in the Risk and Insurance Services segment increased 8% in 2020 compared with 2019, or 3% on an underlying basis. Revenue increased 3% and 6% on an underlying basis at Marsh and Guy Carpenter, respectively, as compared with 2019. The Consulting segment's revenue decreased 2% compared with 2019, as well as on an underlying basis. Revenue decreased 1% and 4% on an underlying basis at Mercer and Oliver Wyman Group, respectively, as compared with 2019.
Operating Expense
Consolidated operating expenses increased 1% in 2020 compared with 2019. Expenses decreased 2% on an underlying basis, reflecting a decrease in JLT integration and restructuring and acquisition-related costs, and savings realized from the completion of integration efforts to date. The decrease also reflects lower travel and entertainment, meeting costs and outside services resulting from the Company’s restrictions on travel and cost containment measures taken in light of COVID-19 and lower expenses recoverable from clients. These decreases were partly offset by a JLT legacy E&O provision of $161 million recorded in 2020, higher incentive compensation and severance.
Risk and Insurance Services
In the Risk and Insurance Services segment, the Company’s subsidiaries and other affiliated entities act as brokers, agents or consultants for insureds, insurance underwriters and other brokers in the areas of risk management, insurance broking and insurance program management services, primarily under the name of Marsh; and engage in reinsurance broking, catastrophe and financial modeling services and related advisory functions, primarily under the name of Guy Carpenter.
Marsh and Guy Carpenter are compensated for brokerage and consulting services primarily through fees paid by clients or commissions paid out of premiums charged by insurance and reinsurance companies. Commission rates vary in amount depending upon the type of insurance or reinsurance coverage provided, the particular insurer or reinsurer and the capacity in which the broker acts and negotiates with clients. Revenues can be affected by premium rate levels in the insurance/reinsurance markets, the amount of risk retained by insurance and reinsurance clients themselves and by the value of the risks that have been insured since commission-based compensation is frequently related to the premiums paid by insureds and reinsureds. In many cases, fee compensation may be negotiated in advance, based on the type of risk, coverage required and service provided by the Company and ultimately, the extent of the risk placed into the insurance market or retained by the client. The trends and comparisons of revenue from one period to the next can be affected by changes in premium rate levels, fluctuations in client risk
retention and increases or decreases in the value of risks that have been insured, as well as new and lost business, and the volume of business from new and existing clients.
Marsh also receives other compensation from insurance companies, separate from retail fees and commissions. This compensation includes, among other things, payment for consulting and analytics services provided to insurers; administrative and other services provided to or on behalf of insurers (including services relating to the administration and management of quota share, panels and other facilities in which insurers participate); and contingent commissions. Marsh and Guy Carpenter also receive interest income on certain funds (such as premiums and claims proceeds) held in a fiduciary capacity for others. The investment of fiduciary funds is regulated by state and other insurance authorities. These regulations typically require segregation of fiduciary funds and limit the types of investments that may be made with them. Interest income from these investments varies depending on the amount of funds invested and applicable interest rates, both of which vary from time to time. For presentation purposes, fiduciary interest is segregated from the other revenues of Marsh and Guy Carpenter and separately presented within the segment, as shown in the revenue by segments charts presented earlier in this MD&A.
The results of operations for the Risk and Insurance Services segment are presented below:
Revenue
Revenue in the Risk and Insurance Services segment increased 8% in 2020 compared with 2019. Revenue grew 3% on an underlying basis and 1% from the impact of acquisitions, partly offset by a 1% decrease related to the impact of foreign currency translation.
In Marsh, revenue increased 3% on an underlying basis and 2% from the impact of acquisitions, partly offset by a 1% decrease from the impact of foreign currency translation. U.S./Canada had underlying revenue growth of 5%. International operations increased 1% on an underlying basis, reflecting increases of 4% in Asia Pacific and 3% in Latin America, while EMEA was flat compared to prior year.
Guy Carpenter’s revenue increased 15% to $1.7 billion in 2020 compared with 2019, or 6% on an underlying basis.
Fiduciary interest income was $46 million in 2020 compared with $105 million in 2019. The decrease in 2020 compared to 2019 reflects the impact of lower interest rates partially offset by a higher level of average invested funds.
The Risk and Insurance Services segment completed seven acquisitions during 2020. Information regarding those acquisitions is included in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements.
Expense
Expense in the Risk and Insurance Services segment increased 3% in 2020 compared with 2019, reflecting decreases of 2% on an underlying basis and 1% from the impact of foreign currency, partly offset by a 2% increase from acquisitions. The decrease in underlying expense reflects lower JLT integration, restructuring and acquisition related costs and savings realized from the completion of integration efforts to date. The decrease also reflects lower travel and entertainment and meeting costs resulting from the Company’s restrictions on travel and cost containment measures taken in light of COVID-19 and lower base salaries. These decreases are partly offset by higher incentive compensation and severance.
Consulting
The Company conducts business in its Consulting segment through two main business groups, Mercer and Oliver Wyman Group. Mercer provides consulting expertise, advice, services and solutions in the areas of health, wealth and career. Oliver Wyman Group provides specialized management, economic and brand consulting services.
The major component of revenue in the Consulting business is fees paid by clients for advice and services. Mercer, principally through its health line of business, also earns revenue in the form of commissions received from insurance companies for the placement of group (and occasionally individual) insurance contracts, primarily life, health and accident coverages. Revenue for Mercer’s investment management business and certain of Mercer’s defined contribution administration services consists principally of fees based on assets under management or administration.
Revenue in the Consulting segment is affected by, among other things, global economic conditions, including changes in clients’ particular industries and markets. Revenue is also affected by competition due to the introduction of new products and services, broad trends in employee demographics, including levels of employment, the effect of government policies and regulations, and fluctuations in interest and foreign exchange rates. Revenues from the provision of investment management services and retirement trust and administrative services are significantly affected by the level of assets under management or administration, which is impacted by securities market performance.
For the investment management business, revenues from the majority of funds are included on a gross basis in accordance with U.S. GAAP and include reimbursable expenses incurred by professional staff and sub-advisory fees, and the related expenses are included in other operating expenses.
The results of operations for the Consulting segment are presented below:
Revenue
Consulting revenue in 2020 decreased 2% compared with 2019, reflecting decreases of 2% on an underlying basis and 1% from the impact of dispositions.
Mercer's revenue in 2020 decreased 1% on an underlying basis and 2% from the impact of dispositions. The decrease in underlying revenue reflects decreases in both Career of 8% and Wealth of 1% partly offset by an increase in Health of 2%. Oliver Wyman Group’s revenue decreased 3% in 2020 compared with 2019, or 4% on an underlying basis.
Expense
Consulting expense in 2020 increased 1% compared with 2019. This reflects an increase of 1% on an underlying basis and a decrease of 1% from the impact of dispositions. The increase in underlying expense reflects a JLT legacy E&O provision of $161 million recorded in 2020, higher JLT integration and restructuring costs as well as higher base salaries, incentive compensation and severance. These increases were partly offset by lower travel, entertainment and meeting costs resulting from the Company’s restrictions on travel and cost containment measures taken in light of COVID-19 and lower expenses recoverable from clients.
Corporate and Other
Corporate expense in 2020 was $274 million compared with $366 million in 2019. Expenses decreased 17% on an underlying basis due to lower acquisition, integration and restructuring costs primarily related
to the JLT Transaction and savings realized from the completion of integration efforts to date, partly offset by higher base salaries.
Other Corporate Items
Interest
Interest income earned on corporate funds amounted to $7 million in 2020 compared with $39 million in 2019. During the first quarter of 2019, the Company issued approximately $6.5 billion of senior notes related to the JLT acquisition. The funds were held in escrow and released for payment in April 2019, when the acquisition was completed. The decrease in interest income from the prior year is primarily due to interest earned on these funds in 2019. Interest expense in 2020 was $515 million compared with $524 million in 2019. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to the impact of lower average interest rates on borrowings.
Investment (Loss) Income
The caption "Investment (loss) income" in the consolidated statements of income comprises realized and unrealized gains and losses from investments. It includes, when applicable, other than temporary declines in the value of securities, mark-to-market increases or decreases in equity investments with readily determinable fair values and equity method gains or losses on its investments in private equity funds. The Company's investments may include direct investments in insurance, consulting or other strategically linked companies and investments in private equity funds.
The Company recorded a net investment loss of $22 million in 2020, primarily due to the loss from the sale of shares of AF during the second quarter of 2020. The Company recorded net investment income of $22 million in 2019 which included gains of $10 million related to mark-to-market changes to equity securities and gains of $12 million related to investments in private equity funds and other investments.
Income Taxes
The Company completed the JLT Transaction on April 1, 2019. During 2020, the integration of this global organization required intercompany transfers of acquired entities into the Company's country structures and the combination of those entities within the equivalent Company businesses. The integration transactions were designed to be tax efficient. The Company's global effective tax rate on JLT's earnings was reduced compared to JLT's pre-acquisition tax rate by utilizing debt for the restructuring transactions to be capital efficient, and reducing the generation of post-acquisition tax losses by merging historically unprofitable JLT entities with profitable Company operations. Provisions for deferred taxes and uncertain tax positions were established as part of the purchase price allocation as of April 1, 2019.
The broader JLT organization is now held under the Company's legal entity structure, which makes it part of a U.S.-based multinational company and subjects it to full U.S. taxation.
The Company's consolidated effective tax rate was 26.7%, 27.3%, and 25.6% in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The rates in all periods reflect the effects of tax planning and the ongoing impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ("TCJA"), including regulatory and other guidance as it became available. The tax rate in 2020 includes a valuation allowance for certain tax credits, the impact of uncertain tax positions, and certain tax planning benefits. The 2019 rate reflects items related to the JLT acquisition, including non-deductible goodwill allocated to the sale of Aerospace and non-deductible expenses incurred in relation to the JLT acquisition. The 2018 rate includes the effect of a charge related to the Company’s investment in AF as discussed in Note 1. The tax rates in all periods reflect the impact of discrete tax matters, tax legislation, and nontaxable adjustments to contingent acquisition consideration.
The effective tax rate may vary significantly from period to period for the foreseeable future. The effective tax rate is sensitive to the geographic mix and repatriation of the Company's earnings, which may result in higher or lower tax rates. A shift in the mix of profits among jurisdictions can also affect the effective tax rate. In 2020, pre-tax income in Barbados, Canada, Ireland, Australia, Japan and Germany accounted for approximately 60% of the Company's total non-U.S. pre-tax income, with effective rates in those countries of 1%, 27%, 15%, 23%, 33.7%, and 32% respectively.
In addition, losses in certain jurisdictions cannot be offset by earnings from other operations, and may require valuation allowances that affect the rate, depending on estimates of the value of associated deferred tax assets which can be realized. A valuation allowance was recorded to reduce deferred tax
assets to the amount that the Company believes is more likely than not to be realized. Details are provided in Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements. The effective tax rate is also sensitive to changes in unrecognized tax benefits, including the impact of settled tax audits and expired statutes of limitation.
Changes in tax laws, rulings, policies or related legal and regulatory interpretations occur frequently and may also have significant favorable or adverse impacts on our effective tax rate.
As a U.S. domiciled parent holding company, the Company is the issuer of essentially all of the Company's external indebtedness, and incurs the related interest expense in the U.S. The Company’s interest expense deductions are not currently limited. Further, most senior executive and oversight functions are conducted in the U.S. and the associated costs are incurred primarily in the U.S. Some of these expenses may not be deductible in the U.S., which may impact the effective tax rate.
The quasi-territorial tax regime provides an opportunity for the Company to repatriate foreign earnings more tax efficiently and there is less incentive for permanent reinvestment of these earnings. However, permanent reinvestment continues to be a component of the Company’s global capital strategy. The Company continues to evaluate its global investment and repatriation strategy in light of our capital requirements and potential costs of repatriation.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act") was signed into law on March 27, 2020. The CARES Act provided over $2 trillion in economic relief to individuals, governmental agencies and companies, to deal with the public health and economic impacts of COVID-19. Pursuant to the CARES Act, payroll taxes due from March 27, 2020 through December 31, 2020 will be deferred until 2021 and 2022 (50% to be paid each year) without interest or penalties.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company is organized as a legal entity separate and distinct from its operating subsidiaries. As the Company does not have significant operations of its own, the Company is dependent upon dividends and other payments from its operating subsidiaries to pay principal and interest on its outstanding debt obligations, pay dividends to stockholders, repurchase its shares and pay corporate expenses. The Company can also provide financial support to its operating subsidiaries for acquisitions, investments and certain parts of their business that require liquidity, such as the capital markets business of Guy Carpenter. Other sources of liquidity include borrowing facilities in financing cash flows.
The Company derives a significant portion of its revenue and operating profit from operating subsidiaries located outside of the U.S. Funds from those operating subsidiaries are regularly repatriated to the U.S. out of annual earnings. At December 31, 2020, the Company had approximately $789 million of cash and cash equivalents in its foreign operations, which includes $249 million of operating funds required to be maintained for regulatory requirements or as collateral under certain captive insurance arrangements. The Company expects to continue its practice of repatriating available funds from its non-U.S. operating subsidiaries out of current annual earnings. Where appropriate, a portion of the current year earnings will continue to be permanently reinvested. With respect to repatriating 2018 and prior earnings, the Company has evaluated such factors as its short- and long-term capital needs, acquisition and borrowing strategies, and the availability of cash for repatriation for each of its subsidiaries. In general, the Company has determined that its permanent reinvestment assertions, in light of the enactment of the TCJA, should allow the Company to repatriate previously taxed earnings from the deemed repatriations as cash becomes available.
During 2020, the Company recorded foreign currency translation adjustments which increased net equity by $559 million. Continued weakening of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies would further increase the translated U.S. dollar value of the Company’s net investments in its non-U.S. subsidiaries, as well as the translated U.S. dollar value of cash repatriations from those subsidiaries. Conversely, strengthening of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies would decrease the translated U.S. dollar value of the Company’s net investments in its non-U.S. subsidiaries, as well as the translated U.S. dollar value of cash repatriations from those subsidiaries.
Cash on our consolidated balance sheets includes funds available for general corporate purposes. Funds held on behalf of clients in a fiduciary capacity are segregated and shown separately in the consolidated
balance sheets as an offset to fiduciary liabilities. Fiduciary funds cannot be used for general corporate purposes, and should not be considered as a source of liquidity for the Company.
Operating Cash Flows
The Company generated $3.4 billion of cash from operations in 2020 and $2.4 billion in 2019. These amounts reflect the net income of the Company during those periods, excluding gains or losses from investments, adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in working capital which relate primarily to the timing of payments of accrued liabilities or receipts of assets and pension contributions.
Pension-Related Items
Contributions
During 2020, the Company contributed $65 million to its U.S. pension plans and $78 million to non-U.S. pension plans compared to contributions of $35 million to U.S. plans and $87 million to non-U.S. plans in 2019.
In the U.S., contributions to the tax-qualified defined benefit plans are based on ERISA guidelines and the Company generally expects to maintain a funded status of 80% or more of the liability determined in accordance with the ERISA guidelines. In 2020, the Company made $30 million of contributions to non-qualified plans and $35 million to its qualified plans. The Company expects to contribute approximately $37 million to its U.S. pension plans in 2021, including $7 million to the U.S. qualified plans to meet ERISA funding requirements and $30 million to its non-qualified plans.
The Company contributed $34 million to its U.K. plans in 2020, including an expense allowance of approximately $5 million. The Company's contributions to its U.K. plans in 2021 are expected to be approximately $47 million, including an expense allowance of $16 million.
Outside the U.S., the Company has a large number of non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans, the largest of which are in the U.K., which comprise approximately 81% of non-U.S. plan assets at December 31, 2020. Contribution rates for non-U.S. plans are generally based on local funding practices and statutory requirements, which may differ significantly from measurements under U.S. GAAP. In the U.K., the assumptions used to determine pension contributions are the result of legally-prescribed negotiations between the Company and the plans' trustee that typically occur every three years in conjunction with the actuarial valuation of the plans. Currently, this results in a lower funded status compared to U.S. GAAP and may result in contributions irrespective of the U.S. GAAP funded status. For the MMC U.K. Pension Fund, a new agreement was reached with the trustee in the fourth quarter of 2019 based on the surplus funding position at December 31, 2018. In accordance with the agreement, no deficit funding is required until 2023. The funding level will be re-assessed during 2022 to determine if contributions are required in 2023. In order to have greater influence over asset allocation and overall investment decisions, in November 2019, the Company renewed its agreement to support annual deficit contributions by the U.K. operating companies under certain circumstances, up to GBP 450 million over a seven-year period.
In addition, in the U.K., the Company assumed responsibility for JLT's Pension Scheme ("JLT U.K. plan"). We currently expect to pay $29 million of deficit funding in 2021, although we will also reach a new funding agreement with the trustee during 2021.
In the aggregate, the Company expects to contribute approximately $87 million to its non-U.S. defined benefit plans in 2021, comprising approximately $40 million to plans outside of the U.K. and $47 million to the U.K. plans.
Changes to Pension Plans
As part of the JLT Transaction, the Company assumed responsibility for a number of pension plans throughout the world, the most significant of which is the JLT U.K. plan. The JLT U.K. plan has a defined benefit section which was frozen to future accrual in 2006 and a defined contribution section. The assets of the scheme are held in a trustee administered fund separate from the Company.
Changes in Funded Status and Expense
The year-over-year change in the funded status of the Company's pension plans is impacted by the
difference between actual and assumed results, particularly with regard to return on assets, and changes in the discount rate, as well as the amount of Company contributions, if any. Unrecognized actuarial losses were approximately $2.4 billion and $3.5 billion at December 31, 2020 for the U.S. plans and non-U.S. plans, respectively, compared with losses of $2.1 billion and $3.1 billion at December 31, 2019. The increases in both the U.S. and non-U.S. plans was primarily due to a decrease in the discount rate used to measure plan liabilities partly offset by an increase in asset values. In the past several years, the amount of unamortized losses has been significantly impacted, both positively and negatively, by actual asset performance and changes in discount rates. The discount rate used to measure plan liabilities in 2020 and 2019 decreased in the U.S. and U.K. (the Company's largest plans) following increases in the U.S. and the U.K. in 2018. An increase in the discount rate decreases the measured plan benefit obligation, resulting in actuarial gains, while a decrease in the discount rate increases the measured plan obligation, resulting in actuarial losses. During 2020, the Company's defined benefit pension plan assets had gains of 13.1% and 12.0% in the U.S. and U.K., respectively, as compared to gains of 21.4% and 13.1% in the U.S. and U.K., respectively, in 2019. During 2018, the Company's defined benefit pension plan assets had losses of 7.4% in the U.S. and 1.0% in the U.K.
Overall, based on the measurement at December 31, 2020, total benefit credits related to the Company’s defined benefit plans are expected to increase in 2021 by approximately $22 million compared to 2020, reflecting an increase in non-U.S. plans of approximately $31 million, offset by a decrease in U.S. plans of $9 million.
The Company’s accounting policies for its defined benefit pension plans, including the selection of and sensitivity to assumptions, are discussed below under Management’s Discussion of Critical Accounting Policies. For additional information regarding the Company’s retirement plans, see Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements.
Financing Cash Flows
Net cash used for financing activities was $1.9 billion in 2020 compared with $3.3 billion provided by financing activities in 2019.
Credit Facilities
The Company and certain of its foreign subsidiaries have a multi-currency five-year unsecured revolving credit facility of $1.8 billion. The interest rate on this facility is based on LIBOR plus a fixed margin which varies with the Company's credit ratings. This facility expires in October 2023 and requires the Company to maintain certain coverage and leverage ratios which are tested quarterly. The Company borrowed $1 billion under this facility in the first quarter of 2020, which was repaid in full during the second quarter of 2020. There were no borrowings outstanding under this facility at December 31, 2020.
In January 2020, the Company entered into two new term loan facilities: a $500 million one-year facility and a $500 million two-year facility. In the first quarter of 2020, the Company borrowed $1 billion against these facilities. During the third quarter of 2020, the Company repaid $500 million of borrowings from its one-year facility. In December 2020, the Company repaid $500 million of borrowings from the two year facility. These two facilities were terminated as of December 31, 2020 after repayment of the initial draw down.
In April 2020, the Company entered into a new 364 day $1 billion unsecured revolving credit facility with a term out option after one year. The facility has similar coverage and leverage ratios as the multi-currency five-year unsecured revolving credit facility. The Company had no borrowings outstanding under this facility at December 31, 2020.
The Company also maintains other credit facilities, guarantees and letters of credit with various banks, aggregating $573 million at December 31, 2020 and $598 million at December 31, 2019. There were no outstanding borrowings under these facilities as of December 31, 2020 or as of December 31, 2019.
Debt
The Company has established a short-term debt financing program of up to $1.5 billion through the issuance of commercial paper. The proceeds from the issuance of commercial paper were used for general corporate purposes. The Company had no commercial paper outstanding at December 31, 2020.
In December 2020, the Company repaid $700 million of maturing Senior Notes and $300 million of floating rate notes with an original maturity of December 2021.
In May 2020, the Company issued $750 million of 2.250% Senior Notes due 2030. The Company used the net proceeds from this offering to pay outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility.
In March 2020, the Company repaid $500 million of maturing Senior Notes.
In September 2019, the Company repaid $300 million of maturing Senior Notes.
During 2019, the Company issued approximately $6.5 billion of Senior Notes to primarily fund the acquisition of JLT, including the payment of related fees and expenses, and to repay certain JLT indebtedness, as well as for general corporate purposes.
In connection with the closing of the JLT Transaction, the Company assumed approximately $1 billion of historical JLT indebtedness, which it repaid during 2019. The Company incurred debt extinguishment costs of $32 million in regard to the repayment of this debt.
The Company's senior debt is currently rated A- by Standard & Poor's and Baa1 by Moody's. The Company's short-term debt is currently rated A-2 by Standard & Poor's and P-2 by Moody's. The Company carries a Stable outlook with S&P and a Negative outlook with Moody's.
Share Repurchases
The Company did not repurchase any shares of its common stock during 2020. In November 2019, the Board of Directors authorized an increase in the Company’s share repurchase program, which supersedes any prior authorization, allowing management to buy back up to $2.5 billion of the Company’s common stock. As of December 31, 2020, the Company remained authorized to purchase shares of its common stock up to a value of approximately $2.4 billion. There is no time limit on this authorization.
During 2019, the Company repurchased 4.8 million shares of its common stock for total consideration of $485 million at an average price per share of $100.48.
Dividends
The Company paid total dividends of $943 million in 2020 ($1.84 per share), $890 million in 2019 ($1.74 per share) and $807 million in 2018 ($1.58 per share).
Contingent Payments Related To Acquisitions
During 2020, the Company paid $102 million of contingent payments related to acquisitions made in prior years. These payments are split between financing and operating cash flows in the consolidated statements of cash flows. Payments of $54 million related to the contingent consideration liability that was recorded on the date of acquisition are reflected as financing cash flows. Payments related to increases in the contingent consideration liability subsequent to the date of acquisition of $48 million are reflected as operating cash flows. Remaining estimated future contingent consideration payments of $243 million for acquisitions completed in 2020 and in prior years are included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities or other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020. The Company paid deferred purchase consideration related to prior years' acquisitions of $68 million and $43 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, that is reflected as financing cash flows. Remaining deferred cash payments of approximately $241 million are included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities or other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020.
In 2019, the Company paid $63 million of contingent payments related to acquisitions made in prior periods, of which $22 million was reported as financing cash flows and $41 million as operating cash flows.
Derivatives
Net Investment Hedge
The Company has investments in various subsidiaries with Euro functional currencies. As a result, the Company is exposed to the risk of fluctuations between the Euro and U.S. dollar exchange rates. As part of its risk management program to fund the JLT acquisition, the Company issued €1.1 billion Senior Notes, and designated the debt instruments as a net investment hedge of its Euro denominated subsidiaries. The hedge is re-assessed each quarter to confirm that the designated equity balance at the
beginning of each period continues to equal or exceed 80% of the outstanding balance of the Euro debt instrument and that all the critical terms of the hedging instrument and the hedged net investment continue to match. If the hedge is highly effective, the change in the debt balance related to foreign exchange fluctuations will be recorded in foreign currency translation gains (losses) in the consolidated balance sheet. The U.S. dollar value of the Euro notes increased by $124 million during 2020 related to the change in foreign exchange rates. The Company concluded that the hedge was highly effective and recorded an increase to accumulated other comprehensive loss for the year ended December 31, 2020.
JLT Fair Value Debt Derivative Contracts
Prior to the JLT Transaction closing, a significant portion of JLT's outstanding senior notes were denominated in U.S. dollars. In order to hedge its exposure against the risk of fluctuations between the British Pound ("GBP") and the U.S. dollar, JLT entered into foreign exchange and interest rate swaps, which were designated as fair value hedges. In June 2019, the Company redeemed these U.S. dollar denominated senior notes and settled the related derivative contracts. Both the change in fair value of the debt and the change in fair value of the derivative contracts were recorded in the consolidated statement of income in the second quarter of 2019. The Company received approximately $112 million upon settlement of these derivative contracts.
JLT Cash Flow Hedges
JLT also had a number of foreign exchange contracts to hedge the risk of foreign exchange movements between the U.S. dollar and the GBP, related to JLT’s U.S. dollar denominated revenue in the U.K. Prior to the acquisition, these derivative contracts were designated as cash flow hedges. Upon acquisition, the derivative contracts were not re-designated as cash flow hedges by the Company. The contracts were settled in June 2019. The change in fair value between the acquisition date and the settlement date resulted in a charge of $26 million in the second quarter of 2019. The charge is recorded as a change in fair value of acquisition related derivative contracts in the consolidated statement of income.
Foreign Exchange Forward Contract
In connection with the JLT Transaction, to hedge the risk of appreciation of the GBP-denominated purchase price relative to the U.S. dollar, on September 20, 2018, the Company entered into the FX Contract to, solely upon consummation of the Transaction, purchase £5.2 billion and sell a corresponding amount of U.S. dollars at a contracted exchange rate. The FX Contract, which did not qualify for hedge accounting treatment under applicable accounting guidance, is discussed in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements. The Company settled the FX Contract on April 1, 2019, recording a realized gain to the consolidated statement of income of approximately $31 million in 2019. The cash outflow related to the settlement of the FX Contract was approximately $294 million in 2019.
Foreign Exchange Contract on Euro Debt Issuance
In March 2019, the Company issued €1.1 billion of senior notes related to the JLT Transaction. See Note 13 for additional information related to the Euro senior note issuances. In connection with the senior note issuances of €1.1 billion, the Company entered into a forward exchange contract to hedge the economic risk of changes in foreign exchange rates from the issuance date to settlement date of the Euro senior notes. This forward exchange contract was settled in March 2019 and the Company recorded a charge of $7 million in the first quarter of 2019 related to the settlement of this contract.
Treasury Locks on Senior Notes
In connection with the JLT Transaction and to hedge the risk of increases in future interest rates prior to its issuance of senior notes, the Company entered into treasury locks related to $2 billion of the expected debt in the fourth quarter of 2018. The fair value at December 31, 2018 was based on the published treasury rate plus forward premium as of December 31, 2018 compared to the all in rate at the inception of the contract. The contracts were not designated as an accounting hedge. The Company recorded an unrealized loss of $116 million related to the change in the fair value of these derivatives in the consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2018. In January 2019, upon issuance of the $5 billion of senior notes, the Company settled the treasury lock derivatives and made a payment to its counter party for $122 million.
Investing Cash Flows
Net cash used for investing activities amounted to $814 million in 2020 compared with $5.7 billion used for investing activities in 2019.
The Company paid $668 million and $5.5 billion, net of cash acquired, for acquisitions it made during 2020 and 2019, respectively.
During 2020, the Company sold certain businesses primarily in the U.S., U.K. and Canada for cash proceeds of approximately $98 million.
At December 31, 2019, the Company owned approximately 443 million shares of the common stock of AF, a South African company listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, which was accounted for under the equity method of accounting. In February 2020, the Company sold approximately 49 million shares, and in May 2020, sold an additional 193 million shares, leaving the Company with an investment of approximately 201 million shares of the common stock of AF at December 31, 2020. Upon completion of the sale of shares in May 2020, the investment in AF was accounted at fair value, with investment gains and losses recorded as investment income in the consolidated statement of income.
During the first quarter of 2019, the Company disposed of its investment in Benefitfocus for total proceeds of approximately $132 million. The Company received $115 million in the first quarter of 2019 and $17 million in the second quarter of 2019 as final settlement on the sale.
During the second quarter of 2019, the Company disposed of its investment in Payscale and received proceeds of approximately $47 million. In January 2019, the Company increased its equity ownership in Marsh India from 26% to 49% for approximately $88 million. Marsh India is carried under the equity method.
The Company’s additions to fixed assets and capitalized software, which amounted to $348 million in 2020 and $421 million in 2019, primarily related to computer equipment purchases, the refurbishing and modernizing of office facilities and software development costs.
The Company has commitments for potential future investments of approximately $46 million in four private equity funds that invest primarily in financial services companies.
Commitments and Obligations
The following sets forth the Company’s future contractual obligations by the types identified in the table below as of December 31, 2020:
The above does not include the liability for unrecognized tax benefits of $98 million as the Company is unable to reasonably predict the timing of settlement of these liabilities, other than approximately $20 million that may become payable during 2021.
The above does not include the remaining transitional tax payments related to the TCJA of $64.5 million.
Management’s Discussion of Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("GAAP") requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management considers the policies discussed below to be critical to understanding the Company’s
financial statements because their application places the most significant demands on management’s judgment, and requires management to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
In the Risk and Insurance Services segment, judgments related to the amount of variable revenue consideration to ultimately be received on placement of quota share reinsurance treaties and contingent commission from insurers, which was previously recognized when the contingency was resolved, now requires significant judgments and estimates.
The Company capitalizes the incremental costs to obtain contracts primarily related to commissions or sales bonus payments. These deferred costs are amortized over the expected life of the underlying customer relationships. The Company also capitalizes certain pre-placement costs that are considered fulfillment costs that are amortized at a point in time when the associated revenue is recognized.
Management also makes significant judgments and estimates to measure the progress toward completing performance obligations and realization rates for consideration related to contracts as well as potential performance-based fees in the Consulting segment.
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Legal and Other Loss Contingencies
The Company and its subsidiaries are subject to numerous claims, lawsuits and proceedings including claims for errors and omissions ("E&O"). GAAP requires that a liability be recorded when a loss is both probable and reasonably estimable. Significant management judgment is required to apply this guidance. The Company utilizes case level reviews by inside and outside counsel, an internal actuarial analysis by Oliver Wyman, a subsidiary of the Company, and other methods to estimate potential losses. The liability is reviewed quarterly and adjusted as developments warrant. In many cases, the Company has not recorded a liability, other than for legal fees to defend the claim, because we are unable, at the present time, to make a determination that a loss is both probable and reasonably estimable. Given the unpredictability of E&O claims and of litigation that could flow from them, it is possible that an adverse outcome in a particular matter could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s businesses, results of operations, financial condition or cash flow in a given quarterly or annual period.
In addition, to the extent that insurance coverage is available, significant management judgment is required to determine the amount of recoveries that are probable of collection under the Company’s various insurance programs.
Retirement Benefits
The Company maintains qualified and non-qualified defined benefit pension and defined contribution plans for its eligible U.S. employees and a variety of defined benefit and defined contribution plans for its eligible non-U.S. employees. The Company’s policy for funding its tax-qualified defined benefit retirement plans is to contribute amounts at least sufficient to meet the funding requirements set forth in U.S. and applicable foreign laws.
The Company recognizes the funded status of its over-funded defined benefit pension and retiree medical plans as a net benefit plan asset and its unfunded and underfunded plans as a net benefit plan liability. The gains or losses and prior service costs or credits that have not been recognized as components of net periodic costs are recorded as a component of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income ("AOCI"), net of tax, in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. The gains and losses that exceed specified corridors, 10 percent of the greater of the projected benefit obligation or the market-related value of plan assets, are amortized prospectively out of AOCI over a period that approximates the remaining life expectancy of participants in plans where substantially all participants are inactive or the average remaining service period of active participants for plans with active participants. The vast majority of unrecognized losses relate to inactive plans and are amortized over the remaining life expectancy of the participants.
The determination of net periodic pension cost is based on a number of assumptions, including an expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, the discount rate, mortality and assumed rate of salary increase. The assumptions used in the calculation of net periodic pension costs and pension liabilities are
disclosed in Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements. The assumptions for expected rate of return on plan assets and the discount rate are discussed in more detail below.
The long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption is determined for each plan based on the facts and circumstances that exist as of the measurement date, and the specific portfolio mix of each plan’s assets. The Company utilizes a model developed by Mercer, a subsidiary of the Company, to assist in the determination of this assumption. The model takes into account several factors, including: actual and target portfolio allocation; investment, administrative and trading expenses incurred directly by the plan trust; historical portfolio performance; relevant forward-looking economic analysis; and expected returns, variances and correlations for different asset classes. These measures are used to determine probabilities using standard statistical techniques to calculate a range of expected returns on the portfolio.
The target asset allocation for the U.S. plans is 64% equities and equity alternatives and 36% fixed income. At the end of 2020, the actual allocation for the U.S. plans was 64% equities and equity alternatives and 36% fixed income. The target asset allocation for the U.K. plans, which comprise approximately 81% of non-U.S. plan assets, is 32% equities and equity alternatives and 68% fixed income. At the end of 2020, the actual allocation for the U.K. plans was 33% equities and equity alternatives and 67% fixed income.
The discount rate selected for each U.S. plan is based on a model bond portfolio with coupons and redemptions that closely match the expected liability cash flows from the plan. Discount rates for non-U.S. plans are based on appropriate bond indices adjusted for duration; in the U.K., the plan duration is reflected using the Mercer yield curve.
The table below shows the weighted average assumed rate of return and the discount rate at the December 31, 2020 measurement date (for measuring pension expense in 2021) for the total Company, the U.S. and the Rest of World ("ROW").
Holding all other assumptions constant, a half-percentage point change in the rate of return on plan assets and discount rate assumptions would affect net periodic pension cost for the U.S. and U.K. plans, which together comprise approximately 85% of total pension plan liabilities, as follows:
The impact of discount rate changes shown above relates to the increase or decrease in actuarial gains or losses being amortized through net periodic pension cost, as well as the increase or decrease in interest expense, with all other facts and assumptions held constant. It does not contemplate nor include potential future impacts a change in the interest rate environment and discount rates might cause, such as the impact on the market value of the plans’ assets. In addition, the assumed return on plan assets would likely be impacted by changes in the interest rate environment and other factors, including equity valuations, since these factors reflect the starting point used in the Company’s projection models. For example, a reduction in interest rates may result in a reduction in the assumed return on plan assets. Changing the discount rate and leaving the other assumptions constant also may not be representative of the impact on expense, because the long-term rates of inflation and salary increases are often correlated with the discount rate. Changes in these assumptions will not necessarily have a linear impact on the net periodic pension cost.
The Company contributes to certain health care and life insurance benefits provided to its retired employees. The cost of these post-retirement benefits for employees in the U.S. is accrued during the period up to the date employees are eligible to retire but is funded by the Company as incurred. The key assumptions and sensitivity to changes in the assumed health care cost trend rate are discussed in Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
Significant judgment is required in determining the annual effective tax rate and in evaluating uncertain tax positions. The Company reports a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The evaluation of a tax position is a two-step process:
•First, the Company determines whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon tax examination, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation, based on only the technical merits of the position. If a tax position does not meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, the benefit of that position is not recognized in the financial statements.
•The second step is measurement. A tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is measured to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The tax position is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50-percent likely of being realized upon ultimate resolution with a taxing authority. Uncertain tax positions are evaluated based upon the facts and circumstances that exist at each reporting period and involve significant management judgment. Subsequent changes in judgment based upon new information may lead to changes in recognition, de-recognition, and measurement. Adjustments may result, for example, upon resolution of an issue with the taxing authorities, or expiration of a statute of limitations barring an assessment for an issue.
The Company recognizes interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. The Company’s accounting policy follows the portfolio approach that leaves stranded income tax effects in AOCI.
Certain items are included in the Company's tax returns at different times than the items are reflected in the financial statements. As a result, the annual tax expense reflected in the consolidated statements of income is different than that reported in the tax returns. Some of these differences are permanent, such as non-deductible expenses, and some differences are temporary and reverse over time, such as depreciation expense. Temporary differences create deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are measured at existing tax rates. Deferred tax liabilities generally represent tax expense recognized in the financial statements for which payment has been deferred, or expense for which a deduction has been taken already in the tax return but the expense has not yet been recognized in the financial statements. Deferred tax assets generally represent items that can be used as a tax deduction or credit in tax returns in future years for which a benefit has already been recorded in the financial statements. The Company evaluates all significant available positive and negative evidence, including the existence of losses in recent years and its forecast of future taxable income by jurisdiction, in assessing the need for a valuation allowance. The Company also considers tax planning strategies that would result in realization of deferred tax assets, and the presence of taxable income in prior period tax filings in jurisdictions that allow for the carry back of tax attributes pursuant to the applicable tax law. The underlying assumptions the Company uses in forecasting future taxable income require significant judgment and take into account the Company's recent performance. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent on the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which temporary differences or carry-forwards are deductible or creditable. Valuation allowances are established for deferred tax assets when it is estimated that it is more likely than not that future taxable income will be insufficient to fully use a deduction or credit in that jurisdiction.
Fair Value Determinations
Goodwill Impairment Testing - The Company is required to assess goodwill and any indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually, or more frequently if circumstances indicate impairment may have occurred. The Company performs the annual impairment assessment for each of its reporting units during the third quarter of each year. In accordance with applicable accounting guidance, a company can assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. Alternatively, the Company may elect to proceed directly to the quantitative goodwill
impairment test. In 2020, the Company elected to perform a qualitative impairment assessment. As part of its assessment, the Company considered numerous factors, including:
•that the fair value of each reporting unit exceeds its carrying value by a substantial margin based on its most recent quantitative assessment in 2019;
•whether significant acquisitions or dispositions occurred which might alter the fair value of its reporting units;
•macroeconomic conditions and their potential impact on reporting unit fair values;
•actual performance compared with budget and prior projections used in its estimation of reporting unit fair values;
•industry and market conditions;
•and the year-over-year change in the Company’s share price.
The Company completed its qualitative assessment in the third quarter of 2020 and concluded that a quantitative goodwill impairment test was not required in 2020 and that goodwill was not impaired.
Share-Based Payment
The accounting guidance for share-based payments requires, among other things, that the estimated grant date fair value of stock options be charged to earnings. Significant management judgment is required to determine the appropriate assumptions for inputs such as volatility and expected term necessary to estimate option values. In addition, management judgment is required to analyze the terms of the plans and awards granted thereunder to determine if awards will be treated as equity awards or liability awards, as defined by the accounting guidance.
As of December 31, 2020, there was $17.5 million of unrecognized compensation cost related to stock option awards. The weighted-average period over which the costs are expected to be recognized is 1.23 years. Also as of December 31, 2020, there was $347.7 million of unrecognized compensation cost related to the Company’s restricted stock, restricted stock unit and performance stock unit awards. The weighted-average period over which that cost is expected to be recognized is approximately 1 year.
See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding accounting for share-based payments.
Investments and Derivatives
Although not directly recorded in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets, the Company's defined benefit pension plans hold investments of approximately $19.1 billion, which include private equity and other non-liquid investments. The fair value of the plan investments determines, in part, the over-or under-funded status of those plans, which is included in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. The Company also has minority positions in certain equity securities (primarily Alexander Forbes), which are accounted for at fair value with gains or losses recorded as investment gains or losses in the consolidated statement of income. The Company also has approximately $111 million of investments in private equity funds accounted for using the equity method of accounting.
The Company reviews the carrying value of its investments (both direct and held through its pension plans) to determine if any valuation adjustments are appropriate under the applicable accounting pronouncements. The Company bases its review on the facts and circumstances as they relate to each investment. In those instances where quoted market prices are not available, particularly for private equity funds, significant management judgment is required to determine the appropriate value of the Company’s investments. Fair value of investments in private equity funds is determined by the funds’ investment managers. Factors considered in determining the fair value of private equity investments include: implied valuation of recently completed financing rounds that included sophisticated outside investors; performance multiples of comparable public companies; restrictions on the sale or disposal of the investments; trading characteristics of the securities; and the relative size of the holdings in comparison to other private investors and the public market float.
In connection with the JLT Transaction, the Company entered into several derivative contracts, described in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements. These derivative contracts are recorded at fair value at the end of each period, with the change in fair value recorded in the consolidated statements of
income. Prior to their settlement, determination of the fair value of these contracts, in particular the deal contingent foreign exchange contract, required significant management judgments or estimates about the potential closing dates of the transaction and remaining value of the deal contingency feature. All derivative contracts related to the JLT Transaction were settled during 2019.
Purchase Price Allocation
Assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including contingent consideration, as part of a business acquisition are generally recorded at their fair value at the date of acquisition. The excess of purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Determining fair value of identifiable assets, particularly intangibles, and liabilities acquired also requires management to make estimates, which are based on all available information and in some cases assumptions with respect to the timing and amount of future revenues and expenses associated with an asset. These estimates directly impact the amount of identified intangible assets recognized and the related amortization expense in future periods.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements contains a summary of the Company’s significant accounting policies, including a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements and their impact or potential future impact on the Company’s financial results, if determinable, under the sub-heading "New Accounting Pronouncements".
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures
On April 1, 2019, the Company completed its acquisition of JLT. JLT's results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 are included in the Company’s results of operations. JLT's results of operations for the three months ending March 31, 2019 are not included in the Company's results of operations for the twelve month period ended December 31, 2019. Prior to being acquired by the Company, JLT operated in three segments, Specialty, Reinsurance and Employee Benefits. As of April 1, 2019, the historical JLT businesses were combined into MMC operations as follows: JLT Specialty is included by geography within Marsh, JLT Reinsurance is included within Guy Carpenter and the majority of the JLT Employee Benefits business is included in Mercer Health and Wealth.
The JLT Transaction had a significant impact on the Company’s results of operations in 2020. The Company believes that in addition to the change in reported GAAP revenue, a comparison of 2020 GAAP reported revenue to the combined 2019 revenue of MMC and JLT, as if the companies were combined on January 1, 2019, provides investors with meaningful information as to the Company’s year-over-year underlying operating results. Investors should not consider the comparison of these non-GAAP measures in isolation from, or as a substitute for, the financial information that the Company reports in accordance with GAAP.
The "2019 Including JLT" revenue information set forth in the table below presents revenue information as if the companies were combined on January 1, 2019 and is not necessarily indicative of what the results would have been had we operated the business since January 1, 2019.
The MMC revenue amounts are as previously reported by the Company in its annual filing of Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019. JLT 2019 revenue information is derived using the same policies and adjustments as the "JLT Supplemental Information - Revenue Analysis" furnished to the SEC on June 6, 2019 on Form 8-K, which is not incorporated by reference in this Form 10-K, and includes the revenue from JLT’s aerospace business.