Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Business sections in this Annual Report. We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements.
The following discussion and analysis constitutes forward-looking statements for purposes of the Securities Act and the Exchange Act and as such involves known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. The words “expect”, “estimate”, “anticipate”, “predict”, “believes”, “plan”, “seek”, “objective” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements or elsewhere in this report. Important factors that could cause our actual results, performance or achievement to differ materially from our expectations are discussed in detail in Item 1 above. All written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us are expressly qualified in their entirety by such factors. We undertake no obligation to publicly release the result of any revisions to these forward-looking statements that may be made to reflect events or circumstances after the date hereof or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. Notwithstanding the foregoing, we are not entitled to rely on the safe harbor for forward looking statements under 27A of the Securities Act or 21E of the Exchange Act as long as our stock is classified as a penny stock within the meaning of Rule 3a51-1 of the Exchange Act. A penny stock is generally defined to be any equity security that has a market price (as defined in Rule 3a51-1) of less than $5.00 per share, subject to certain exceptions.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements, including the notes thereto.
Overview
Business Overview
Since 2016, the focus of our business has been to build crude oil distillation units and refining facilities (CDUs) in the Permian Basin in West Texas. We revised our business plan in 2021 to move MMEX to clean energy use and production, leveraging our history, management and business relationships from the traditional energy sector. The focus of our business plan is to
·
Modify our planned CDU projects in Pecos County (West Texas) to produce potentially hydrogen and ultra-low sulfur fuel products combined with CO2 capture.
·
Purchase additional acreage allowing us to develop additional megawatts of solar power for distribution to our projects in West Texas.
Our immediate plans are to pursue the following three projects:
Project 1: A clean refining 10,000 barrel per day facility at our Pecos County site to produce 87° gasoline, ultra-low sulphur diesel and low-sulphur fuel oil, utilizing the Ultra Fuels concept.
Project 2: We have teamed with Black Tree Group to develop a “blue hydrogen” facility in Pecos County to produce hydrogen with carbon capture and storage employing steam methane reformer technology with the abundant natural gas supplies in the immediate area as the feedstock.
Project 3: A parallel “green hydrogen” plant in Pecos County, which plans to utilize the proprietary electrolizer technology of a major international technology partner.
We are in various stages of negotiations with major company off-takes that range from specialty air and gas companies to international trading companies. We would expect the sales of hydrogen by these companies will be to their customer base, which are more traditional chemical end uses. The proposed distribution network of liquid hydrogen from our planned projects will be by truck and rail.
Completion of these projects is dependent upon our obtaining the necessary capital for planning, construction and start-up costs. We are in consultation with the local and state tax authorities to file for tax abatement treatment generally applicable to projects such as our hydrogen projects. However, neither the receipt of adequate capital or tax abatement treatment can be assured.
Through April 30, 2021, we have had no revenues and have reported continuing losses from operations.
Results of Operations
We recorded a net loss of $24,526,886 or $(14.23) per share, for fiscal year ended April 30, 2021, compared to a net loss of $4,393,689 or $(6.57) per share, for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2020. As discussed below, the net income or loss for any fiscal year fluctuates materially due to non-operating gains and losses.
Revenues
We have not yet begun to generate revenues.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses decreased $36,835 to $867,471 for the year ended April 30, 2021 from $904,306 for the year ended April 30, 2020. The decrease resulted from lower salaries, travel and other expenses associated with securing debt financing and administrative activities of our development activities due to limitations on funding during the current fiscal year.
Refinery Start-Up Costs
During the year ended April 30, 2021, the expenditures for the development of our CDU project in Pecos County, Texas decreased from the prior fiscal year due to financing constraints. We have expensed all costs incurred, including acquisition of refinery rights, planning, design and permitting. Such costs totaled $179,133 and $214,439 for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Our depreciation and amortization expenses remained constant, totaling $34,875 and $34,663 for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The expense results from the depreciation of land improvements and amortization of land easements.
Other Income (Expense)
Our interest expense decreased $703,108 to $1,143,495 for the year ended April 30, 2021 from $1,846,603 for the year ended April 30, 2020. We entered into fewer convertible debt arrangements in the current fiscal year, resulting in less amortization of debt discount to interest expense, which was partially offset by the increase in loan penalties and default interest.
For the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, we reported losses on derivative liabilities of $22,906,922 and $1,402,233, respectively. In a series of subscription agreements, we issued warrants in prior years that contain certain anti-dilution provisions that we have identified as derivatives. We also identified the variable conversion feature of certain convertible notes payable as derivatives. We estimate the fair value of the derivatives using multinomial lattice models that value the warrants based on a probability weighted cash flow model using projections of the various potential outcomes. These estimates are based on multiple inputs, including the market price of our stock, interest rates, our stock price volatility and management’s estimates of various potential equity financing transactions. These inputs are subject to significant changes from period to period and to management's judgment; therefore, the estimated fair value of the derivative liabilities will fluctuate from period to period, and the fluctuation may be material.
We reported a gain on extinguishment of debt of $605,010 for the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to a gain on extinguishment of debt of $8,555 for the year ended April 30, 2020. The gain on extinguishment of debt generally results from the settlement and extinguishment of convertible notes payable and certain accounts payable and accrued expenses. During the year ended April 30, 2021 we settled certain notes which resulted in principal and accrued interest being written off for a gain of $242,102. We also recorded a gain of $194,008 for the write off of the derivative liabilities associated with the settlement of the notes and we recorded a gain of $167,900 when the United States Small Business Administration forgave our loan issued under the Paycheck Protection Program.
Net Income (Loss)
As a result of the above, we reported net losses of $24,526,886 and $4,393,689 for the years ended April 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital
As of April 30, 2021, we had current assets of $368,342, comprised of cash of $330,449 and prepaid expenses and other current assets of $37,893, and current liabilities of $6,611,452, resulting in a working capital deficit of $6,243,110. Included in our current liabilities as of April 30, 2021 are derivative liabilities of $3,010,042, which we do not anticipate will require the payment of cash.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Our sources and uses of cash for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
We used net cash of $805,683 in operating activities for the year ended April 30, 2021 as a result of our net loss of $24,526,886, our non-cash gain of $605,010 and our increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $14,748, partially offset by non-cash expenses totaling $23,402,206, and increases in accounts payable of $3,695, accrued expenses of $756,839 and accounts payable and accrued expenses - related parties of $178,221.
In comparison, we used net cash of $734,518 in operating activities for the year ended April 30, 2020 as a result of our net loss of $4,393,689 and non-cash gain of $8,555, partially offset by non-cash expenses totaling $3,020,499, decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $15,804, and increases in accounts payable of $58,753, accrued expenses of $375,732 and accounts payable and accrued expenses - related parties of $196,938.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0, and $10,540 for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, comprised on the purchase of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1,069,302 for the year ended April 30, 2021, comprised of proceeds from notes payable of $775,000, proceeds from convertible notes payable of $10,000, proceeds from convertible notes payable - related parties of $163,500, proceeds from SBA bridge loan of $10,000, and proceeds from a PPP loan payable of $150,000, partially offset by repayments of convertible notes payable of $39,198.
By comparison, net cash provided by financing activities was $756,700 for the year ended April 30, 2020, comprised of proceeds from convertible notes payable of $365,300, proceeds from convertible notes payable - related parties of $323,500 and proceeds from PPP loan payable of $167,900, partially offset by repayments of convertible notes payable of $100,000.
Going Concern Uncertainty
Our financial statements are prepared using accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America applicable to a going concern, which contemplate the realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. We have incurred continuous losses from operations, have an accumulated deficit of $67,984,693 and a total stockholders’ deficit of $5,770,041 at April 30, 2021, and have reported negative cash flows from operations since inception. In addition, as of April 30, 2021 we did not have the cash resources to meet our operating commitments for the next twelve months. We require capital investments to implement our business plan, including the development of our planned hydrogen projects. On July 15, 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (“SPA”) which closed on July 20, 2021, pursuant to which we issued and sold to an institutional investor in a registered direct offering 170,000 shares of our common stock, 2,575,000 warrants, and 3,580,000 pre-funded warrants. We received proceeds of $2,650,850 after deducting placement agent fees and related offering expenses. We have subsequently utilized approximately $560,000 of the proceeds to reduce indebtedness and intend to utilize the remaining amount for working capital purposes. Nevertheless, our ability to continue as a going concern must be considered in light of the problems, expenses and complications frequently encountered by entrance into established markets and the competitive environment in which we operate.
In addition to the SPA, we expect to continue to seek additional funding through private or public equity and debt financing.
Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on our ability to generate sufficient cash from operations to meet our cash needs and/or to raise funds to finance ongoing operations and repay debt. However, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in our efforts to raise additional debt or equity capital and/or that our cash generated by our operations will be adequate to meet our needs. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern for a reasonable period of time.
The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of any uncertainty as to the Company's ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements also do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or amounts and classifications of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to inventories, investments, intangible assets, income taxes, financing operations, and contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
For further information on our significant accounting policies see the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. There were no material changes to our significant accounting policies during the year ended April 30, 2021. The following is a description of those significant accounting policies that involve estimates and judgment by management.
Derivative liabilities
In a series of subscription agreements, the Company issued warrants in prior years that contain certain anti-dilution provisions that have been identified as derivatives. In addition, the Company identified the conversion feature of certain convertible notes payable and convertible preferred stock as derivatives. As of April 30, 2021, the number of warrants or common shares to be issued under these agreements is indeterminate; therefore, the Company concluded that the equity environment is tainted and all additional warrants, stock options and convertible debt are included in the value of the derivative. We estimate the fair value of the derivatives using multinomial lattice models that value the derivative liabilities based on a probability weighted cash flow model using projections of the various potential outcomes. These estimates are based on multiple inputs, including the market price of our stock, interest rates, our stock price volatility and management’s estimates of various potential equity financing transactions. These inputs are subject to significant changes from period to period and to management's judgment; therefore, the estimated fair value of the derivative liabilities will fluctuate from period to period, and the fluctuation may be material.
Fair value of financial instruments
Under Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, and ASC 825, Financial Instruments, the FASB establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted accounting principles and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. This Statement reaffirms that fair value is the relevant measurement attribute. The adoption of this standard did not have a material effect on the Company's financial statements as reflected herein. The carrying amounts of cash, accounts payable, accrued expenses and notes reported on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets are estimated by management to approximate fair value primarily due to the short-term nature of the instruments.
An entity is required to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value using a hierarchy based on the level of independent, objective evidence surrounding the inputs used to measure fair value. A financial instrument’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. The hierarchy prioritized the inputs into three levels that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active.
Level 3 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are unobservable inputs to the valuation methodology that are significant to the measurement of the fair value of the assets or liabilities.
Our derivative liabilities are measured at fair value on a recurring basis and estimated as follows: