Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing activities, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the "Risk Factors" section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, Item 1A, for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company primarily focused on developing proprietary therapeutics designed to extend life or improve quality of life for cancer patients. We are building a drug development pipeline through the licensing and acquisition of therapeutics in late preclinical and clinical development stages. We leverage our scientific and clinical experience to help reduce the risk of and accelerate the clinical development of our drug product candidates.
In December 2019, we completed our initial public offering (including the exercise of the over-allotment by the underwriters) by selling 1,277,778 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $8.00 per share. Net proceeds were approximately $9.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and accrued, unpaid offering expenses. Our common stock began trading on the Nasdaq Capital Market on December 19, 2019.
In January 2020, we entered into a Capital on DemandTM Sales Agreement with JonesTrading Institutional Services, LLC (“JonesTrading”), as sales agent, pursuant to which we offered and sold (at our discretion), from time to time, through or to JonesTrading shares of our common stock, having an aggregate offering price of up to $19.7 million. Pursuant to this agreement, through December 31, 2020, we have sold 860,677 shares of our common stock at an average gross price of $9.79 per share for net proceeds of $8,175,290, after fees and commissions of $253,036. From January 1, 2021 through February 11, 2021, we sold an additional 1,104,047 shares of our common stock at an average gross price of $10.20 per share for net proceeds of $10,925,311, after fees and commissions of $338,153.
In June 2020, we entered into a 50/50 collaboration development agreement with NorthStar Medical Radioisotopes, LLC (“NorthStar”) to develop potential Radio-Immuno-Therapeutics (“RITs”) to treat severe COVID-19 (patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection). NorthStar is a commercial producer and supplier of medical radioisotopes. This collaboration combines NorthStar’s expertise in the innovative production, supply, and distribution of important medical radioisotopes with our expertise in therapeutic drug development and our pre-IND stage humanized urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (“uPAR”) targeted monoclonal antibody known as MNPR-101, along with a proprietary portfolio of related monoclonal antibodies that target uPAR or its ligand uPA. uPAR seems to be selectively expressed on aberrantly activated immune cells. In response to coronavirus infection, these rogue immune cells produce pro-inflammatory cytokines that can cause runaway inflammation throughout the body, commonly referred to as a cytokine storm. It is this systemic hyper-inflammatory state that is thought to be largely responsible for the severe lung injury and multiple organ damage that contributes to poor outcomes and death in patients with severe COVID-19.
In this collaboration, we have coupled MNPR-101 to therapeutic radioisotopes supplied by NorthStar. The resulting conjugates are designed to be a highly selective agents that have the potential to kill aberrantly activated cytokine-producing immune cells. By eradicating these cells with a uPAR-targeted RIT (“uPRIT”), the goal is to spare healthy cells while quickly reducing the cytokine storm and its harmful systemic effects. Through March 5, 2021, we have incurred immaterial amounts of expenses related to the NorthStar collaboration, while partnering with several key companies and institutions to further the collaboration’s development efforts. These collaborators include: IsoTherapeutics Group, LLC, which generated the uPRIT candidates; Aragen Bioscience Inc., which screened the uPRIT candidates through preclinical biochemical testing; and Texas Lung Injury Institute / University of Texas Health Science Center at Tyler, which plans to perform preclinical testing and, if successful, clinical testing.
In August 2020, we announced a plan to develop a test to potentially triage COVID-19 patients into those likely versus unlikely to progress to severe respiratory failure. The test would use our proprietary monoclonal antibody, ATN-658, to detect soluble urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (“suPAR”) in COVID-19 patient plasma. A suPAR test for COVID-19 patients, if successful, could identify those at high risk for severe respiratory failure, facilitating earlier therapeutic interventions and/or allowing for the staging of patients to an optimal treatment based on their disease characteristics.
In November 2020, we announced a series of recently issued patents for our Phase 2b/3 clinical-stage lead product candidate, Validive (clonidine HCl mucobuccal tablet). These patents, including U.S. Patent No. 10,675,271, provide claims covering “Clonidine and/or clonidine derivatives for use in the prevention and/or treatment of adverse side effects of chemotherapy”. These patents expand the potential use of Validive in cancer patients, beyond the earlier allowed claims for the prevention of oral mucositis in patients receiving CRT. Specifically, they provide protection for the potential ability of Validive to prevent or treat common chemotherapy-associated side effects such as asthenia and fatigue and would provide protection should we determine in the future to conduct additional Validive development activities related to adverse side effects of chemotherapy beyond oropharyngeal cancer.
In December 2020, we announced the issuance of a U.S. patent (US 10,450,340) covering compositions of matter (2-pyrrilino camsirubicin) for a novel family of camsirubicin analogs. This patent, which expands the Company’s camsirubicin intellectual property portfolio, is expected to expire in 2038 not including any patent term extensions. The patent broadens our camsirubicin portfolio and creates a pipeline that has been designed to retain the potentially favorable non-cardiotoxic chemical backbone of camsirubicin and the potent broad-spectrum antitumor activity of doxorubicin. Further, preclinical evidence suggests that this new family of 2-pyrrilino camsirubicin analogs could be active in doxorubicin-resistant tumor cells which may enable use in cancer types beyond those possible with camsirubicin.
In February 2021, we announced the first patient dosed in our Phase 2b/3 VOICE trial of Validive® for the prevention of CRT-induced severe oral mucositis in patients with oropharyngeal cancer (“VOICE”).
Given the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects on clinical trials, we have adjusted our clinical development plans accordingly to fit what is feasible in the current environment. We have simplified the design of the previously planned Phase 3 clinical trial for our lead product candidate, Validive, to a seamless design Phase 2b/3 clinical trial (our VOICE trial) that will allow us to minimize touch points with patients and sites. This seamless design will allow us to immediately advance to the Phase 3 portion of the trial if supported by the interim data at the end of the Phase 2b portion of the trial. To complete the VOICE clinical program, including, if required, completing a smaller second Phase 3 confirmatory clinical trial, we will require additional funding in the millions or tens of millions of dollars (depending on if we have consummated a collaboration or partnership or neither for Validive), which we are planning to pursue within the next 12 months.
Along with our VOICE trial, we continue to prioritize supporting the camsirubicin Phase 2 clinical trial for which we signed a collaboration agreement in June 2019 with Grupo Español de Investigación en Sarcomas (“GEIS”), discussed in further detail below. We believe we have funds sufficient to obtain topline results from the run-in portion of the trial.
In February 2021, we also announced the publication of a peer-reviewed study in the European Journal of Cancer which shows the potential utility of MNPR-101 conjugates as uPAR imaging agents to improve surgical outcomes in bladder cancer and for surveillance post-resection. This publication builds on previous studies using conjugates of MNPR-101 and its mouse analog, ATN-658, for the optical imaging of oral and colon cancer.
Our Product Pipeline
Our Product Candidates
Validive (clonidine mucobuccal tablet; clonidine MBT)
Validive is a mucobuccal tablet (MBT) formulation of clonidine. The MBT formulation was developed to enhance the oral mucosal drug delivery and significantly increase the salivary concentrations of the active ingredient while minimizing systemic absorption. The Validive tablet is tasteless and self-administered once daily by affixing it to the outside of the patient’s upper gum where it dissolves slowly over the period of several hours, resulting in the extended release of clonidine into the oral cavity and oropharynx, the site of SOM following chemoradiation treatment (“CRT”) for OPC. Validive therapy is designed to begin on the first day of CRT and continue daily through the last day of CRT.
SOM is a painful and debilitating inflammation and ulceration of the mucous membranes lining the oral cavity and oropharynx in response to chemoradiation therapy. Patients receiving CRT to treat their OPC often develop SOM, which remains one of the most common and devastating side effects of treatment in this indication. We believe Validive has the potential to address several critical elements that affect SOM patients, including:
Reduction in the incidence of SOM. SOM can increase the risk of acute and chronic comorbidities, including dysphagia, trismus and lung complications, which are often irreversible and lead to increased hospitalization and the need for additional interventions. In a Phase 2 clinical trial, the OPC patient cohort treated with Validive 100 µg demonstrated a reduction in the absolute incidence of SOM compared to placebo of 26.3% (incidence rate of 65.2% in placebo, 45.0% in Validive 50 µg group, 38.9% in Validive 100 µg group). A reduced incidence of SOM in OPC patients may lower the risk of acute and chronic comorbidities and improve quality of life.
Delay in the time to onset of SOM. SOM can cause cancer treatment delay and/or discontinuation, which may impact overall survival outcomes. In the Phase 2 clinical trial, OPC patients had a time to onset of SOM of 37 days in the placebo cohort; 45-day time to onset of SOM in the Validive 50 µg cohort; and median was not reached in the Validive 100 µg group as fewer than half of the patients developed SOM. Prolonging time to onset of SOM may lead to fewer missed CRT treatments, resulting in improved overall survival outcomes.
Decrease in the duration of SOM. Longer duration of SOM leads to a higher risk of the need for parenteral nutrition and lower quality of life. SOM patients experience difficulty or inability to drink and/or eat, and difficulty in swallowing often results in malnourishment and feeding tube intervention. The Phase 2 clinical trial data demonstrated a 15.5-day reduction (by 37.8%) in the duration of SOM for patients treated with Validive 100 µg (41 day median duration with placebo, 34 days with the Validive 50 µg group, and 25.5 days for the Validive 100 µg group) in patients that developed SOM. Median duration across all patients, inclusive of both those that did and did not develop SOM, was 17 days in the placebo group and 0 days in each of the Validive 50 and 100 µg groups. Reduced duration of SOM may result in lower risk of malnourishment and feeding tube intervention, and fewer treatment terminations/delays.
In September 2017, we exercised an option to license Validive from Onxeo S.A., the company that had developed Validive through its Phase 2 clinical trial. In this completed Phase 2 clinical trial, Validive demonstrated clinically meaningful and dose-dependent efficacy signals within the 64-patient OPC population randomized to placebo. Additionally, patients in the Validive cohorts in the Phase 2 clinical trial demonstrated a safety profile similar to that of placebo. While not designed by us, Onxeo’s promising preclinical studies and Phase 2 clinical trial have informed the design and conduct of what we believe will be an effective Phase 2b/3 (VOICE) clinical trial.
SOM typically arises in the immune tissue at the back of the tongue and throat, which comprise the oropharynx, and consists of acute severe tissue damage and pain that prevents patients from swallowing, eating and drinking. Validive stimulates the alpha-2 adrenergic receptor (alpha-2AR) on macrophages (white blood cells present in the immune tissues of the oropharynx) suppressing pro-inflammatory cytokine expression. Validive exerts its effects locally in the oral cavity and oropharynx over a prolonged period of time through its unique MBT formulation. Patients who develop SOM are also at increased risk of developing late-onset toxicities, including trismus (jaw, neck, and throat spasms), dysphagia, and lung complications, which are often irreversible and lead to increased hospitalization and the need for further interventions sometimes years after completion of CRT. We believe that a reduction in the incidence and duration of SOM by Validive will have the potential to reduce treatment discontinuation and/or treatment delays potentially leading to improved survival outcomes, and reducing or eliminating long-term morbidities resulting from CRT.
The OPC target population for Validive is the most rapidly growing segment of head and neck cancer (“HNC”) patients, estimated to exceed 40,000 new cases annually of OPC in the U.S alone. The growth in OPC is driven by the increasing prevalence of oral human papilloma virus (“HPV”) infections in the U.S. and around the world. Despite the availability of a pediatric/adolescent HPV vaccine, the rate of OPC incidence in adults is not anticipated to be materially reduced for decades due to low adoption of the vaccine to date. As a result, the incidence of HPV-driven OPC is projected to increase for many years to come and will continue to support a clinical need for Validive for the prevention of CRT-induced SOM in patients with OPC since CRT is the standard of care treatment, and we do not anticipate this changing for years to come.
A pre-Phase 3 meeting with the FDA was held, and based on the meeting discussion a Phase 3 clinical protocol and accompanying statistical analysis plan (“SAP”) was submitted to the FDA for review and comments. We have also received protocol assistance and advice on our Phase 3 protocol and SAP from the European Medicines Agency Committee on Human Medicinal Products (EMA/CHMP/SAWP). Based on comments and guidance provided by FDA and EMA, and our analysis of the current COVID-19 pandemic and its effects on clinical trials, we have modified our original adaptive design Phase 3 clinical trial to be a seamless Phase 2b/3 (VOICE) clinical trial to better fit the current clinical research environment. The primary endpoint, absolute incidence of SOM, remains the same, but the overall design of the trial has been simplified and the touch points with the healthcare system have been minimized. We have now initiated clinical trial sites and commenced dosing in the Phase 2b portion of our VOICE trial. We anticipate the interim (completion of Phase 2b portion of the VOICE trial) will be reached in the first quarter of 2022, and the Phase 3 enrollment will be completed in the fourth quarter of 2022. Initiating the Phase 3 portion of the VOICE trial will be subject to the interim (Phase 2b) results. We will need to raise additional funding or find a suitable pharmaceutical partner to complete the VOICE clinical program including, if required, completing a smaller second Phase 3 confirmatory clinical trial. Validive has been granted fast track designation in the U.S., orphan drug designation in the EU, and has global intellectual property patent protection through mid-2029 not accounting for possible extensions.
Camsirubicin (5-imino-13-deoxydoxorubicin; formerly MNPR-201, GPX-150)
Camsirubicin is a proprietary doxorubicin analog that is selective for topoisomerase II-alpha. Doxorubicin is widely used to treat adult and pediatric solid and blood (hematologic) cancers, including soft tissue sarcomas, breast, gastric, ovarian and bladder cancers, leukemias and lymphomas. Despite clinical studies demonstrating the anti-cancer benefit of higher cumulative doses of doxorubicin, the clinical efficacy of doxorubicin has historically been limited by the risk of patients developing irreversible, potentially life-threatening cardiotoxicity. For example, several clinical studies completed in the 1990s demonstrated that concurrent doxorubicin (60 mg/m2, 8 cycles) and paclitaxel gave a 94% overall response rate in patients with metastatic breast cancer but led to 18% of these patients developing congestive heart failure. Reduction of doxorubicin to 4-6 cycles of treatment decreased the incidence of congestive heart failure, but also reduced response rates to 45-55%. In a clinical study looking at dose response, sarcoma patients on the high dose (75 mg/m2) doxorubicin had a response rate of 37% compared to just 18% in the low dose (45 mg/m2) doxorubicin group. With the cumulative dose restriction on doxorubicin, the median progression free survival for ASTS patients is approximately 6 months, with median overall survival of 12-15 months. There is a significant unmet opportunity to develop a replacement for doxorubicin that can be dosed higher and for longer.
Camsirubicin has been engineered specifically to retain the anticancer activity of doxorubicin while minimizing the toxic effects on the heart. Similar to doxorubicin, the antitumor effects of camsirubicin are mediated through the stabilization of the topoisomerase II complex after a DNA strand break and DNA intercalation leading to tumor cell apoptosis (cell death). Inhibiting the topoisomerase II-alpha isoform is desired for the anti-cancer effect, while inhibiting the topoisomerase II-beta isoform has been demonstrated to mediate, at least in part, the cardiotoxicity associated with doxorubicin. Camsirubicin is more selective than doxorubicin for inhibiting topoisomerase II-alpha versus topoisomerase II-beta. This selectivity may at least partly explain the minimal cardiotoxicity that has been observed for camsirubicin in preclinical and clinical studies to date. We believe these attributes provide a strong rationale to develop camsirubicin without restriction on cumulative dose, in a broad spectrum of cancer types.
A Phase 2 clinical trial for camsirubicin has been completed in patients with advanced (e.g. unresectable or metastatic) soft tissue sarcoma (“ASTS”). Median progression free survival for ASTS patients is approximately 6 months and average life expectancy for these patients is 12-15 months. In this study, 52.6% of patients evaluable for tumor progression demonstrated clinical benefit (partial response or stable disease), which was proportional to dose and consistently observed at higher cumulative doses of camsirubicin (>1000 mg/m2). Camsirubicin was very well tolerated in this study and underscored the ability to potentially administer camsirubicin without restriction of cumulative dose in patients with ASTS. Although doxorubicin has been the standard of care treatment for over 40 years for patients with ASTS, doxorubicin is limited to a lifetime cumulative dose maximum of 450 mg/m2. This means that even if a patient is responding, they are pulled off of doxorubicin treatment once this cumulative dose has been reached. Thus, there is a significant unmet opportunity to develop a replacement for doxorubicin that retains anti-cancer activity while reducing or eliminating the risk for irreversible heart damage.
Based on encouraging clinical results to date, we plan to continue the development of camsirubicin as first-line treatment in patients with ASTS, where the current first-line treatment is doxorubicin. The aim is to administer camsirubicin without restricting cumulative dose, thereby potentially improving efficacy beyond that of doxorubicin by continuing to treat patients who are responding on treatment. In June 2019, we entered into a clinical collaboration with GEIS. GEIS will lead a multi-country, randomized, open-label Phase 2 clinical trial evaluating camsirubicin head-to-head against doxorubicin in patients with ASTS. GEIS is an internationally renowned non-profit organization focused on the research, development and management of clinical trials for sarcoma that has worked with many of the leading biotech and global pharmaceutical companies. Enrollment of the trial is currently anticipated to begin in the second quarter of 2021, and to include approximately 170 ASTS patients, an interim analysis, and take around two years to enroll. The trial will begin with a dose escalation (“run-in”) prior to the randomization portion of the trial. The primary endpoint of the trial will be progression-free survival, with secondary endpoints including overall survival, response rate and incidence of treatment-emergent adverse events. Camsirubicin has been granted orphan drug designation for the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma in the U.S. and EU.
MNPR-101 (formerly huATN-658)
MNPR-101 is a novel, preclinical stage drug candidate. It is a first-in-class humanized monoclonal antibody to the urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (“uPAR”), a well-credentialed cancer therapeutic target. uPAR is a protein receptor that resides on the cell surface and is overexpressed in many deadly cancers, but has little to no expression in healthy tissue; several Phase 1 imaging studies in human advanced cancer patients show that uPAR is detected selectively in the tumor.
In normal cells, uPAR is transiently expressed as part of a highly regulated process required for the breakdown of the extracellular matrix during normal tissue remodeling. In cancer, however, uPAR is constitutively overexpressed by the tumor cell, and the uPAR extracellular matrix degrading function is hijacked by the tumor to support tissue invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis. uPAR expression is important to tumor cell survival, and uPAR expression increases in high grade and metastatic disease.
MNPR-101 has demonstrated significant antitumor activity in numerous preclinical models of tumor growth, both as a monotherapy and in combination with other therapeutics and is being advanced toward an IND. Based on the selective expression of uPAR in numerous tumor types, we anticipate MNPR-101 will be well-tolerated and amenable to a variety of combination treatment approaches in the clinic.
uPRIT as a Potential Therapeutic for Severe COVID-19
MNPR-101 is also being developed for the treatment of severe COVID-19 and other respiratory diseases. We have entered into a collaboration development agreement with NorthStar to develop potential uPRITs to treat severe COVID-19. This collaboration combines NorthStar’s expertise in the innovative production, supply, and distribution of important medical radioisotopes with our expertise in therapeutic drug development. NorthStar and we have coupled MNPR-101 with a therapeutic radioisotope. uPAR seems to be selectively expressed on aberrantly activated immune cells. In response to coronavirus infection, these rogue immune cells produce pro-inflammatory cytokines that can cause runaway inflammation throughout the body, commonly referred to as a “cytokine storm.” It is this systemic hyper-inflammatory state that is thought to be largely responsible for the severe lung injury and further multiple organ damage that contributes to poor outcomes and death in patients with severe COVID-19.
In collaboration with NorthStar, we have filed a provisional patent application entitled “Precision Radioimmunotherapeutic Targeting of the Urokinase Plasminogen Activator Receptor (uPAR) for Treatment of Severe COVID-19 Disease” with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (“USPTO”). This application covers novel compositions and uses of cytotoxic radioisotopes attached to antibodies that bind to uPAR, thereby creating precision targeted radiotherapeutics, also known as uPRITs, for the treatment of severe COVID-19 and other respiratory diseases. Advanced COVID-19 patients frequently develop severe, life-threatening, pulmonary inflammation as a result of a viral induced cytokine storm. The development of this cytokine storm is associated with a high rate of mortality in severe COVID-19 patients, even when oxygen support and mechanical ventilation are utilized. uPRITs have been designed with the goal of selectively eradicating the aberrantly activated immune cells responsible for causing cytokine storm and its harmful systemic effects. The co-inventors of the provisional patent application are James Harvey, Chief Scientific Officer of NorthStar, and Andrew P. Mazar, our Chief Scientific Officer. We have also entered into collaborations with: IsoTherapeutics Group, LLC, which generated the uPRIT candidates; Aragen Bioscience Inc., which screened the uPRIT candidates through preclinical biochemical testing; and Texas Lung Injury Institute / University of Texas Health Science Center at Tyler, which plans to perform preclinical testing and, if successful, clinical testing.
ATN-658 as a Potential Diagnostic for Severe COVID-19
A prototype enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (“ELISA”) for measuring blood suPAR levels using the non-humanized version of MNPR-101 (ATN-658) has been developed, and we are in discussions with several parties to further develop and commercialize a suPAR-based test in COVID-19 patients.
The use of suPAR for triaging COVID-19 patients is supported by a growing body of recent studies. Rovina et al. 2020 showed that patients with elevated levels of suPAR at the time of hospital admission are 17 times more likely to develop severe respiratory failure (p=.0000000012); Arnold et al. 2020 showed suPAR to have the best performance in predicting outcome (such as intensive care unit admission and death) of all the biomarkers examined; and Eugen-Olsen et al. 2020 showed that low levels of suPAR are predictive of mild outcome in COVID-19 patients.
MNPR-101 as a Potential Imaging Agent
Using MNPR-101, a multimodal imaging probe was developed and tested in vivo in human bladder cancer models. A publication in the European Journal of Cancer (Baart et al. 2021) reported that high expression of uPAR in bladder cancer is localized at the tumor periphery, suggesting that using a fluorescent-conjugated MNPR-101 probe might allow surgeons to better visualize the borders of the tumor, potentially resulting in more complete tumor resection and thereby minimizing relapse. Similar approaches have been utilized successfully in the resection of other tumor types, such as breast cancer.
Bladder cancer is often treated with transurethral resection to remove cancerous tissue; however, recurrence can occur in up to 78% of patients within 5 years. Up to 40% of recurrent cases develop muscle invasive disease, which has a poor prognosis and requires complete removal of the bladder. Many patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer go on to develop and succumb to metastatic disease.
Our Strategy
Our management team has extensive experience in developing therapeutics through regulatory approval and commercialization. In aggregate, companies they co-founded have achieved four drug approvals in the U.S. and the EU, successfully sold an asset developed by management which is currently in Phase 3 clinical trials, and completed the sale of a biopharmaceutical company for over $800 million in cash. Understanding the preclinical, clinical, regulatory and commercial development processes and hurdles are key factors in successful drug development and the expertise demonstrated by our management team across all of these areas increases the probability of success in advancing the product candidates in our product pipeline. Our strategic goal is to acquire, develop and commercialize promising oncology product candidates that address important unmet medical needs of cancer patients. The six key elements of our strategy to achieve this goal are to:
●
Leverage data generated from the Phase 2 Validive clinical trial to position us effectively for a successful VOICE clinical program for Validive for SOM in OPC. In the Phase 2 clinical trial the absolute incidence of SOM in OPC patients was reduced by 26.3%, the time to onset was delayed, and the duration of disease in patients that developed SOM was decreased by 15.5 days in the Validive 100 µg cohort versus placebo. In addition to the data from the Phase 2 clinical trial, we believe the guidance from our key opinion leaders (“KOLs”) as well as from the FDA and EMA, and our own internal clinical trial design expertise, position us well for an effective VOICE clinical trial program.
●
Obtain FDA approval of Validive and maximize the commercial potential of Validive in the U.S. and the EU, seeking partnerships outside these markets. If the VOICE clinical program of Validive is successful and FDA approval is obtained, we currently intend to commercialize Validive in the U.S. and the EU ourselves, which may include establishing our own specialty sales force and seeking partnerships outside of these territories for regulatory approval and drug sales and distribution.
●
Advance the clinical development of camsirubicin, by pursuing clinical indications where doxorubicin has demonstrated efficacy. ASTS will be the first indication, which will allow camsirubicin to go head-to-head against doxorubicin, the current first-line treatment. In this indication, camsirubicin previously demonstrated clinical benefit (stable disease or partial response) in 52.6% of patients evaluable for tumor progression in a single-arm Phase 2 study. Clinical benefit was proportional to dose and consistently observed at higher cumulative doses of camsirubicin (>1000 mg/m2). Camsirubicin was very well tolerated in this Phase 2 study and underscored the ability to potentially administer camsirubicin without restriction as to cumulative dose (doxorubicin is limited to 450 mg/m2 cumulative dose due to heart toxicity).
●
Continue the development of MNPR-101 and related molecules as a therapeutic, a diagnostic and imaging agents. We plan to continue the development of MNPR-101 for diagnostic and therapeutic use in severe COVID-19 and in cancer.
●
Expand our drug development pipeline through advancing current assets, in-license and acquisition of oncology product candidates. The 2-pyrrilino camsirubicin analogs represent proprietary compositions of matter that retain the non-cardiotoxic backbone of camsirubicin but may have features in terms of antitumor activity and mechanism that distinguish this family of compounds from camsirubicin. We plan to continue the expansion of our drug development pipeline through acquiring or in-licensing additional oncology product candidates, particularly those that leverage existing scientific and clinical data that helps reduce the risks of the next steps in clinical development.
●
Utilize the expertise and prior experience of our team in the areas of asset acquisition, drug development and commercialization to establish ourselves as a leading biopharmaceutical company. Our senior executive team has relevant experience in biopharmaceutical in-licensing and acquisitions as well as developing product candidates through approval and commercialization. In aggregate, our team has co-founded BioMarin Pharmaceutical (Nasdaq: BMRN), Raptor Pharmaceuticals ($800 million sale to Horizon Pharma), and Tactic Pharma, LLC (“Tactic Pharma”) (sale of lead asset, choline tetrathiomolybdate, which was ultimately acquired by Alexion in June 2018 for $764 million; Alexion is currently in the process of being acquired by AstraZeneca).
Risks Associated with our Business
Our business is subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including those highlighted in “Item 1A - Risk Factors”. These risks include, among others, the following:
●
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company with a history of financial losses. We expect to continue to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future and may never achieve or maintain profitability, which could result in a decline in the market value of our common stock.
●
Funds raised to-date are not sufficient to complete the VOICE clinical program, including, if required, completing a smaller second Phase 3 confirmatory clinical trial, to support further development of camsirubicin beyond Phase 2, or to support continued development of MNPR-101 and related compounds. If we are unable to raise enough funds in the next 12 months from the sale of our common stock or other financing efforts, we may have to consider strategic options such as out-licensing Validive or other product candidates, entering into a clinical partnership, or terminating one or more programs. There can be no assurance that we can find a suitable partner on satisfactory terms.
●
We have a limited operating history, no revenues from operations, and are dependent upon raising capital to continue our drug development programs.
●
We do not have and may never have any approved products on the market. Our business is highly dependent upon receiving approvals from various U.S. and international governmental agencies and will be severely harmed if we are not granted approval to manufacture and sell our product candidates.
●
Our clinical trials may not yield sufficiently conclusive results for regulatory agencies to approve the use of our products.
●
If we experience delays or difficulties in the enrollment of subjects in clinical trials, our receipt of necessary regulatory approvals will be delayed or prevented, which will materially delay our program schedules and adversely affect our financial condition.
●
We rely on third parties to conduct our manufacturing, non-clinical studies, and our clinical trials. If these third parties do not successfully carry out their contractual duties or meet expected deadlines or performance goals, the initiation or conduct of our clinical trials may be delayed and we may be unable to obtain regulatory approval for, or commercialize our, current product candidates or any future products, and our financial condition will be adversely affected.
●
We face significant competition from other biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, and our operating results will suffer if we fail to compete effectively. Competition and technological change may make our product candidates obsolete or non-competitive.
●
The termination of third-party licenses will adversely affect our rights to important compounds or technologies.
●
If we and our third-party licensors do not obtain and preserve protection for our respective intellectual property rights, our competitors may be able to take advantage of our development efforts to develop competing drugs.
●
If we lose key management leadership, and/or scientific personnel, and if we cannot recruit qualified employees or other significant personnel, we may experience program delays and increased compensation costs, and our business will be materially disrupted.
●
The COVID-19 pandemic could have a substantial negative impact on our business, financial condition, operating results, stock price and ability raise additional funds.
Implications of Being an Emerging Growth Company
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”). An emerging growth company may take advantage of specified reduced reporting burdens that are otherwise applicable generally to public companies. These provisions include, but are not limited to:
●
inclusion of only two years, as compared to three years, of audited financial statements in addition to any required unaudited interim financial statements with correspondingly reduced “Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations” disclosures;
●
an exemption from the auditor attestation requirement in the assessment of our internal control over financial reporting pursuant to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (“Sarbanes-Oxley Act”);
●
an exemption from compliance with any new requirements adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (“PCAOB”) requiring mandatory audit firm rotation;
●
reduced disclosure about executive compensation arrangements; and
●
an exemption from the requirement to seek non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements.
We may take advantage of these provisions until we are no longer an emerging growth company. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (1) the last day of the year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our initial public offering, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the prior June 30th, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period.
We have elected to take advantage of certain of the reduced disclosure obligations in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and may elect to take advantage of other reduced reporting requirements in future filings. As a result, the information that we provide to our stockholders may be reduced and /or less detailed than what you might find from other public reporting companies.
The JOBS Act permits an emerging growth company such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected to opt out of this provision and, as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards when they are required to be adopted by public companies that are not emerging growth companies. In addition, we are also a “smaller reporting company” as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and have elected to take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosure requirements available to smaller reporting companies such as avoiding the extensive narrative disclosure required of other reporting companies, particularly in the description of executive compensation.
Corporate Information
We were formed as a Delaware limited liability company in December 2014, with the name Monopar Therapeutics, LLC. In December 2015, we converted to a Delaware C corporation. Our principal executive offices are located at 1000 Skokie Blvd, Suite 350, Wilmette, IL 60091. Our telephone number is (847) 388-0349. Our corporate website is located at www.monopartx.com. Any information contained in, or that can be accessed through our website, is not incorporated by reference in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Trademark notice
We have registered trademarks with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (“USPTO”), for the following trademarks: “Validive”, “Baxefyn”, “Vidarys”, “Cotilix”, “Arvita” and “Clonidol”. All other trademarks, service marks and trade names in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are the property of their respective owners. We have omitted the ® and ™ designations, as applicable, for the trademarks used herein.
Revenues
We are an emerging growth company, have no approved drugs and have not generated any revenues. To date, we have engaged in acquiring pharmaceutical drug product candidates, licensing rights to drug product candidates, entering into collaboration agreements for testing and clinical development of our drug product candidates and providing the infrastructure to support the clinical development of our drug product candidates. We do not anticipate commercial revenues from operations until we complete testing and development of one of our drug product candidates and obtain marketing approval or we sell, enter into a collaborative marketing arrangement, or out-license one of our drug product candidates to another party. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources”.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and consolidated results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation arrangements with employees, non-employee directors and consultants using a fair value method, which requires the recognition of compensation expense for costs related to all stock-based awards, including stock option grants and restricted stock units (“RSUs”). The fair value method requires us to estimate the fair value of stock-based payment awards on the date of grant using an option pricing model or the closing stock price on the date of grant in the case of RSUs.
Stock-based compensation costs for stock awards granted to our employees and non-employee directors are based on the fair value of the underlying instruments calculated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model on the date of grant for stock options and using the closing stock price on the date of grant for RSUs and recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is the vesting period. Determining the appropriate fair value model and related assumptions requires judgment, including selecting methods for estimating the Company’s future stock price volatility, forfeiture rates and expected term. The expected volatility rates are estimated based on the actual volatility of comparable public companies over recent historical periods of the same length as the expected term. We generally selected these companies based on reasonably comparable characteristics, including market capitalization, risk profiles, stage of corporate development and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected term of the stock-based awards. The expected term for stock options granted during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was estimated using the simplified method. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. We have not paid dividends and do not anticipate paying a cash dividend in future vesting periods and, accordingly, use an expected dividend yield of zero. The risk-free interest rate is based on the rate of U.S. Treasury securities with maturities consistent with the estimated expected term of the awards. Prior to January 1, 2019, the measurement of consultant stock-based compensation was subject to periodic adjustments as the underlying equity instruments vest. Since January 1, 2019, consultant stock-based compensation is valued on the grant date and is recognized as an expense straight-line over the period during which services are rendered.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31,
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Research and Development Expenses
Research and Development (“R&D”) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $4,065,000, compared to approximately $1,969,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This represents an increase of approximately $2,096,000 primarily attributed to increases in expenses of $1,144,000 for the planning of the GEIS camsirubicin Phase 2 clinical trial including manufacturing, $48,000 for increases in Validive clinical trial planning and manufacturing costs, $924,000 for annual R&D personnel salary increases, annual (non-cash) equity grants and salaries and benefits of three new R&D personnel and a higher allocation of the CEO's salary and benefits to R&D expenses due to the start-up of clinical trial activities, partially offset by $20,000 for net decreases other R&D expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $2,444,000, compared to approximately $2,355,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This represents an increase of approximately $89,000 primarily attributed to $430,000 for net increases in stock-based compensation for annual (non-cash) equity grants and increases in annual G&A personnel salary and benefits, $202,000 for increases in fees related to public company compliance, including Nasdaq, legal and audit fees, $32,000 for increases in Delaware franchise tax and Australian income tax, and $16,000 for net increases in general costs of operations, partially offset by $475,000 in CEO's salary and benefits allocated from G&A expenses to R&D expenses, and $116,000 for decreases in stock-based compensation for non-employee directors (non-cash).
Other Income from PPP Loan Forgiveness
Other income from PPP loan forgiveness of approximately $122,000 represents the PPP loan granted by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) in May 2020, which repayment was forgiven by the SBA in December 2020.
Interest Income
Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by approximately $17,000 versus the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a significant decrease in bank interest rates partially offset by an increase in bank balances resulting from our initial public offering in December 2019 and funds raised in our Capital on DemandTM Sales Agreement with JonesTrading during 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have incurred losses and cumulative negative cash flows from operations since our inception in December 2014 resulting in an accumulated deficit of approximately $32.2 million as of December 31, 2020. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will increase to enable the execution of our strategic plan. As a result, we anticipate that we will seek to raise additional capital in 2021 to fund our future operations. We will seek to obtain needed capital through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, strategic collaborations and grant funding. To date, we have funded our operations through net proceeds from the initial public offering of our common stock and net proceeds from sales under our Capital on DemandTM Sales Agreement, private placements of our preferred and common stock, and the net receipt of funds related to the acquisition of camsirubicin as discussed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 under Item 7 Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Liquidity and Resources, filed with the SEC on March 27, 2020. We anticipate that the currently available funds as of March 5, 2021, will fund our planned operations at least through March 31, 2022.
We invest our cash equivalents in a money market account.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had net cash inflows of approximately $3,523,000 and $6,321,000, respectively, a decrease of approximately $2,798,000, due primarily to higher net cash used in operating activities in 2020 and less cash raised in 2020 compared to 2019.
Cash Flow Used in Operating Activities
The increase to cash flow used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 of approximately $1,644,000 was primarily a result of increased R&D and G&A cash operating expenses.
Cash Flow Used in Investing Activities
There was no cash flow provided by or used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Cash Flow Provided by Financing Activities
The decrease in cash flow provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 of approximately ($1,165,000) was due to net proceeds from the initial public offering of our common stock and the exercise of stock options offset by deferred offering costs during the year ended December 31, 2019 being higher than the net sales of our common stock under our Capital on DemandTM Sales Agreement with JonesTrading and the receipt of the forgiven PPP loan during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Future Funding Requirements
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize any of our current or future drug product candidates or we out-license or sell a drug product candidate to another party. At the same time, we expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing development activities, particularly as we continue the research, development, future preclinical studies and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our current and future drug product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval of any of our current or future drug product candidates, we will need substantial additional funding for commercialization requirements and our continuing drug product development operations.
As a company, we have not completed development through marketing approvals of any therapeutic products. We expect to continue to incur significant increases in expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we:
● advance the clinical development and execute the regulatory strategy for Validive;
● continue the clinical development and execute the regulatory strategy for camsirubicin;
● continue the preclinical activities and potentially enter clinical development of MNPR-101 (and related compounds) for severe COVID-19 and/or other indications;
● acquire and/or license additional pipeline drug product candidates and pursue the future preclinical and/or clinical development of such drug product candidates;
● seek regulatory approvals for any of our current and future drug product candidates that successfully complete registration clinical trials;
● establish or purchase the services of a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any products for which we may obtain marketing approval;
● develop our manufacturing/quality capabilities or establish a reliable, high quality supply chain sufficient to support our clinical requirements and to provide sufficient capacity to launch and grow the sales of any product for which we obtain marketing approval; and
● add or contract for required operational, financial and management information systems and capabilities and other specialized expert personnel to support our drug product candidate development and planned commercialization efforts.
We anticipate that the funds available as of March 5, 2021, will fund our operations at least through March 2022. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our drug product candidates, and the extent to which we enter into collaborations with third parties to participate in the development and commercialization of our drug product candidates, we are unable to accurately estimate with high reliability the amounts and timing required for increased capital outlays and operating expenditures associated with our current and anticipated drug product candidate development programs. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the progress of regulatory interactions and clinical development of Validive;
● the progress of clinical development and regulatory outcomes of camsirubicin;
● the progress of preclinical and clinical development of MNPR-101 (and related compounds) including through our collaboration with NorthStar;
● the number and characteristics of other drug product candidates that we may license, acquire or otherwise pursue;
● the scope, progress, timing, cost and results of research, preclinical development and clinical trials of current and future drug product candidates;
● the costs, timing and outcomes of seeking and obtaining FDA and international regulatory approvals;
● the costs associated with manufacturing/quality requirements and establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities;
● our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make in connection with the licensing, filing, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
● our need and ability to hire or contract for additional management, administrative, scientific, medical, sales and marketing, and manufacturing/quality and other specialized personnel or external expertise;
● the effect and timing of entry of competing products or new therapies that may limit market penetration or prevent the introduction of our drug product candidates or reduce the commercial potential of our product portfolio;
● our need to implement additional internal systems and infrastructure; and
● the economic and other terms, timing and success of our existing collaboration and licensing arrangements and any collaboration, licensing or other arrangements into which we may enter in the future, including the timing of receipt of or payment to or from others of any milestone or royalty payments under these arrangements.
See Item 1A - “Risk Factors”. Expenditures are expected to increase in 2021 onward for:
●
clinical research services and clinical site fees for our VOICE clinical program, including, if required, completing a smaller second Phase 3 confirmatory clinical trial;
●
process development, manufacturing costs and clinical database management of camsirubicin in connection with the GEIS Phase 2 clinical trial;
●
supporting the NorthStar collaboration;
●
GEIS collaboration milestone fees; and
●
employee compensation and consulting fees to support our VOICE clinical program.
We have activated clinical trial sites and commenced dosing in our VOICE clinical trial. In order to complete the VOICE clinical program, including, if required, completing a smaller second Phase 3 confirmatory clinical trial, we will require additional funding in the millions or tens of millions of dollars (depending on if we have consummated a collaboration or partnership or neither for Validive), or find a suitable pharmaceutical partner, both of which we are planning to pursue within the next 12 months. There can be no assurance that any such events will occur. We intend to continue evaluating drug product candidates for the purpose of growing our pipeline. Identifying and securing high-quality compounds usually takes time and related expenses; however, our spending could be significantly accelerated in 2021 and onward if additional drug product candidates are acquired and enter clinical development. In this event, we may be required to expand our management team, and pay higher contract manufacturing costs, contract research organization fees, other clinical development costs and insurance costs that are not currently projected. The anticipated operating cost increases in 2021 and onward are expected to be primarily driven by the funding of our VOICE clinical program, support of the GEIS Phase 2 clinical trial of camsirubicin and development of MNPR-101 and related compounds. Beyond our need to raise additional funding in the coming 12 months to complete the VOICE clinical program, we will also need significant additional funding thereafter in order to commercialize Validive if approved for marketing, support further development of camsirubicin in and beyond the Phase 2 clinical trial, to support our collaboration with NorthStar, if successful, support further development of MNPR-101 and related compounds, and generally to support our current and any future product candidates through completion of trials, approval processes and, if applicable, commercialization.
Until we can generate a sufficient amount of product revenue to finance our cash requirements, we expect to finance our future cash needs primarily through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, strategic collaborations and grant funding. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our current stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our current stockholders’ rights. See Item 1A - “Risk Factors - Existing and new investors will experience dilution as a result of our option plan and potential future stock sales.” Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with other parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or drug product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us, which will reduce our future returns and affect our future operating flexibility. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our pipeline product development or commercialization efforts or grant rights to others to develop and market drug product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
License, Development and Collaboration Agreements
Onxeo S.A.
In June 2016, we executed an agreement with Onxeo S.A., a French public company, which gave us the exclusive option to license (on a world-wide exclusive basis) Validive (clonidine mucobuccal tablet; clonidine MBT a mucoadhesive tablet of clonidine based on the Lauriad mucoadhesive technology). The agreement includes clinical, regulatory, developmental and sales milestones that could reach up to $108 million if we achieve all milestones, and escalating royalties from 5% to 10% on net sales. In September 2017, we exercised the option to license Validive from Onxeo for $1 million, but as of March 5, 2021, we have not been required to pay Onxeo any other funds under the agreement. We anticipate the need to raise significant funds to support the completion of clinical development and marketing approval of Validive.
Under the agreement, we are required to pay royalties to Onxeo on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis until the later of (1) the date when a given product is no longer within the scope of a patent claim in the country of sale or manufacture, (2) the expiry of any extended exclusivity period in the relevant country (such as orphan drug exclusivity, pediatric exclusivity, new chemical entity exclusivity, or other exclusivity granted beyond the expiry of the relevant patent), or (3) a specific time period after the first commercial sale of the product in such country. In most countries, including the U.S., the patent term is generally 20 years from the earliest claimed filing date of a non-provisional patent application in the applicable country, not taking into consideration any potential patent term adjustment that may be filed in the future or any regulatory extensions that may be obtained. The royalty termination provision pursuant to (3) described above is shorter than 20 years and is the least likely cause of termination of royalty payments.
The Onxeo license agreement does not have a pre-determined term, but expires on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis; that is, the agreement expires with respect to a given product in a given country whenever our royalty payment obligations with respect to such product have expired. The agreement may also be terminated early for cause if either we or Onxeo materially breach the agreement, or if either we or Onxeo become insolvent. We may also choose to terminate the agreement, either in its entirety or as to a certain product and a certain country, by providing Onxeo with advance notice.
Grupo Español de Investigación en Sarcomas (“GEIS”)
In June 2019, we executed a clinical collaboration with GEIS for the development of camsirubicin in patients with advanced soft tissue sarcoma (“ASTS”). GEIS is the study sponsor and will lead a multi-country, randomized, open-label Phase 2 clinical trial to evaluate camsirubicin head-to-head against doxorubicin in patients with ASTS. Enrollment of the trial is anticipated to begin in the second quarter of 2021 and will include approximately 170 ASTS patients. We will provide study drug and supplemental financial support for the clinical trial averaging approximately $2 million to $3 million per year. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $1.4 million in expenses under the GEIS agreement and other clinical-related expenses including clinical material manufacturing and database management expenses in support of GEIS’s Phase 2 camsirubicin clinical trial. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred $0.2 million in expenses related to the GEIS collaboration. We can terminate the agreement by providing GEIS with advance notice, and without affecting the Company’s rights and ownership to any intellectual property or clinical data.
XOMA Ltd.
Pursuant to a non-exclusive license agreement with XOMA Ltd. for the humanization technology used in the development of MNPR-101, we are obligated to pay XOMA Ltd. clinical, regulatory and sales milestones which could reach up to $14.925 million if we achieve all milestones for MNPR-101. The agreement does not require the payment of sales royalties. There can be no assurance that we will achieve any milestones. As of March 5, 2021, we had not reached any milestones and had not been required to pay XOMA Ltd. any funds under this license agreement.
Service Providers
In the normal course of business, we contract with service providers to assist in the performance of research and development, financial strategy, audit, tax and legal support. We can elect to discontinue the work under these agreements at any time. We could also enter into collaborative research and development, contract research, manufacturing and supplier agreements in the future, which may require upfront payments and/or long-term commitments of cash.
Office Lease
Effective January 1, 2018, we leased office space in the Village of Wilmette, Illinois for $2,520 per month for 24 months. This office space houses our current headquarters. On December 31, 2019, the office lease expired and we continued to lease on a month-to-month basis. In February 2019, we leased additional office spaces on a month-to month basis at our headquarters and we anticipate that we will lease additional space in the future as we hire additional personnel.
Legal Contingencies
We are currently not, and to date have never been, a party to any material legal proceedings.
Indemnification
In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts and agreements that contain a variety of representations and warranties and provide for general indemnification. Our exposure under these agreements is unknown because it involves claims that may be made against us in the future, but that have not yet been made. To date, we have not paid any claims or been required to defend any action related to our indemnification obligations. However, we may record charges in the future as a result of these indemnification obligations.
In accordance with our Second Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, Amended and Restated Bylaws and the indemnification agreements entered into with each officer and non-employee director, we have indemnification obligations to our officers and non-employee directors for certain events or occurrences, subject to certain limits, while they are serving at our request in such capacity. There have been no claims to date. See Item 1A - “Risk Factors - We have limited the liability of and indemnified our directors and officers.”
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
To date, we have not had any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under the SEC rules.