Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Executive Overview
While our business was materially affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in significantly lower sales and profits in 2021, we continued to make strategic investments to support our operating and financial model designed to drive sustainable sales and profit growth. We have done this through our Monro.Forward investment strategy focused on the following four key pillars:
Improve Guest Experience
We transformed 147 stores through rebranding and reimaging investments during 2021.
We made significant investments in the health and safety of our teammates and guests.
Enhance Customer-Centric Engagement
We completed the installation of our store digital phone and customer communication system in 2021.
We realigned our marketing spend toward higher return-on-investment (“ROI”) digital channel during 2021.
Optimizing Product and Service Offering
We completed the rollout of our tire pricing and category management technology in 2021.
Accelerating Productivity and Team Engagement
We completed the rollout of our technology-based labor model, with data-driven cloud based store staffing and scheduling software, during 2021.
We leveraged Monro University to facilitate onboarding and training required of new teammates in order to reach full productivity.
Growth through Acquisitions
In addition to our Monro.Forward investment strategy, executing on strategically located acquisitions with attractive valuations remains a key element of our growth strategy in support of our operating and financial model. We are committed to executing on attractive opportunities in our highly fragmented industry and are actively evaluating acquisition targets. We have continued to capitalize on a robust acquisition pipeline as we acquired 17 stores in 2021 and, subsequent to March 27, 2021, we completed the acquisition of 30 stores on April 25, 2021.
Financial Summary
2021 included the following notable items:
Diluted earnings per common share (“EPS”) were $1.01.
Adjusted diluted EPS, a non-GAAP measure, were $1.14.
Sales decreased 10.4 percent, driven by a decrease in comparable store sales.
Comparable store sales decreased 11.1 percent, driven primarily by a decline in guest traffic, partially offset by an increase in average ticket amount spent.
Operating income of $72.2 million was 29.0 percent lower than the prior year.
Net income was $34.3 million.
Adjusted net income, a non-GAAP measure, was $38.7 million.
Operating cash flow of $184.9 million was 52.3 percent higher than the prior year.
Note: Amounts may not foot due to rounding.
Monro, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Adjusted diluted EPS and adjusted net income, each of which are a measure not derived in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (“GAAP”), exclude the impact of certain items. Management believes that adjusted diluted EPS and adjusted net income are useful in providing period-to-period comparisons of the results of our operations by excluding certain non-recurring items and items related to our Monro.Forward or acquisition initiatives. Reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP measures are provided beginning on page 24 under “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
We define comparable store sales, or same store sales, as sales for stores that have been opened or owned at least one full fiscal year. We believe this period is generally required for new store sales levels to begin to normalize. Management uses comparable store sales to assess the operating performance of the Company’s stores and believes the metric is useful to investors because our overall results are dependent upon the results of our stores.
Recent Development and Trends
Our Company-operated stores have experienced improvement in sales to date from the low point during April 2020. The following table presents fiscal monthly information about our recent comparable store sales trends. There is no assurance that these trends will continue.
As we move through this transition and anticipate comparable store sales trends to improve, we expect to incur some labor inefficiencies as we adjust to new operating models and federal and local health and safety protocols with a goal to remain as efficient as possible while still offering safe and high quality service to our guests. Those labor inefficiencies may include difficulty in hiring employees required to maintain store staffing levels needed to meet demand. We will also incur additional costs and investments in supplies necessary to keep our teams and guests safe, such as face masks, hand sanitizer and cleaning supplies, which are all expected to be ongoing costs for the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and recovery period.
Given the level of volatility and uncertainty surrounding the future impact of COVID-19, we cannot estimate with certainty the long-term impacts of COVID-19 on our business, financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows in the future. Please see the risks set forth in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” above for further discussion of the risks that may impact our longer-term operational and financial performance.
Impact of COVID-19
In response to the unprecedented and rapid spread of COVID-19, many U.S. state governments, in states in which we operate, enacted stay-at-home restrictions and social distancing measures during fiscal 2021. State and local governments ordered restrictions on the operations of certain businesses, including temporary closures of some businesses, and numerous other businesses temporarily closed voluntarily or transitioned their workforces to working remotely. Further, individuals’ ability to travel was curtailed through mandated travel restrictions throughout the year.
As a result, demand for automotive undercar repair services as well as replacement tires and tire related services declined at a rapid pace and has remained below normal levels, which has had an unprecedented and materially adverse impact on our results of operations and business operations. Although demand improved in 2021 from the low point during April 2020, we experienced a significant decline in guest traffic throughout the year, as compared to the prior year, which we believe is due to the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2021, comparable store sales decreased 11.1 percent from the prior year. As an essential business, our stores and distribution centers remained open during the pandemic, however, substantially all Company-operated retail stores operated under a reduced schedule throughout the year to match lower demand. We continue to address the ongoing business challenges and shifting economic dynamics as the COVID-19 pandemic and recovery efforts have continued to evolve.
Despite the challenges, some positive signs have begun to emerge. Since the low point during April 2020, we have experienced improvement in sales driven by improvement in store traffic. However, there can be no assurance as to the time required to fully recover operations and sales to pre-pandemic levels or if we will reach those levels again.
Liquidity
Given the uncertainties surrounding the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our future financial condition, results of operations and cash flows, we have taken a number of actions in response to prevailing uncertain market conditions. In order to enhance our
Monro, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
liquidity position, we took a precautionary measure and borrowed $350 million available to us under our credit facility in March 2020. We subsequently repaid the $350 million previously borrowed during 2021. To improve our liquidity, we took the following measures during 2021 to reduce costs and improve cash flows: (i) reduced store hours and store labor to align with reduced demand across our store locations; (ii) undertook significant reductions in operating expenses across the Company, including compensation expense through the continued furlough of or other reduction to certain members of our workforce as well as advertising expense through realigned marketing spend toward digital channels; and (iii) negotiated rent deferrals for a significant number of our stores, as well as other rent reductions. Although acquisition activity was paused during the first six months of fiscal 2021, we continued to evaluate potential acquisition candidates that we believe would fit our growth strategy while maintaining financial discipline. We acquired 17 retail tire and automotive repair stores located in California in December 2020 and financed the acquisition through our Credit Facility. Additionally, with sales improvement throughout 2021, we resumed our rebrand and reimage initiatives and have substantially completed the transformation of 147 stores during the year, after pausing these initiatives during the first three months of fiscal 2021.
Enhanced Safety Standards
As the COVID-19 pandemic has continued to evolve, our priority has been and continues to be, the health and safety of our teammates and guests. To protect our teammates and guests, we have implemented strict cleaning and sanitation measures. In addition, we have provided face masks and other protective equipment, including sneeze guards installed at each sales counter, necessary to ensure the safety of our teammates and guests. We have also implemented various measures intended to reduce the spread of COVID-19 among our non-store workforce including working from home and encouraging teammates to adhere to prevention measures recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and the World Health Organization. Since our non-store workforce is able to work remotely using various technology tools, we are able to maintain our operations and internal controls over financial reporting and disclosures.
Analysis of Results of Operations
We have elected to omit discussion on the earliest of the three years covered by the consolidated financial statements presented. The discussion of the fiscal year ended March 30, 2019 is incorporated herein by reference to Part II, Item 7., “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” located in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 28, 2020, filed on June 12, 2020.
Sales
Sales include automotive undercar repair, tire replacement and tire related service sales, net of discounts, returns, etc., and revenue from the sale of warranty agreements and commissions earned from the delivery of tires. See Note 8 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for further information. We use comparable store sales to evaluate the performance of our existing stores by measuring the change in sales for a period over the comparable, prior-year period of equivalent length. There were 361 selling days in both 2021 and 2020. Comparable sales measures vary across the retail industry. As a result, our comparable sales calculation is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
Sales growth - from both comparable store sales and new stores - represents an important driver of our long-term profitability. We expect that comparable store sales growth will significantly impact our total sales growth. We believe that our ability to successfully differentiate our guests’ experience through a careful combination of merchandise assortment, price, convenience, guest experience, and other factors will over the long-term drive both increasing guest traffic and the average ticket amount spent.
Monro, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
The sales decrease was primarily due to a decrease in comparable store sales from a substantial decrease in traffic as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by new store sales. Additionally, there was a decrease in sales from closed stores. The following table shows the drivers of the change in sales between 2020 and 2021.
(a)Sales from 2021 and 2020 acquisitions represented 2.0 percent of the changes between 2020 and 2021.
As a result of the impact of the unprecedented and rapid spread of COVID-19, demand for automotive undercar repair services as well as replacement tires and tire related services declined at a rapid pace and has remained below normal levels. During 2021, substantially all Company-operated retail stores operated under a reduced schedule for a majority of the year to match lower demand. Although demand improved in 2021 from the low point during April 2020, we experienced a significant decline in guest traffic throughout the year, as compared to the prior year, which we believe is due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Comparable store sales were impacted by lower guest traffic, offset by higher average ticket amount spent.
During 2021, the completed rollout of our tire category management and pricing tool contributed to outperformance in our largest product category, as compared to the prior year, as shown below:
Comparable store front end/shocks and maintenance services category sales for 2021 both decreased by approximately 19 percent from the prior year. Additionally, brakes and alignment category sales decreased by approximately 24 percent and 13 percent, respectively, on a comparable store basis as compared to the prior year. Comparable store tire category sales for 2021 decreased by approximately 3 percent from the prior year.
(a)Includes 17 stores opened related to the 2021 acquisition as well as one store from the 2020 acquisitions that was opened upon completion of store construction.
(b)Includes four stores temporarily closed due to storm damage.
Cost of Sales and Gross Profit
The decrease in gross profit, as a percentage of sales, was primarily due to an increase in material costs, as a percentage of sales, as a result of a shift in sales mix to tires. However, we expanded our gross profit per tire from the prior year with the completed rollout of
Monro, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
our tire category management and pricing tool. The decrease in gross profit, as a percentage of sales, was also partially due to an increase in distribution and occupancy costs, as a percentage of sales. Although we were able to reduce these largely fixed costs through rent concessions from landlords, we lost leverage on these costs with lower overall comparable store sales. Partially offsetting these increases was a decrease in technician labor costs, which decreased as a percentage of sales, due to improved labor productivity.
Operating, Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The decrease of $52.0 million in operating, selling, general and administrative (“OSG&A”) expenses from the prior year is primarily due to decreased expenses from comparable stores mainly as a result of focused cost reduction against lower overall comparable stores sales, including actively managing our store management staffing levels to match demand and realigning marketing spend toward digital channels, as well as a $6.4 million reduction in impairment charge. The decrease in OSG&A expenses from the prior year also reflects lower expenses from 42 closed stores compared to the prior year. Partially offsetting these decreases was an increase in expenses from new stores.
Other Performance Factors
Net Interest Expense
Net interest expense of $28.2 million for 2021 remained relatively flat as compared to the prior year, and increased as a percentage of sales from 2.2 percent to 2.5 percent. Weighted average debt outstanding for 2021 increased by approximately $219 million as compared to 2020. This increase is primarily related to an increase in debt outstanding under our Credit Facility that was borrowed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in late 2020, as well as an increase in finance lease debt recorded in connection with the 2021 and 2020 acquisitions and greenfield expansion, along with renegotiated leases. Partially offsetting these increases was a decrease in the weighted average interest rate of approximately 190 basis points from the prior year due to lower borrowing rates associated with new leases as well as a decrease in Credit Facility borrowing rates.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our 2021 effective income tax rate was 22.3 percent compared to 21.9 percent for 2020, as discrete items, primarily related to employee share-based compensation, resulted in a larger tax rate benefit in the prior year period. The effective tax rate for 2021 reflects an income tax benefit of $0.5 million due to the difference in statutory tax rates from loss years to years in which such net operating losses may be carried back.
Note 9 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements provides additional information.
Monro, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to reporting net income and diluted EPS, which are GAAP measures, this Form 10-K includes adjusted net income and adjusted diluted EPS, which are non-GAAP financial measures. We have included reconciliations to adjusted net income and adjusted diluted EPS from our most directly comparable GAAP measures, net income and diluted EPS, below. Management views these non-GAAP financial measures as indicators to better assess comparability between periods because management believes these non-GAAP financial measures reflect our core business operations while excluding certain non-recurring items and items related to store closings as well as Monro.Forward or acquisition initiatives.
These non-GAAP financial measures are not intended to represent, and should not be considered more meaningful than, or as an alternative to, their most directly comparable GAAP measures. These non-GAAP financial measures may be different from similarly titled non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies.
Adjusted net income is summarized as follows:
Adjusted diluted EPS is summarized as follows:
(a)For 2021, store impairment charge is too minor in amount, net of the impact from income taxes, to have an impact on the calculation of adjusted diluted EPS.
Note: The calculation of the impact of non-GAAP adjustments on diluted EPS is performed on each line independently. The table may not add down by +/- $0.01 due to rounding.
The adjustments to diluted EPS reflect adjusted effective tax rates of 23.5 percent and 24.2 percent for 2021 and 2020, respectively. These adjusted effective tax rates exclude the income tax impacts from share-based compensation and differences in statutory tax rates for net operating loss carrybacks. See adjustments from the Reconciliation of Adjusted Net Income table above for pre-tax amounts.
Monro, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Analysis of Financial Condition
Capital Resources, Contractual Obligations and Liquidity
Capital Resources
Our primary capital requirements for 2021 were divided among the funding of acquisitions for $17.2 million, as well as the upgrading of facilities and systems and the funding of our store transformation program totaling $51.7 million. In 2020, our primary capital requirements were divided among the funding of acquisitions for $104.4 million, as well as the upgrading of facilities and systems and the funding of our store transformation program totaling $55.9 million. In both 2021 and 2020, capital requirements were primarily met by cash flow from operations and from our Credit Facility.
We paid dividends of $29.8 million in 2021. In May 2021, Monro’s Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.24 per share or share equivalent to be paid to shareholders of record as of June 7, 2021. The dividend will be paid on June 21, 2021.
The acquisition subsequent to March 27, 2021 was financed through our existing credit facility. See Note 3 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Through rebranding and reimaging investments, we have completed the transformation of 366 stores since the launch of the current program in 2019.
We continue to evaluate potential acquisition targets that we believe would fit our growth strategy while maintaining financial discipline. We believe we have sufficient resources available (including cash flow from operations and, if necessary, cash on hand and/or bank financing) to expand our business as currently planned for the next twelve months.
Contractual Obligations
(a)Finance and operating lease commitments represent future undiscounted lease payments and include $108.4 million and $61.0 million, respectively, related to options to extend lease terms that are reasonably certain of being exercised.
During 2021, we negotiated rent deferrals, with repayment at later dates, for a significant number of our store leases. These concessions provide a deferral of rent payments with no substantive changes to the original contract. Consistent with updated guidance from the FASB in April 2020, we have elected to treat the rent deferrals as accrued liabilities. The accrued rent reflected in the table above includes $0.8 million related to rent deferrals due primarily in the first and second quarter of 2022 and $1.0 million due to timing of other lease related expenses. We will continue to recognize expense during the deferral periods.
In addition, during 2021, we negotiated rent reductions with certain landlords on approximately 23 percent of our lease contracts in exchange for extending our current lease term. As these agreements represent substantive changes to our contractual obligations, the leases were remeasured. As a result, finance lease and financing obligation assets, net and finance leases and financing obligations were increased by $67.7 million and $64.0 million, respectively, and operating lease assets, net and operating lease liabilities were increased by $16.2 million and $20.0 million, respectively. The negotiated terms were generally consistent with terms of typical renewal agreements.
Liquidity
Interest only is payable monthly throughout the term of our Credit Facility. The borrowing capacity for the Credit Facility of $600 million includes an accordion feature permitting us to request an increase in availability of up to an additional $250 million.
On June 11, 2020, we entered into a First Amendment to the Credit Facility (the “First Amendment”), which, among other things, amended the terms of certain of the financial and restrictive covenants in the credit agreement through the first quarter of 2022 to provide us with additional flexibility to operate our business. The First Amendment permanently amended the interest rate charged on
Monro, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
borrowings to be based on the greater of adjusted one-month LIBOR or 0.75 percent. For the period from June 30, 2020 to June 30, 2021, the minimum interest rate spread charged on borrowings will be 225 basis points over LIBOR. Additionally, during the same period, we may declare, make or pay any dividend or distribution up to $38.5 million in the aggregate and the acquisition of stores or other businesses up to $100 million in the aggregate are permitted if we are in compliance with the financial covenants and other restrictions in the First Amendment and Credit Facility. The Credit Facility requires fees payable quarterly throughout the term between 0.125 percent and 0.35 percent of the amount of the average net availability under the Credit Facility during the preceding quarter. Except as amended by the First Amendment, the remaining terms of the credit agreement remain in full force and effect.
Within the Credit Facility, we have a sub-facility of $80 million available for the purpose of issuing standby letters of credit. The line requires fees aggregating 87.5 to 212.5 basis points annually of the face amount of each standby letter of credit, payable quarterly in arrears. There was a $33.6 million outstanding letter of credit at March 27, 2021.
Mortgages and specific lease financing arrangements with other parties (with certain limitations) are permitted under the Credit Facility. Other specific terms and the maintenance of specified ratios are generally consistent with our prior financing agreement. Additionally, the Credit Facility is not secured by our real property, although we have agreed not to encumber our real property, with certain permissible exceptions.
In order to enhance our liquidity position during the COVID-19 pandemic, we took a precautionary measure and borrowed $350 million available to us under our Credit Facility in March 2020, which we subsequently repaid in 2021. There was $190.0 million outstanding and $376.4 million available under the Credit Facility at March 27, 2021.
We were in compliance with all debt covenants at March 27, 2021.
As of May 21, 2021, we had approximately $18.0 million in cash on hand. We believe that we can fulfill our commitments and working capital needs utilizing our cash flow from operations and, if necessary, cash on hand and/or bank financing for at least the next 12 months and the foreseeable future.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any material off-balance sheet arrangements at March 27, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires us to make estimates and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts. In Note 1 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements, we describe the significant accounting policies used in preparing the consolidated financial statements. Our management believes that the accounting policies listed below are those that are most critical to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations, and that required management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments in estimating the effect of inherent uncertainties.
Business Combinations
We use the acquisition method in accounting for acquired businesses. Under the acquisition method, our financial statements reflect the operations of an acquired business starting from the completion of the acquisition. The assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their respective estimated fair values at the date of the acquisition. Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the identifiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Significant judgment is often required in estimating the fair value of assets acquired, particularly the right of use (“ROU”) assets and intangible assets, including trade names and customer relationships. ROU assets are recorded at the present value of remaining lease payments adjusted to reflect favorable or unfavorable market terms of the lease. As a result, in the case of significant acquisitions, we normally obtain the assistance of a third-party valuation specialist in estimating the value of the ROU assets as well as intangible assets. The fair value measurements are based on available historical information and on expectations and assumptions about the future, considering the perspective of marketplace participants. Favorable or unfavorable market terms used to value the ROU assets are estimated based on comparable market data. Fair values of acquired trade names are estimated using an income approach, specifically the relief-from-royalty method. Customer relationships are valued using the cost approach or an income approach such as the excess earnings method. Assumptions utilized in the determination of fair value include forecasted sales, discount rates, royalty rates (trade names) and customer attrition rates (customer relationships). While we believe the expectations and assumptions about the future are reasonable, they are inherently uncertain. Unanticipated market or macroeconomic events and circumstances, like the COVID-19 pandemic, may occur, which could affect the accuracy or validity of the estimates and assumptions.
Monro, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Carrying Values of Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
We have a history of growth through acquisitions. Assets and liabilities of acquired businesses are recorded at their estimated fair values as of the date of acquisition. Goodwill represents consideration paid in excess of fair values assigned to the underlying net assets of acquired businesses. The carrying value of goodwill is subject to an annual impairment test, which we perform in the third quarter of the fiscal year. Impairment tests may also be triggered by any significant events or changes in circumstances affecting our business.
We have one reporting unit which encompasses all operations including new acquisitions. In performing our annual goodwill impairment test, we perform a qualitative assessment to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than the carrying value of goodwill. The qualitative assessment includes a review of business changes, economic outlook, financial trends and forecasts, growth rates, industry data, market capitalization and other relevant qualitative factors. If the qualitative factors indicate a potential impairment, we compare the fair value of our reporting unit to the carrying value of our reporting unit. If the fair value is less than its carrying value, an impairment charge is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. The loss recognized cannot exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. We believe there is little risk of impairment of our goodwill.
Our intangible assets primarily represent allocations of purchase price to identifiable intangible assets of acquired businesses and are amortized over their estimated useful lives. All intangibles and other long-lived assets, which include property and equipment as well as ROU assets, are reviewed whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an impairment may exist. If such indicators are present, it is determined whether the sum of the estimated undiscounted future cash flows attributable to such assets is less than their carrying values.
A deterioration of macroeconomic conditions may not only negatively impact the estimated operating cash flows used in our cash flow models, but may also negatively impact other assumptions used in our analyses, including, but not limited to, the estimated cost of capital and/or discount rates. Additionally, we are required to ensure that assumptions used to determine fair value in our analyses are consistent with the assumptions a hypothetical marketplace participant would use. As a result, the cost of capital and/or discount rates used in our analyses may increase or decrease based on market conditions and trends, regardless of whether our actual cost of capital has changed. Therefore, we may recognize an impairment of an intangible asset or assets even though realized actual cash flows are approximately equal to or greater than our previously forecasted amounts.
Self-Insurance Reserves
We are largely self-insured with respect to workers’ compensation, general liability and employee medical claims. In order to reduce our risk and better manage our overall loss exposure, we purchase stop-loss insurance that covers individual claims in excess of the deductible amounts, and caps total losses in a fiscal year. We maintain an accrual for the estimated cost to settle open claims as well as an estimate of the cost of claims that have been incurred but not reported. These estimates take into consideration the historical average claim volume, the average cost for settled claims, current trends in claim costs, changes in our business and workforce, and general economic factors. These accruals are reviewed on a quarterly basis. For more complex reserve calculations, such as workers’ compensation, we periodically use the services of an actuary to assist in determining the required reserve for open claims.
Income Taxes
We estimate our provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, income taxes payable and unrecognized tax benefit liabilities based on a number of factors including, but not limited to, historical pre-tax operating income, future estimates of pre-tax operating income, tax planning strategies, differences between tax laws and accounting rules of various items of income and expense, statutory tax rates and credits, uncertain tax positions and valuation allowances. We use significant judgment and estimates in evaluating our tax positions.
We record deferred tax assets and liabilities based upon the expected future tax outcome of differences between tax laws and accounting rules of various items of income and expense recognized in our results of operations using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the future tax outcome is expected. We evaluate our ability to realize the tax benefits associated with deferred tax assets and establish valuation allowances when we believe it is more likely than not that some portion of our deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We file U.S. federal income tax returns and income tax returns in various state jurisdictions. Monro’s 2020, 2019 and 2018 U.S. federal tax years and various state tax years remain subject to income tax examinations by tax authorities. We establish tax liabilities in accordance with the accounting guidance on income taxes. Under the accounting guidance, we measure and recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position taken or expected to be taken on an income tax return based on the largest benefit that is more likely than not of being realized upon settlement. An uncertain income tax position will not be recognized in the financial statements unless it is more likely than not to be sustained. We adjust these tax liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits, as well as the related
Monro, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
interest and penalties, based on the latest facts and circumstances, including recently published rulings, court cases and outcomes of tax audits. Due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in an actual tax liability that differs from our estimated tax liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits and our effective tax rate may be materially impacted. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome of, the timing of, or the tax treatment of any particular uncertain tax position, we believe that our tax balances reflect the more likely than not outcome of known tax contingencies.
Accounting Standards
See “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in Note 1 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the impact of recently issued accounting standards on our consolidated financial statements as of March 27, 2021 and for the year then ended, as well as the expected impact on the consolidated financial statements for future periods.