ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The historical consolidated financial data discussed below reflects the historical results of operations and financial position of Montauk USA. The consolidated financial statements of Montauk USA, our predecessor for accounting purposes, became our historical financial statements following the IPO. The historical financial data discussed below relates to periods prior to the Reorganization Transactions.
In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Item 1A.-Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
Overview
Montauk is a renewable energy company specializing in the recovery and processing of biogas from landfills and other non-fossil fuel sources for beneficial use as a replacement to fossil fuels. We develop, own, and operate RNG projects, using proven technologies that supply RNG into the transportation industry and use RNG to produce Renewable Electricity. We are one of the largest U.S. producers of RNG, having participated in the industry for over 30 years. We established our operating portfolio of 12 RNG and three Renewable Electricity projects through self-development, partnerships, and acquisitions that span six states.
Biogas is produced by microbes as they break down organic matter in the absence of oxygen (during a process called anaerobic digestion). Our two current sources of commercial scale biogas are LFG and ADG, which is produced inside an airtight tank used to breakdown organic matter, such as livestock waste. We typically secure our biogas feedstock through long-term fuel supply agreements and property lease agreements with biogas site hosts. Once we secure long-term fuel supply rights, we design, build, own, and operate facilities that convert the biogas into RNG or use the processed biogas to produce Renewable Electricity. We sell the RNG and Renewable Electricity through a variety of short-, medium-, and long-term agreements. Because we are capturing waste methane and making use of a renewable source of energy, our RNG and Renewable Electricity generate valuable Environmental Attributes, which we are able to monetize under federal and state initiatives.
Factors Affecting Revenue
Our total operating revenues include renewable energy and related sales of Environmental Attributes. Renewable energy sales primarily consist of the sale of biogas, including LFG and ADG, which is either sold or converted to Renewable Electricity. Environmental Attributes are generated and monetized from the renewable energy.
We report revenues from two operating segments: Renewable Natural Gas and Renewable Electricity Generation. Corporate relates to additional discrete financial information for the corporate function; primarily used as a shared service center for maintaining functions such as executive, accounting, treasury, legal, human resources, tax, environmental, engineering, and other operations functions not otherwise allocated to a segment. As such, the corporate entity is not determined to be an operating segment but is discretely disclosed for purposes of reconciliation to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
•
Renewable Natural Gas Revenues: We record revenues from the production and sale of RNG and the generation and sale of the Environmental Attributes derived from RNG, such as RINs and LCFS credits. Our RNG revenues from Environmental Attributes are recorded net of a portion of Environmental Attributes shared with off-take counterparties as consideration for such counterparties using the RNG as a transportation fuel.
We monetize a portion of our RNG production under fixed-price and counterparty sharing agreements, which provide floor prices in excess of commodity indices and sharing percentages of the monetization of Environmental Attributes. Under these sharing arrangements, we receive a portion of the profits derived from counterparty monetization of the Environmental Attributes in excess of the floor prices.
•
Renewable Electricity Generation Revenues: We record revenues from the production and sale of Renewable Electricity and the generation and sale of the Environmental Attributes, such as RECs, derived from Renewable Electricity. All of our Renewable Electricity production is monetized under fixed-price PPAs from our existing operating projects.
•
Corporate Revenues: Corporate reports realized and unrealized gains or losses under our gas hedge programs. Corporate also relates to additional discrete financial information for the corporate function; primarily used as a shared service center for maintaining functions such as executive, accounting, treasury, legal, human resources, tax, environmental, engineering and other operations functions not otherwise allocated to a segment.
Our revenues are priced based on published index prices which can be influenced by factors outside our control, such as market impacts on commodity pricing and regulatory developments. With our royalty payments structured as a percentage of revenue, royalty payments fluctuate with changes in revenues. Due to these factors, we place a primary focus on managing production volumes and operating and maintenance expenses as these factors are more controllable by us.
RNG Production
Our RNG production levels are subject to fluctuations based on numerous factors, including:
•
Disruptions to Production: Disruptions to waste placement operations at our active landfill sites, severe weather events, failure or degradation of our or a landfill operator’s equipment or interconnection or transmission problems could result in a reduction of our RNG production. We strive to proactively address any issues that may arise through preventative maintenance, process improvement and flexible redeployment of equipment to maximize production and useful life. In November 2019, our McCarty facility lost production capacity of one of its engines due to its failure. Production was not restored until March 2020 when a replacement was commissioned. We recorded $3.9 million as a gain on insurance proceeds related to the replacement of property and business interruption. In October 2020, California wildfires forced our Bowerman facility to temporarily shut down. While production resumed in November 2020, our fourth quarter 2020 Bowerman revenues were approximately 20.0% lower than the prior year period. We expect 2021 first quarter revenues for our Bowerman facility to be approximately 16% less than the 2020 first quarter revenues.
•
Recent historical cold weather impacted our Atascocita, Galveston, McCarty, and Coastal Plains facilities located in Texas during February 2021. Production at these facilities was temporarily idled due to the loss of power from February 14 through February 20, 2021 and force majeure events were declared by certain of our counter-parties or by us for the period February 12 through February 22, 2021 related to these weather events. Operations at these facilities have subsequently resumed, but we estimate that our cost of utilities will increase approximately 7.1% in the first quarter of 2021 within our RNG segment.
•
Quality of Biogas: We are reliant upon the quality and availability of biogas from our site partners. The quality of the waste at our landfill project sites is subject to change based on the volume and type of waste accepted. Variations in the quality of the biogas could affect our RNG production levels. At three of our projects, we operate the wellfield collection system, which allows greater control over the quality and consistency of the collected biogas. At two of our projects, we have operating and management agreements by which we earn revenue for managing the wellfield collection systems. Additionally, our dairy farm project benefits from the consistency of feedstock and controlled environment of collection of waste to improve biogas quality.
•
RNG Production from Our Growth Projects: We anticipate increased production at certain of our existing projects as open landfills continue to take in additional waste and the amount of gas available for collection increases. Delays in commencement of production or extended commissioning issues at a new project or a conversion project would delay any realization of production from that project.
Pricing
Our Renewable Natural Gas and Renewable Electricity Generation segments’ revenues are primarily driven by the prices under our off-take agreements and PPAs and the amount of RNG and Renewable Electricity that we produce. We sell the RNG produced from our projects under a variety of short-term and medium-term agreements to counterparties, with contract terms varying from three years to five years. Our contracts with counterparties are typically structured to be based on varying natural gas price indices for the RNG produced. All of the Renewable Electricity produced at our biogas-to-electricity projects is sold under long-term contracts to creditworthy counterparties, typically under a fixed price arrangement with escalators.
The pricing of Environmental Attributes, which accounts for a substantial portion of our revenues, is subject to volatility based on a variety of factors, including regulatory and administrative actions and commodity pricing.
Our dairy farm project is expected to be awarded a more attractive CI by CARB, thereby generating LCFS credits at a multiple of those generated by our landfill projects.
The sale of RINs, which is subject to market price fluctuations, accounts for a substantial portion of our revenues. We manage against the risk of these fluctuations through forward sales of RINs, although currently we only sell RINs in the calendar year they are generated in the following calendar year. With election uncertainty, in the fourth quarter of 2020, we entered into forward commitments of approximately 50% of our expected 2021 RIN generation. These forward commitments were based on D3 RIN index prices at the time of the commitment, which averaged $1.50-$1.57. While our average commitment price was in excess of these index averages at the time we entered into the forward commitments, it is below current D3 RIN index prices. These forward commitments will be monetized throughout 2021. Realized prices for Environmental Attributes monetized in a year may not correspond directly to index prices due to the forward selling of commitments.
Factors Affecting Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses include royalties, transportation, gathering and production fuel expenses, project operating and maintenance expenses, general and administrative expenses, depreciation and amortization, net loss (gain) on sale of assets, impairment loss and transaction costs.
•
Project Operating and Maintenance Expenses: Operating and maintenance expenses primarily consist of expenses related to the collection and processing of biogas, including biogas collection system operating and maintenance expenses, biogas processing, operating and maintenance expenses, and related labor and overhead expenses. At the project level, this includes all labor and benefit costs, ongoing corrective and proactive maintenance, project level utility charges, rent, health and safety, employee communication, and other general project level expenses.
•
Royalties, Transportation, Gathering and Production Fuel Expenses: Royalties represent payments made to our facility hosts, typically structured as a percentage of revenue. Transportation and gathering expenses include capacity and metering expenses representing the costs of delivering our RNG and Renewable Electricity production to our customers. These expenses include payments to pipeline operators and other agencies that allow for the transmission of our gas and electricity commodities to end users. Production fuel expenses generally represent alternative royalty payments based on quantity usage of biogas feedstock.
•
General and Administrative Expenses: General and administrative expenses primarily consist of corporate expenses and unallocated support functions for our operating facilities, including personnel costs for
executive, finance, accounting, investor relations, legal, human resources, operations, engineering, environmental registration and reporting, health and safety, IT and other administrative personnel and professional fees and general corporate expenses. In connection with the consummation of the IPO and the Reorganization Transactions, stock options issued under MNK’s Employee Share Appreciation Rights Scheme for US Affiliates were canceled. Under FASB ASC 718, the Company accelerated all previously unvested stock-based compensation expense of approximately $2.1 million in January 2021. The Company’s Board of Directors approved grants of restricted stock, non-qualified stock option, and restricted share unit awards under the Company’s Equity and Incentive Compensation Plan on January 28, 2021. The Company will account for stock-based compensation related to these equity awards under FASB ASC 718. For more information, see Note 21 to our audited consolidated financial statements.
•
Depreciation and Amortization: Expenses related to the recognition of the useful lives of our intangible and fixed assets. We spend significant capital to build and own our facilities. In addition to development capital, we annually reinvest to maintain these facilities.
•
Impairment Loss: Expenses related to reductions in the carrying value(s) of fixed and/or intangible assets based on periodic evaluations whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable.
•
Transaction Costs: Transaction costs primarily consist of expenses incurred for due diligence and other activities related to potential acquisitions and other strategic transactions.
Key Operating Metrics
Total operating revenues reflect both sales of renewable energy and sales of related Environmental Attributes. As a result, our revenues are primarily affected by unit production of RNG and Renewable Electricity, production of Environmental Attributes, and the prices at which we monetize such production. Set forth below is an overview of these key metrics:
•
Production volumes: We review performance by site based on unit of production calculations for RNG and Renewable Electricity, measured in terms of MMBtu and MWh, respectively. While unit of production measurements can be influenced by schedule facility maintenance schedules, the metric is used to measure the efficiency of operations and the impact of optimization improvement initiatives. We monetize a majority of our RNG commodity production under variable-price agreements, based on indices. A portion of our Renewable Natural Gas segment commodity production is monetized under fixed-priced contracts. Our Renewable Electricity Generation segment commodity production is primarily monetized under fixed-priced PPAs.
•
Production of Environmental Attributes: We monetize Environmental Attributes derived from our production of RNG and Renewable Electricity. We carry-over a portion of the RINs generated from RNG production to the following year and monetize the carried over RINs in such following calendar year. A majority of our Renewable Natural Gas segment Environmental Attributes are self-monetized, though a portion are generated and monetized by third parties under counterparty sharing agreements. A majority of our Renewable Electricity Generation segment Environmental Attributes are monetized as a component of our fixed-price PPAs.
•
Average realized price per unit of production: Our profitability is highly dependent on the commodity prices for natural gas and electricity, and the Environmental Attribute prices for RINs, LCFS credits, and RECs. Realized prices for Environmental Attributes monetized in a year may not correspond directly with that year’s production as attributes may be carried over and subsequently monetized. Realized prices for Environmental Attributes monetized in a year may not correspond directly to index prices due to the forward selling of commitments.
The following table summarizes the key operating metrics described above, which metrics we use to measure performance.
(1) RINs are generated in the month that the gas dispensed to generate RINs, which occurs the month after the gas is produced. Volumes under fixed/floor-price arrangements generate RINs which we do not self-market.
(2) One MMBtu of RNG has the same energy content as 11.727 gallons of ethanol, and thus may generate 11.727 RINs under the RFS program.
(3) Represents RINs available to be self-marketed by us during the reporting period.
(4) Represents gas production which has not been dispensed to generate RINs.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our revenues, expenses and net income for the periods set forth below:
Revenues for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Total revenues in 2020 were $100.4 million, a decrease of $5.3 million (5.0%) compared to $105.7 million in 2019. The primary driver for this decrease related to a 16.1% decrease in Renewable Electricity from our election to end the contract and exit our Monmouth facility and California wildfires impacting power generation at our Bowerman facility. To a lesser extent, decreased realized average RIN prices offset increased RINs sold, leading to an overall 1.1% decrease in RNG revenues.
Renewable Natural Gas Revenues
We produced 5.7 million MMBtu of RNG during 2020, an increase of over the 5.4 million MMBtu (7.2%) produced in 2019. Of this increase, 0.2 million MMBtu of RNG were produced from development site commissioned during 2019. Less than 0.1 million MMBtu of RNG were produced from development sites commissioned during 2020. Wellfield improvement initiatives at our Apex site yielded an increase of 0.1 million MMBtus over the prior year period. Our McCarty site was unfavorably impacted by the loss of one of its engines leading to a reduction in 2020 of (0.1) million MMBtus over the 2019 period.
Revenues from the Renewable Natural Gas segment in 2020 were $83.2 million, a decrease of $0.9 million 1.1% compared to $84.2 million in 2019. Average commodity pricing for natural gas for 2020 was 3.0% higher than the prior year. During 2020, we self-monetized 39.3 million RINs, representing a 2.5 million increase (6.8%) compared to 36.8 million in 2019. The increase was primarily related to increased MMBtu production over the prior year period. Average pricing realized on RIN sales during 2020 was $1.32 as compared to $1.45 in 2019, a decrease of 9.0%. This compares to the average D3 RIN index price for 2020 of $1.49 being approximately 29.8% higher than the average D3 RIN index price in 2019. Approximately 8.0 million of our RIN sales during 2019 were based on commitment pricing calculated based on the D5 RIN index with a portion of the cellulosic waiver credit which results in a RIN sales price in excess of the D3 RIN index. The CWC price in 2020 was $1.80, a 1.7% increase from $1.77 from 2019. All of our 2020 RIN sales were priced generally on the D3
index. At December 31, 2020, we had approximately 0.4 million MMBtus available for RIN generation. We had approximately 0.1 million RINs generated and unsold at December 31, 2020. We did not have any MMBtus available for RIN generation at December 31, 2019, however we did have 0.9 million RINs generated and unsold at December 31, 2019.
Renewable Electricity Generation Revenues
We produced 0.2 million MWh in Renewable Electricity in 2020, a decrease of approximately 0.05 million (21.2%) MWh compared to 0.2 million in 2019. In 2019, we elected to end the contract and exit our Monmouth, New Jersey facility and ended electricity production at our Coastal Plains location during its conversion to an RNG site. As of October 1, 2020, Pico is now reported in our Renewable Natural Gas segment due to its conversion to an RNG site.
Revenues from Renewable Electricity facilities in 2020 were $16.7 million, a decrease of $3.2 million (16.1%) compared to $19.9 million in 2019. The exit of Monmouth and conversion of Coastal Plains was responsible for approximately $1.2 million of the decrease. Prior to reporting Pico in RNG, Pico accounted for $0.9 million of the $3.2 million decrease between 2020 and 2019. With the conversion of Pico to an RNG, the fixed price for Renewable Electricity was reduced as part of the power purchase agreement. Our Bowerman facility was impacted in the 2020 fourth quarter by the California wildfires forcing it to temporarily shut down the facility. This temporary shutdown is the primary reason our Bowerman facility contributed approximately $0.6 million less revenues in 2020 over the prior year period.
For 2020, 100% of Renewable Electricity Generation segment revenues were derived from the monetization of Renewable Electricity at fixed prices associated with the underlying PPAs, as compared to 93.9% in 2019. This provides the Company with certainty of revenues resulting from our Renewable Electricity sites.
Corporate Revenue
Our gas hedge program during 2020 was priced at rates in excess of the actual index price, resulting in realized losses of $0.4 million, a decrease of $0.7 million (229.4%) compared to realized gains of $0.3 million in 2019.
Expenses for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
General and Administrative Expenses
Total general and administrative expenses of $16.6 million in 2020, increased of $3.0 million (21.7%) compared to $13.6 million in 2019. Employee related costs, including severance, increased approximately $1.3 million (17.6%) in 2020 as compared to the prior year period. Additionally, our corporate insurance premiums increased approximately $0.8 million (42.9%) in 2020 over 2019. Third-party consulting fees increased approximately $1.1 million (56.1%) in 2020 resulting from our successful completion of the IPO and Reorganization Transactions.
Renewable Natural Gas Expenses
Operating and maintenance expenses for our RNG facilities in 2020 were $33.6 million, an increase of $4.9 million (17.3%) compared to $28.7 million in 2019. $2.8 million of the increase related to development sites commissioned during 2019 and $1.4 million related to development sites commissioned in 2020. Exclusive of the effects of these development sites, operating and maintenance expenses for 2020 were $28.5 million, an increase of $0.7 million (2.6%) compared to $27.8 million in 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to increased condensate removal and utility costs at our Apex location. Our Rumpke facility also incurred preventative maintenance costs than compared to the prior year period. Our Rumpke facility also incurred increased utility
costs related to our running a third processing plant at less than nameplate capacity levels and increased preventive maintenance costs. Finally, we incurred increased wellfield operating costs associated with optimization programs at our Monroeville facility. While our McCarty plant experienced reduced production while replacing one of its engines, it incurred lower operating and maintenance expenses primarily related to reduced breakdown costs in 2020.
Royalties, transportation, gathering and production fuel expenses for the Company’s RNG facilities for 2020 were $16.4 million, a decrease of $0.1 million (0.6%) compared to $16.5 million in 2019. Royalties, transportation, gathering and production fuel expenses increased as a percentage of RNG revenues to 19.8% for 2020 from 19.6% in 2019. A site commissioned during 2020 contributed $0.1 million to the total while a site commissioned during 2019 contributed an additional $0.7 million during 2020. Exclusive of the effects of the development sites, royalty related costs for 2020 were $15.5 million, a decrease of $1.0 million (5.8%) compared to $16.5 million in 2019.
Renewable Electricity Expenses
Operating and maintenance expenses for our Renewable Electricity facilities in 2020 were $9.8 million, a decrease of $1.1 million (10.1%) compared to $10.9 million in 2019. We reported the results of Pico within the Renewable Electricity Generation segment until October 2020. Of the total, Pico contributed $1.4 million in 2020 and, exclusive of Pico, Renewable Electricity facility operating and maintenance expenses decreased by $1.3 million (13.2%). The decrease is related increasing preventative maintenance intervals at our Bowerman facility to mitigate increased condensate removal costs. Additionally, our exit from our Monmouth facility reduced operating and maintenance expenses in 2020 by $0.6 million. Royalties, transportation, gathering and production fuel expenses for our Renewable Electricity facilities for 2020 were $1.7 million, a decrease of $0.7 million (30.2%) compared to $2.4 million in 2019 and as a percentage of Renewable Electricity Generation segment, revenues decreased from 12.4% to 10.5%. This decrease relates primarily to a site vacated in 2019 and from $0.6 million related to the exit of our Monmouth site in 2020.
Royalty Payments
Royalties, transportation, gathering, and production fuel expenses in 2020 were $18.3 million, a decrease of $0.6 million (3.2%) compared to $18.9 million in 2019. We make royalty payments to our fuel supply site partners on the commodities we produce and the associated Environmental Attributes. These royalty payments are typically structured as a percentage of revenue subject to a cap, with fixed minimum payments when Environmental Attribute prices fall below a defined threshold. To the extent commodity and Environmental Attributes’ prices fluctuate, our royalty payments may fluctuate upon renewal or extension of a fuel supply agreement or in connection with new projects. Our fuel supply agreements are typically structured as 20-year contracts, providing long-term visibility into the margin impact of future royalty payments.
Depreciation
Depreciation and amortization in 2020 were $22.1 million, an increase of $2.3 million (11.9%) compared to $19.8 million in 2019. The increase was due to approximately $35.3 million in development site assets being placed into service during 2020 at the time of commercial operation date (“COD”). In 2019, approximately $21.2 million of assets were placed into service at the time of COD.
Impairment loss
We calculated and recorded an impairment loss of $0.3 million for 2020, a decrease of $2.1 million (88.6%) compared to $2.4 million in 2019. The decrease in 2020 was partially attributable to the termination of a
development agreement related to our Pico acquisition. In the prior year, the impairment loss was due to the cancellation of a site conversion agreement and conversion of existing Renewable Electricity to RNG sites in
2020 and the write-off of assets distributed from our Red Top joint venture. We calculated impairments based upon replacement cost, if applicable, and pre-tax cash flow projections.
Other Expenses (Income)
Other expenses in 2020 were $0.3 million, an increase of $0.4 million (770.2%) compared to income of $47 thousand in 2019. We recorded losses on the disposition of assets of $0.3 million in 2020. We recorded a gain of $0.1 million in 2019 associated with the sale of the Red Top joint venture interests and related distribution of fixed assets.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Prior to 2018, we generated sizeable NOLs, which reduced our income tax payable for 2018 and 2019. Based upon our historical pre-tax book income and forecasts, we expect to utilize all remaining NOLs and thus have not recorded a valuation allowance against such NOLs.
Our effective income tax rate (“ETR”) for 2020 was a benefit of 430.4% compared to a benefit of 6.5% for the prior year period. This increased benefit in the ETR is driven by low pre-tax earnings compared to the tax benefit of 2020. Additionally, we recorded a tax benefit of $2,417 in connection with the January 1, 2020 dissolution of the MEC partnership which will allow all entities under MEC to file as part of our consolidated federal tax group. The Company also made adjustments to deferred taxes related to intangibles and net operating losses, and released our valuation allowance related to certain deferred tax assets that can now be utilized within the new federal tax consolidated group.
The CARES Act and the Consolidated Appropriations Act, enacted by the United States on March 27, 2020 and December 27, 2020, respectively, did not have a material impact on our provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company is continuing to analyze the ongoing impact of this legislation.
Operating Profit for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Operating profit in 2020 was $3.6 million, a decrease of $7.4 million (67.5%) compared to $11.0 million in 2019. RNG operating profit for 2020 was $22.7 million, a decrease of $3.0 million (11.7%) compared to $25.7 million in 2019. Renewable Electricity Generation operating loss for 2020 was $2.3 million, a decrease of $0.2 million (7.0%) compared to $2.4 million in 2019.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For a discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, see the section entitled “Management Discussion and Analysis” in our Registration Statement on Form S-1 (Registration No. 333-251312). The registration statement was filed in connection with the IPO and was declared effective by the SEC on January 21, 2020.
Key Trends
Trends Affecting the Renewable Fuel Market
We believe rising demand for RNG is attributable to a variety of factors, including growing public support for renewable energy, U.S. governmental actions to increase energy independence, environmental concerns increasing demand for natural gas-powered vehicles, job creation, and increasing investment in the renewable energy sector.
Key drivers for the long-term growth of RNG include the following factors:
•
Regulatory or policy initiatives, including the federal RFS program and state-level low-carbon fuel programs in states such as California and Oregon, that drive demand for RNG and its derivative Environmental Attributes.
•
Efficiency, mobility and capital cost flexibility in our operations enable RNG to compete successfully in multiple markets. Our operating model is nimble, as we commonly use modular equipment; our RNG processing equipment is more efficient than its fossil-fuel correlates.
•
Demand for compressed natural gas (“CNG”) from natural gas-fueled vehicles. The RNG we create is pipeline quality and can be used for transportation fuel when converted to CNG. CNG is commonly used by medium-duty fleets that are close to fueling stations, such as city fleets, local delivery trucks and waste haulers.
•
Regulatory requirements, market pressure and public relations challenges increase the time, cost and difficulty of permitting new fossil fuel-fired facilities.
There is significant potential for sustained growth in biogas conversion from waste sources, given evolving consumer preferences, regulatory conditions, ongoing waste industry trends, and project economics. We believe that our status as a large producer of RNG from LFG, our 30-year track record of developing and operating projects, and our deep relationships with some of the largest landfill owners in the country position us well to continue to grow our portfolio. We intend to continue to pursue financially disciplined growth through our proven growth channels, including expansion of existing projects, conversion projects, optimization across our portfolio, greenfield development and acquisitions.
The primary factors that we believe will affect our future operating results are as follows:
Conversion of Electricity Projects to RNG Projects:
We periodically evaluate opportunities to convert existing facilities from Renewable Electricity to RNG production. These opportunities tend to be most attractive for any merchant electricity facilities given the favorable economics for the sale of RNG plus RINs relative to the sale of market rate electricity plus RECs. This strategy has been an increasingly attractive avenue for growth since 2014 when RNG from landfills became eligible for D3 RINs. However, during the conversion of a project, there is a gap in production while the electricity project is offline until it commences operation as an RNG facility, which can adversely affect us. This timing effect may adversely affect our 2021 operating results as a result of our potential conversion of Renewable Electricity projects. Upon completion of a conversion, we expect that the increase in revenue upon commencement of RNG production will more than offset the loss of revenue from Renewable Electricity production. Historically, we have taken advantage of these opportunities on a gradual basis at our merchant electricity facilities, such as Atascocita and Coastal Plains.
Acquisition and Development Pipeline
The timing and extent of our development pipeline affects our operating results due to:
•
Impact of Higher Selling, General and Administrative Expenses Prior to the Commencement of a Project’s Operation: We incur significant expenses in the development of new RNG projects. Further, the receipt of RINs is delayed, and typically does not commence for a period of four to six months after the commencement of injecting RNG into a pipeline, pending final registration approval of the project by the EPA and then the subsequent completion of a third-party quality assurance plan certification. During such time, the RNG is either physically or theoretically stored and later withdrawn from storage to allow for the generation of RINs.
•
Shifts in Revenue Composition for Projects from New Fuel Sources: As we expand into livestock farm projects, our revenue composition from Environmental Attributes will change. We believe that livestock
farms offer us a lucrative opportunity, as the value of LCFS credits for dairy farm projects, for example, are a multiple of those realized from landfill projects due to the significantly more attractive CI score of livestock farms.
•
Incurrence of Expenses Associated with Pursuing Prospective Projects That Do Not Come to Fruition: We incur expenses to pursue prospective projects with the goal of a site host accepting our proposal or being awarded a project in a competitive bidding process. Historically, we have evaluated opportunities which we decided not to pursue further due to the prospective project not meeting our internal investment thresholds or a lack of success in a competitive bidding process. To the extent we seek to pursue a greater number of projects or bidding for projects becomes more competitive, our expenses may increase.
Regulatory, Environmental and Social Trends
Regulatory, environmental and social factors are key drivers that incentivize the development of RNG and Renewable Electricity projects and influence the economics of these projects. We are subject to the possibility of legislative and regulatory changes to certain incentives, such as RINs, RECs and GHG initiatives. The EPA missed its November 30, 2020 statutory deadline to set RVOs for 2021. Accordingly, EPA has not set RVOs for 2021, though it indicates a final rule setting the RVOs can be expected in June 2021. It is unclear if they will meet this timeline. The manner in which the EPA will establish RVOs beginning in 2023, when the statutory RVO mandates are set to expire, is expected to create additional uncertainty as to RIN pricing. Further changes to the CI score assigned to a project upon its renewal or a change in the way CARB develops the CI score for a new project could significantly affect the profitability of a project, particularly in the case of a livestock farm project.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures:
The following table presents EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, non-GAAP financial measures for each of the periods presented below. We present EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA because we believe the measures assist investors in analyzing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. In addition, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are financial measurements of performance that management and the Board of Directors use in their financial and operational decision-making and in the determination of certain compensation programs. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are supplemental performance measures that are not required by, or presented in accordance with GAAP. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered alternatives to net income or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP, or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities or a measure of our liquidity or profitability.
The following table provides our EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented, as well as a reconciliation to net income:
(1) For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an impairment of 0.3 million termination of a development agreement related to our Pico acquisition. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded an impairment of $1.5 million associated with our decision to cancel a site conversion agreement and we recorded an impairment loss of $0.9 million associated with a 2018 asset distribution from Red Top.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our cash and cash equivalents, net of restricted cash, was $21.0 million and $9.8 million, respectively. We intend to fund near-term development projects using cash flows from operations and borrowings under our revolving credit facility. We believe that we will have sufficient cash flows from operations and borrowing availability under our credit facility to meet our debt service obligations and anticipated required capital expenditures (including for projects under development) for at least the next 12 months. However, we are subject to business and operational risks that could adversely affect our cash flows and liquidity.
At December 31, 2020, we had debt before debt issuance costs of $66.7 million, compared to debt before debt issuance costs of $68.2 million at December 31, 2019.
Our debt before issuance costs (in thousands) is as follows:
Amended Credit Agreement
On December 12, 2018, we entered into an amended revolving credit and term loan agreement (as amended, the “Amended Credit Agreement”), with Comerica Bank (“Comerica”) and certain other financial institutions. The Amended Credit Agreement, which is secured by substantially all of our assets and assets of certain of our subsidiaries and provides for a five-year $95.0 million term loan and a five-year $80.0 million revolving credit facility.
As of December 31, 2020, $30.0 million was outstanding under the term loan and $36.7 million was outstanding under the revolving credit facility. The term loan amortizes in quarterly installments of $2.5 million and has a final maturity of December 12, 2023 with an interest rate of 2.961% and 4.642% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The revolving and term loans under the Amended Credit Agreement bear interest at the Eurodollar Margin or Base Rate Margin based on our Total Leverage Ratio (in each case, as those terms are defined in the Amended Credit Agreement).
The Amended Credit Agreement contains customary covenants applicable to us and certain of our subsidiaries, including financial covenants. The Amended Credit Agreement is subject to customary events of default, and contemplates that we would be in default if, for any fiscal quarter (x) the average monthly D3 RIN price (as determined in accordance with the Amended Credit Agreement) is less than $0.80 per RIN and (y) the consolidated EBITDA for such quarter is less than $6.0 million. Consolidated EBITDA is defined under the Amended Credit Agreement as net income plus (a) income tax expense, (b) interest expense, (c) depreciation, depletion, and amortization expense, (d) non-cash unrealized derivative expense and (e) any other extraordinary, unusual, or non-recurring adjustments to certain components of net income, as agreed upon by Comerica in certain circumstances.
Under the Amended Credit Agreement, we are required to maintain the following ratios:
•
a maximum ratio of Total Liabilities to Tangible Net Worth (in each case, as those terms are defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) of greater than 2.0 to 1.0 as of the end of any fiscal quarter; and
•
as of the end of each fiscal quarter, (x) a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) of not less than 1.2 to 1.0 and (y) a Total Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) of not more than 3.0 to 1.0.
On August 28, 2019, we received a waiver for a Specified Event of Default (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement), for the period from August 31, 2019 to October 1, 2019. The Specified Event of Default related to the average monthly D3 RIN price being less than the minimum required price for a consecutive three-month period. The waiver was temporary in nature and expired on October 1, 2019, at which time no events of default were ongoing.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all financial covenants related to the Amended Credit Agreement.
The Amended Credit Agreement replaced our prior credit agreements with Comerica Bank and a portion of the proceeds of the term loan made under the Amended Credit Agreement were used by us to, among other things, fully satisfy an aggregate of $52.5 million outstanding under such credit agreements. For additional information regarding the Amended Credit Agreement, see the sections entitled “Description of Indebtedness and Note 12-Debt to our audited consolidated financial statements.
Debt Financing
We have historically funded our growth and capital expenditures with our working capital, cash flow from operations and debt financing. Excluding strategic transactions, we expect our 2021 capital expenditures to range
between $8.0 and $9.0 million. Our 2021 capital plans include annual preventative maintenance expenditures, annual wellfield expansion projects, and other specific facility improvements. Additionally, we expect to spend between $2.0 and $4.0 million on optimization projects at our recently commissioned development facilities. Our Amended Credit Agreement provides us with an $80.0 million revolving credit facility, with a $75.0 million accordion option, providing us with access to additional capital to implement our acquisition and development strategy.
Cash Flow
The following table presents information regarding our cash flows and cash equivalents for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated $28.7 million of cash from operating activities, a 3.1% increase from the prior year ended December 31, 2019 of $27.8 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, income and adjustments to income from operating activities provided $22.5 million compared to $29.5 million in 2019. Working capital and other assets and liabilities provided $6.2 million in the current period compared to ($2.1) million being used in the prior year period. When we commission new sites, we invest capital to ramp up operations prior to the project generating revenue. In addition, our operating profit was also negatively affected by an 8.8% reduction in realized RIN pricing in 2020 over the prior year period. Our net cash flows used in investing activities has historically focused on project development and facility maintenance.
For 2020, our capital expenditures were $17.6 million, of which $0.9 million, $5.9 million and $2.0 million related to the construction of our Galveston, Coastal Plains, and Pico RNG facilities, respectively. We also incurred $3.5 million in capital expenditures rebuilding the failed engine at our McCarty RNG site. For 2019, our capital expenditures were $45.6 million, of which $12.6 million, $10.7 million and $10.6 million related to the construction of our Galveston, Coastal Plains, and Pico RNG facilities, respectively.
Our net cash flows used in financing activities of $1.5 million for 2020 decreased by $26.0 million compared to 2019, primarily due to lower borrowings and debt repayments in 2020. Additionally, we made a distribution to acquire outstanding share rights related to a minority partner of a fully consolidated entity, but otherwise paid no dividends in 2020. Higher debt issuance costs in the prior year period related to closing of the Amended Credit Agreement.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our outstanding contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 that require us to make future cash payments:
(1) Includes fixed interest associated with these obligations.
(2) Operating lease obligations consist of leases for various office spaces and equipment.
(3) Minimum royalty and capital obligations associated with fuel supply agreements at certain operating sites.
(4) This table does not include the estimated discounted liability for the decommissioning and removal requirements for specific gas processing and distribution assets of $5.7 million. See Note 8, “Asset Retirement Obligations of the Consolidated Financial Statements.”
(5) This table excludes any obligations which may arise in connection with any future site closures.
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
In the preparation of our interim financial statements for the IPO, as well as the preparation of our year end financial statements, we and our independent public accounting firm identified a material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting that impacted the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and for the nine months ended September 30, 2020 and 2019. During the quarter ended December 31, 2020, we continued to implement remediation initiatives in response to the previously identified material weakness in connection with our material weakness remediation plan as noted below.
See “Risk Factors-Emerging Growth Company Risks-We have identified a material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting. We continue to implement remediation initiatives in response to this material weakness. If we identify additional material weaknesses in the future or otherwise fail to maintain an effective system of internal controls, we may not be able to accurately or timely report our financial condition or results of operations, which may adversely affect our business.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with GAAP and require our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and such estimates may change if the underlying conditions or assumptions change.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenues are comprised of renewable energy and the related Environmental Attribute sales provided under long-term contracts with its customers. All revenue is recognized when we satisfy our performance obligation(s) under the contract (either implicit or explicit) by transferring the promised product to the customer either when (or as) the customer obtains control of the product. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct product or service to a customer. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each
distinct performance obligation. We allocate the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation using the product’s observable market standalone selling price for each distinct product in the contract.
Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring our products. As such, revenue is recorded net of allowances and customer discounts. To the extent applicable, sales, value add, and other taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are accounted for on a net (excluded from revenues) basis. The nature of our long-term contracts may give rise to several types of variable consideration, such as periodic price increases. This variable consideration is outside of our control as the variable consideration is dictated by the market.
The nature of the Company’s long-term contracts may give rise to several types of variable consideration, such as periodic price increases. This variable consideration is outside of the Company’s influence as the variable consideration is dictated by the market. Therefore, the variable consideration associated with the long-term contracts is considered fully constrained.
RINs
We generate D3 RINs through our production and sale of RNG used for transportation purposes as prescribed under the RFS program. Our operating costs are associated with the production of RNG. The RINs are generated as an output of our renewable operating projects. The RINs that we generate are able to be separated and sold independently from the energy produced. Therefore, no cost is allocated to the RIN when it is generated. Revenue is recognized on these Environmental Attributes when there is an agreement in place to monetize the credits at an agreed upon price with a customer and transfer of control has occurred. We enter into forward commitments to transfer RINs. These forward commitments are based on D3 RIN index prices at the time of the commitment. Realized prices for RINs monetized in a year may not correspond directly to index prices due to the forward selling of commitments.
RECs
We generate RECs through our production and conversion of landfill methane into Renewable Electricity in various states, including California, Oklahoma, and Texas. These states have various laws requiring utilities to purchase a portion of their energy from renewable resources. Our operating costs are associated with the production of Renewable Electricity. The RECs are generated as an output of our renewable operating projects. The RECs that we generate are able to be separated and sold independently from the electricity produced. Therefore, no cost is allocated to the REC when it is generated. Revenue is recognized on these Environmental Attributes when there is an agreement in place to monetize the credits at an agreed upon price with a customer and transfer of control has occurred.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and various state and local jurisdictions. Tax regulations within each jurisdiction are subject to the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations and require significant judgment to apply.
Our net deferred tax asset position is a result of NOLs, fixed assets, intangibles, and tax credit carryforwards. The realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon our ability to generate sufficient future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible, prior to the expiration of the tax attributes. The evaluation of deferred tax assets requires judgment in assessing the likely future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns and forecasting future profitability by tax jurisdiction.
See Note 13, “Income Taxes” to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus. We evaluate our deferred tax assets at reporting periods on a jurisdictional basis to determine
whether adjustments to the valuation allowance are appropriate considering changes in facts or circumstances. As of each reporting date, management considers new evidence, both positive and negative, when determining the future realization of our deferred tax assets. We account for uncertain tax positions using a “more-likely-than-not” threshold for recognizing and resolving uncertain tax positions. The evaluation of uncertain tax positions is based on factors that include, but are not limited to, changes in tax law, the measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns, the effective settlement of matters subject to audit, new audit activity and changes in facts or circumstances related to a tax position. Given our current level of pre-tax earnings and forecasted future pre-tax earnings, we expect to generate income before taxes in the United States in future periods at a level that would fully utilize our U.S. federal NOL carryforwards and the majority of its state NOL carryforwards prior to their expiration.
Intangible Assets
Separately identifiable intangible assets are recorded at their fair values upon acquisition. We account for intangible assets in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other. Finite-lived intangible assets include interconnections, customer contracts, and trade names and trademarks. The interconnection intangible asset is the exclusive right to utilize an interconnection line between the operating project and a utility substation to transmit produced electricity. Included in that right is full maintenance provided on this line by the utility. Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful life. We evaluate our finite-lived intangible assets for impairment as events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of these assets may not be fully recoverable. Events that could result in an impairment include, among others, a significant decrease in the market price or the decision to close a site.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized and include emission allowances and land use rights. Emission allowances consist of credits that need to be applied to nitrogen oxide (“NOx”) emissions from internal combustion engines. These engines emit levels of NOx for which environmental permits are required in certain regions in the United States. Except for permanent allocations of NOx credits, allowances available for use each year are capped at a level necessary for ozone attainment per the National Ambient Air Quality Standards. We assess the impairment of intangible assets that have indefinite lives at least on an annual basis or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable.
If finite-lived or indefinite-lived intangible assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. The fair value is determined based on the present value of expected future cash flows. We use our best estimates in making these evaluations, however, actual future pricing, operating costs and discount rates could vary from the assumptions used in our estimates and the impact of such variations could be material.
Finite-Lived Asset Impairment
In accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 360, Property, Plant and Equipment and intangible assets with finite useful lives are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset or asset group to future undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset or asset group. Such estimates are based on certain assumptions, which are subject to uncertainty and may materially differ from actual results, including considering project specific assumptions for long-term credit prices, escalated future project operating costs and expected site operations. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Fair value is generally determined by considering (i) internally developed discounted cash flows for the asset group, (ii) third-party valuations, and/or (iii) information available regarding the current market value for such assets. We use our best estimates in making these evaluations and consider various factors, including future pricing and operating costs. However, actual future market prices and project costs could vary from the assumptions used in our estimates and the impact of such variations could be material.
We recorded impairment of $0.3 million and $2.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See Note 3, “Asset Impairment” to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Off-balance sheet arrangements comprise those arrangements that may potentially impact our liquidity, capital resources and results of operations, even though such arrangements are not recorded as liabilities under GAAP. Our off-balance sheet arrangements are limited to the outstanding letters of credit and operating leases described below. Although these arrangements serve a variety of our business purposes, we are not dependent on them to maintain our liquidity and capital resources, and we are not aware of any circumstances that are reasonably likely to cause the off-balance sheet arrangements to have a material adverse effect on liquidity and capital resources.
During 2020, we had $7.1 million of off-balance sheet arrangements of outstanding letters of credit. These letters of credit reduce the borrowing capacity of our revolving credit facility under our Amended Credit Agreement. Certain of our contracts require these letters of credit to be issued to provide additional performance assurances. There have been no usage against these outstanding letters of credit. During 2019, we did not have off-balance sheet arrangements other than outstanding letters of credit of approximately $7.6 million.
Emerging Growth Company
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act allows emerging growth companies to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We intend to utilize these transition periods, which may make it difficult to compare our financial statements to those of non-emerging growth companies and other emerging growth companies that have opted out of the transition periods afforded under the JOBS Act.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of our recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting standards not yet adopted, see Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this prospectus.