Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination (“Business Combination”) with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds our initial public offering (“Initial Public Offering”) and the private placement of the placement units (“Placement Units”), the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial Business Combination (pursuant to backstop agreements we may enter into), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to banks or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Proposed Business Combination with Momentus
On October 7, 2020, we entered into the Merger Agreement with First Merger Sub, Second Merger Sub and Momentus. The Merger Agreement, the Mergers and the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement are referred to herein as the “Proposed Transaction”.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the aggregate merger consideration payable to the equityholders of Momentus will be paid in equity consideration equal to $1,131,000,000, minus Momentus’ indebtedness for borrowed money as of the Closing, plus the amount of Momentus’ cash and cash equivalents (excluding restricted cash as determined in accordance with GAAP, any cash being held on behalf of Momentus’ customers and any security deposits for leases) as of the Closing, plus the aggregate exercise price of all outstanding options and warrants (the “Merger Consideration”). The Merger Consideration payable to the stockholders of Momentus will be paid in shares of newly issued Class A common stock of SRAC, with a deemed value of $10 per share. In addition, SRAC will pay off, or cause to be paid off, on behalf of Momentus and in connection with the Closing, Momentus’ outstanding indebtedness for borrowed money.
In connection with the Proposed Transaction, each share of Momentus’ capital stock (subject to limited exceptions) will be cancelled and automatically deemed for all purposes to represent the right to receive a portion of the Merger Consideration in accordance with Momentus’ organizational documents. In addition, the Merger Consideration that is paid with respect to any shares of Momentus’ capital stock that is subject to any vesting restrictions or other conditions shall continue to be subject to such vesting restrictions and conditions after the Closing.
Each option of Momentus that is outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the Closing (whether vested or unvested) will be automatically assumed by SRAC and converted into an option to acquire an adjusted number of shares of Class A common stock at an adjusted exercise price per share and will continue to be governed by substantially the same terms and conditions (including vesting and exercisability terms) as were applicable to the corresponding former option.
Each warrant to purchase shares of capital stock of Momentus that is outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the Closing will be automatically converted into a warrant to acquire an adjusted number of shares of Class A common stock at an adjusted exercise price per share and will continue to be governed by substantially the same terms and conditions (including applicable vesting conditions) as were applicable to the corresponding former warrant.
Consummation of the Proposed Transaction is subject to customary closing conditions for special purpose acquisition companies, including the following conditions to each party’s obligations, among others: (a) approval by SRAC’s stockholders and Momentus’ stockholders, (b) SRAC having at least $5,000,001 of net tangible assets as of the effective time of the consummation of the Mergers, and (c) the approval of the listing of the shares of Class A common stock to be issued in connection with the Closing on The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC and the effectiveness of a Registration Statement on Form S-4. The Merger Agreement may be terminated under certain customary and limited circumstances prior to the consummation of the Mergers.
On October 7, 2020, we entered into Subscription Agreements with certain investors pursuant to which the investors have agreed to purchase an aggregate of 17,500,000 shares of Class A common stock in a private placement for $10.00 per share (“Private Placement”). The proceeds from the Private Placement will be partially used to fund the Repurchase and for general working capital purposes following the closing. The closing of the transactions contemplated by the Subscription Agreements is contingent upon, among other customary closing conditions, the substantially concurrent consummation of the Proposed Transaction.
Concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, PML, SRAC and Momentus entered into a Repurchase Agreement pursuant to which, amongst other things, SRAC has agreed to repurchase a certain number of shares of Class A common stock from PML, at a purchase price of $10.00 per share, immediately following the Closing (the “Repurchase”). The Repurchase is contingent on the amount of available cash SRAC has at the Closing from (a) the Private Placement (and any alternative financing arranged by SRAC and Momentus in the event the Private Placement becomes unavailable) and (b) the funds in SRAC’s trust account (after taking into account payments required to satisfy SRAC’s stockholder redemptions), after further deducting the amount of SRAC’s transaction expenses and Momentus’ transaction expenses (“Net Proceeds”) being in excess of $265 million. If Net Proceeds exceed $265,000,000 but are less than $280,000,000, the number of shares of Class A common stock subject to the Repurchase will be equal to the amount by which Net Proceeds exceed $250 million, divided by $10.00. In the event Net Proceeds are in excess of $280,000,000, the number of shares of Class A common stock subject to the Repurchase will be equal to $30,000,000, divided by $10.00. At the closing of the Repurchase, SRAC will be entitled to deduct from such cash payment an amount equal to 3.3% of such cash payment (representing PML’s obligation to pay Momentus a portion of its transaction expenses).
For additional information regarding the Proposed Transaction, Momentus, the Merger Agreement, the Subscription Agreements, the Repurchase Agreement and the other agreements entered into in connection with the Proposed Transaction, including risk and uncertainties with respect to Momentus and the parties’ ability to consummate the Proposed Transaction, see the Registration Statement on Form S-4, including a proxy statement/consent solicitation statement/prospectus included therein, initially filed by SRAC with the SEC on November 2, 2020, as subsequently amended.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our Initial Public Offering, described below, identifying a target for our initial Business Combination and we do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing our initial Business Combination, including the Proposed Transaction with Momentus.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $2,765,450, which consists of operating costs of $3,720,975 and a provision for income taxes of $178,866, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,134,391.
For the period from May 28, 2019 (date of inception) through December 31, 2019, we had net income of $62,359, which consists of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $346,011, offset by operating costs of $236,085 and a provision for income taxes of $47,567.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 13, 2019, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 17,250,000 Units, which included the full exercise by the underwriter of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 2,250,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $172,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of our Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 545,000 Placement Units to the sponsor and Cantor at a price of $10.00 per Placement Unit, generating gross proceeds of $5,450,000.
Following our Initial Public Offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Placement Units, a total of $172,500,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $10,924,857 in transaction costs, including $3,450,000 of underwriting fees, $6,900,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $574,857 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $1,751,026. Net loss of $2,765,450 was impact by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,134,391 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $2,148,815 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from May 28, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $356,959. Net income of $62,359 was offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $346,011 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $73,307 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities in the Trust Account of $173,107,749. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we withdrew $872,653 of interest income from the Trust Account principally to pay for federal and state income taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $214,811 outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete our initial Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with our initial Business Combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units identical to the Placement Units, at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender.
If our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating our initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
In February 2021, Stable Road Capital and DIBALYD Investments, an affiliate of Nala Investments, each loaned $300,000 to us pursuant to non-interest bearing promissory notes in order to finance transaction and working capital costs. The promissory notes mature upon the earlier of June 30, 2021 or the consummation of our initial Business Combination.
Going Concern
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” we have until May 13, 2021 or the extension date, as applicable, to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and administrative support provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on November 8, 2019 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the initial Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriter is entitled to deferred commissions of $0.40 per unit of the gross proceeds from the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering, or $6,900,000 in the aggregate. The deferred commissions will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We accounts for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for and Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net income (loss) adjusted for net income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.