ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Recent Developments
Impact of COVID-19
We are continuing to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business, including how it is impacting our customers, employees, supply chain, and distribution network, as well as the demand for our products in the industries and markets that we serve. Our first priority is the health and safety of our employees, customers, and business partners and we believe that we have taken every necessary step to keep our facilities clean and safe during the COVID-19 pandemic. While COVID19 had a material impact on our reported results for our second, third, and fourth quarters, we are unable to predict the ultimate impact that it may have on our business, future results of operations, financial position or cash flows. The extent to which our operations may be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic will depend largely on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the ultimate severity and duration of the outbreak and actions by government authorities to contain the outbreak or treat its impact. Furthermore, the impacts of a potential worsening of global economic conditions and the continued disruptions to and volatility in the financial markets remain unknown. See Part II, Item 1A, Risk Factors, for an additional discussion of risks related to COVD-19.
As a result of the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak, during the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2020, the Company experienced a temporary reduction of its manufacturing and operating capacity in Italy as a result of government-mandated actions to control the spread of COVID-19 which adversely impacted our revenues. Further, the Company has experienced and may continue to experience disruptions or delays in its supply chain as a result of such actions, which would result in higher supply chain costs to the Company in order to maintain the supply of materials and components for its products. In addition, the Company has modified its business practices (including practices regarding employee travel, employee work locations, and cancellation of physical participation in meetings, events and conferences).
During 2020, to address the COVID-19 outbreak induced downturn in our business including, but not limited to, the Company adopted a restructuring plan for North American operations to generate approximately $4.5 million in annualized cost savings.
In addition to the above, we continued to take steps to minimize the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and to protect the safety of our employees and customers. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had available liquidity through cash and our credit facility of approximately $29 million to address liquidity concerns and we remained in compliance with the covenants in our bank credit facility as we were able to generate positive cash flow from operations of approximately $8.3 million (excluding the PPP loan of $3.7 million) for the year ended December 31, 2020 and maintain a strong balance sheet. Furthermore, in December 2020, the Company paid down approximately $17.5 million of the convertible notes and European bank debt. Lastly, the company's consolidated backlog of approximately $82 million, as of January 31, 2021 is at its highest level in over three years.
Business Overview
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of continuing operations should be read in conjunction with the Company’s financial statements and notes, and other information included elsewhere in this Report.
When reading this section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, it is important that you also read the financial statements and related notes thereto. This Annual Report on Form 10-K and certain information incorporated herein by reference contain forward-looking statements within the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. See “Forward-Looking Statements”.
The following table sets forth certain financial data for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019:
Results of Consolidated Operations
MANITEX INTERNATIONAL, INC.
(In thousands)
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Continuing Operations Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net (loss) income from continuing operations
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net loss was $12.7 million, compared to net income of $0.1 million for 2019.
Net revenue and gross profit -For the year ended December 31, 2020, net revenue and gross profit were $167.5 million and $30.9 million, respectively. Gross profit as a percent of net revenues was 18.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net revenue and gross profit were $215.5 million and $40.8 million, respectively. Gross profit as a percent of net revenues was 19.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
For 2020, revenues decreased $48.0 million or 22.3% from $215.5 million for 2019. The decreases are primarily due to decreases in straight mast crane sales and revenues from the Company’s United States subsidiaries, primarily due to the impact of the ongoing of COVID-19 pandemic partially offset by an increase in revenues due to a favorable impact by a stronger Euro, which accounted for $2.2 million.
Gross profit as a percent of net revenues was 18.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020, which decreased from 19.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in gross profit is attributable to decreases in revenues and product mix partially offset by decrease in cost of sales. The decline in the gross profit percentage is primarily driven by product mix as lower margin products were sold in 2020.
Research and development -Research and development for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.2 million compared to $2.7 million for the comparable period in 2019. The Company’s research and development spending continues to reflect our commitment to develop and introduce new products that give the Company a competitive advantage.
Selling, general and administrative expense - Selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $28.7 million compared to $34.1 million for the comparable period in 2019, a decrease of $5.4 million. The decreases are primarily related to cost savings initiatives implemented during the second quarter of 2020 at our US facilities resulting in permanent and temporary layoffs of employees, postponement of consulting costs, and lower professional fees. Also cost reduction occurred driven by our Italian subsidiaries which were shut down for four weeks due to COVID-19. In addition, 2019 included restructuring charges at our PM facilities, which did not occur in 2020.
Advertising -Advertising costs are expensed as incurred and were $489 and $965 for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The advertising costs are included within the SG&A financial statement caption and the decrease in expense is consistent with the cost savings initiatives discussed above.
Impairment of intangible assets - Impairment expense was $6.7 million and $1.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase was driven by the COVID-19 pandemic which caused a decrease in the Company’s market capitalization causing a triggering event which resulted in a $6.6 million goodwill impairment charge and a $0.1 million tradename impairment charge during 2020.
Interest expense -Interest expense was $3.6 million and $4.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease reflects the impact of lower outstanding debt balances and lower interest rates during 2020.
Gain from extinguishment of debt- For 2020, the Company paid off the entire PM term and unsecured debt at a 15% discount to its face value which resulted in a gain of $0.6 million.
Change in fair value of securities held- For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company held no marketable securities. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company had a gain of $5.5 million due to a change in the fair value of securities held in ASV.
Foreign currency transaction loss - For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a foreign currency loss of $0.8 million consistent with the loss incurred during 2019. A substantial portion of the losses relate to changes in the Argentinian peso. The Company has not been able to identify a strategy to effectively hedge the currency risks related to the Argentinian peso.
Other (expense) income- For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had other expenses of $0.5 million compared to other income of less than $0.1 million for the comparable period in 2019. Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily related to a legal settlement and the closing of a location in Italy.
Discontinued operations- For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a net loss from discontinued operations of $0.9 million compared to a net loss from discontinued operations of $8.6 million for the comparable period in 2019. The improvement was mainly driven by no impairment expense during 2020, compared to $6.6 million of goodwill and intangible impairment expense during 2019.
Income tax - On March 27, 2020, the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act” was enacted. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to net operating loss carrybacks, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, a modification to the net interest deduction limitations and a technical correction to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement
property. The CARES Act did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The calculation of the overall income tax provision for the 12 months ended December 31, 2020 primarily consists of a domestic income tax provision resulting from state and local taxes, foreign income taxes, the change in unrecognized tax benefits and valuation allowance.
The Company’s effective tax rate from continuing operations was an income tax provision of 5.6% on a pretax loss of $12.0 million compared to an income tax provision of 98.1% on a pretax income of $2.8 million from prior year. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 differs from the U.S. statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the tax effects related to the mix of domestic and foreign earnings, nondeductible permanent differences, domestic losses for which the Company is not recognizing an income tax benefit, the change in unrecognized tax benefits and valuation allowance. In the prior year the Company established a valuation allowance against the deferred assets of PM.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The ultimate duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic remain highly uncertain at this time. Accordingly, its impact on the global economy generally and our customers and suppliers specifically, as well as the ultimate potential negative financial impact to our results of operations and liquidity position cannot be reasonably estimated at this time, but have been and could continue to be material. In the context of these uncertain conditions, we are actively managing the business to maintain cash flow and ensure that we have sufficient liquidity for a variety of scenarios. We believe that such strategy will allow us to meet our anticipated funding requirements.
On April 14, 2020, the Company and its United States subsidiaries received a loan under the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), which is part of the recently enacted CARES Act administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. The Company received total proceeds of $3.7 million from the PPP loan. We have applied to have this loan forgiven in accordance with applicable provisions of the PPP loan program, and we anticipate that this application will be approved. In accordance with the requirements of the PPP, the Company used proceeds from the PPP loan primarily for payroll costs. The loan is recorded on the balance sheet in current liabilities as deferred income liability and cash provided by operating activities on the statement of cash flows (See Note 3 for accounting policy on loan). While there is no guarantee that the Company will receive forgiveness for any outstanding amounts under the PPP Loan, it believes that it has acted in compliance with the terms of the program and is seeking forgiveness of the PPP Loan.
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash were $17.4 million and $23.6 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. In addition, the Company has a U.S. revolving credit facility with a maturity date of July 20, 2023. At December 31, 2020 the Company had $9.1 million available to borrow under its revolving credit facility.
At December 31, 2020, the PM Group had established working capital facilities with five Italian, one Spanish and eleven South American banks. Under these facilities, the PM Group can borrow $25.1 million against orders, invoices and letters of credit. At December 31, 2020, the PM Group had received advances of $13 million. Future advances are dependent on having available collateral.
Significant Transactions Affecting Company Liquidity
On August 21, 2020, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement to sell Manitex Sabre, Inc. to an affiliate of Super Steel, LLC for cash proceeds of $1,500, subject to certain adjustments based on closing date accounts receivable and inventory.
In addition to the proceeds from sale of $1,500 in cash received, the Company may receive a maximum royalty and earnout payments of approximately $2,900 for years 2021 thru 2023 if certain revenue criteria are met. The Company accounts for the contingent consideration as a gain in accordance with ASC 450. Under this approach, we will recognize the contingent consideration in earnings after the contingency is resolved. See Note 21 for additional discussion related to the sale of Sabre’s business and assets.
In September 2019, ASV was acquired by Yanmar American Corporation resulting in the Company receiving $7.05 per share in cash, or $7.6 million, for its remaining 1,080,000 shares of ASV.
Cash Flows for 2020 and 2019
Operating Activities
For 2020, operating activities provided $12.0 million in cash compared to $3.2 million cash provided during 2019. Cash provided by working capital was $11.7 million for 2020 compared to usage $0.7 million for 2019. Effective accounts receivable management
generated $6.8 million cash in 2020 compared to $9.3 million cash in 2019. Cash of $7.6 million was used to pay down accounts payable in 2019. Inventory represented a cash inflow of $4.7 million in 2020 compared to a cash outflow of $2.4 million for 2019. Cash of $3.7 million was also generated from the receipt of funds under the PPP program in 2020.
Investing Activities
Cash provided from investing activities was $0.8 million in 2020 which included $1.6 million in proceeds from the sale of the Sabre business unit. Cash provided from investing activities was $5.8 million in 2019 which included $7.6 million in proceeds from the sale of an interest in an equity investment. Cash payments for plant, property and equipment were $0.7 million in 2020 compared to payments of $1.8 million in 2019.
Financing Activities
Cash flow from financing activities was an outflow of $20.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 which included the payoff of the convertible notes for $22.5 million, principal loan payments of $8.3 million, a reduction in working capital borrowing of $2.3 million and payments under capital leases of $0.5 million. These were partially offset by net borrowings under the revolving credit facility of $12.8 million. Cash flow from financing activities was an outflow of $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 which included principal loan payments of $4.1 million, a reduction in working capital borrowing of $3.9 million and payments under capital leases of $0.4 million.
Contingencies
The Company is involved in various legal proceedings, including product liability and workers’ compensation matters which have arisen in the normal course of operations. Certain cases are at a preliminary stage, and it is not possible to estimate the amount or timing of any cost to the Company.
The Company does not believe that these contingencies in aggregate will have a material adverse effect on the Company.
Additionally, the Company has been named as a defendant in several multi-defendant asbestos related product liability lawsuits. In certain instances, the Company is indemnified by a former owner of the product line in question. In the remaining cases the plaintiff has, to date, not been able to establish any exposure by the plaintiff to the Company’s products. The Company is uninsured with respect to these claims but believes that it will not incur any material liability with respect to these to claims.
When it is probable that a loss has been incurred and possible to make a reasonable estimate of the Company’s liability with respect to such matters, a provision is recorded for the amount of such estimate or the minimum amount of a range of estimates when it is not possible to estimate the amount within the range that is most likely to occur. The Company established reserves for several PM lawsuits in conjunction with the purchase accounting for this acquisition.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
CIBC has issued 2 standby letters of credit at December 31, 2020. The first standby letter of credit is $0.2 million in favor of an insurance carrier to secure obligations which may arise in connection with future deductible payments that may be incurred under the Company’s worker’s compensation insurance policies. The second standby letter of credit is less than $0.1 million in favor of a governmental agency to secure obligations which may arise in connection with worker’s compensation claims.
See Note 21 - “Legal Proceedings and Other Contingencies.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions based upon historical experience and various other factors and circumstances. Management believes that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable under the circumstances; however, actual results may vary from these estimates and assumptions under different future circumstances. We have identified the following critical accounting policies that affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition. Revenue is recognized when obligations under the terms of the contract with our customer are satisfied; generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of our equipment, parts or installation services (typically completed within one day),
which occurs at a point in time. Equipment can be redirected during the manufacturing phase such that over time revenue recognition is not appropriate. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Our contracts are non-cancellable, and returns are only allowed in limited instances. Value added tax and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. The expected costs associated with our base warranties continue to be recognized as expense when the products are sold and do not constitute a separate performance obligation.
For instances where equipment and installation services are sold together, the Company accounts for the equipment and installation services separately. The consideration (including any discounts) is allocated between the equipment and installation services based on their stand-alone selling prices. The stand-alone selling prices are determined based on the prices at which the Company separately sells the equipment.
In some instances, the Company fulfills its obligations and bills the customer for the work performed but does not ship the goods until a later date. These arrangements are considered bill-and-hold transactions. In order to recognize revenue on the bill-and-hold transactions, the Company ensures the customer has requested the arrangement, the product is identified separately as belonging to the customer, the product is ready for shipment to the customer in its current form, and the Company does not have the ability to direct the product to a different customer. A portion of the transaction price is not allocated to the custodial services due to the immaterial value assigned to that performance obligation.
Payment terms offered to customers are defined in contracts and purchase orders and do not include a significant financing component. At times, the Company may offer discounts which are considered variable consideration however, the Company applies the constraint guidance when determining the transaction price to be allocated to the performance obligations.
Assets and Liabilities Classified as Held for Sale. The Company classifies assets (or disposal groups comprised of assets and liabilities) as held for sale when they are expected to be recovered primarily through sale rather than through continuing use. They are stated at the lower of carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell. Upon reclassification, we cease to depreciate or amortize non-current assets classified as held for sale. A discontinued operation is a component of our business that represents a separate major line of business or geographical area of operation that has been disposed of or is held for sale and a strategic shift that will have a major effect on our operations and financial results. Classification as a discontinued operation occurs upon disposal or when the operation meets the criteria to be classified as held for sale, if earlier. When an operation is classified as a discontinued operation, the comparative statement of comprehensive income (loss) is revised as if the operation had been discontinued from the start of the comparative period. We have elected to not revise consolidated statements of cash flows to split operating, investing and financing activities between continuing and discontinued operations, but instead provide certain required cash flow information. The Company will account for the contingent consideration as a gain in accordance with ASC 450. Under this approach, we will recognize the contingent consideration in earnings after the contingency is resolved. As part of the discontinued operations classification, we review the allocation of corporate expenses, interest expense and entity-wide goodwill and intangible assets. In addition, income taxes are calculated on a stand-alone basis for both continuing and discontinued operations.
Inventories and Related Reserve for Obsolete and Excess Inventory. Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value and are reduced by a reserve for excess and obsolete inventories. The estimated reserve is based upon historical experiences and/or specific identification of excess or obsolete inventories.
Goodwill. Goodwill, representing the difference between the total purchase price and the fair value of assets (tangible and intangible) and liabilities at the date of acquisition, is reviewed for impairment annually, and more frequently as circumstances warrant, and written down only in the period in which the recorded value of such assets exceed their fair value. The Company does not amortize goodwill in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 350, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other” (“ASC 350”).
Under “ASC 350”, entities are provided with the option of first performing a qualitative assessment on none, some, or all of its reporting units to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If after completing a qualitative analysis, it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value a quantitative analysis is required.
In 2020 and 2019, goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or a component of an operating segment that constitutes a business for which discrete financial information with similar economic characteristics is available and operating results are regularly reviewed by our chief operating decision maker.
The Company evaluates its consolidated goodwill using the quantitative two step approach. The first step used to identify potential impairment involves comparing the reporting unit’s estimated fair value to its carrying value, including goodwill. During the first step testing, the Company evaluates goodwill for impairment using a business valuation method, which is calculated as of a measurement date by determining the present value of debt-free, after-tax projected future cash flows, discounted at the weighted average cost of
capital of a hypothetical third-party buyer. The market approach was also considered in evaluating the potential for impairment by calculating fair value based on multiples of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) of comparable, publicly traded companies. The Company also observed implied EBITDA multiples from relatively recent merger and acquisition activity in the industry, which was used to test the reasonableness of the results.
The second step of the process involves the calculation of an implied fair value of goodwill for each reporting unit for which step one indicated impairment. The implied fair value of goodwill is determined by measuring the excess of the estimated fair value of the reporting unit over the estimated fair values of the individual assets, liabilities and identifiable intangibles as if the reporting unit was being acquired in a business combination. If the implied fair value of goodwill exceeds the carrying value of goodwill assigned to the reporting unit, there is no impairment. If the carrying value of goodwill assigned to a reporting unit exceeds the implied fair value of the goodwill, an impairment charge is recorded for the excess. An impairment loss cannot exceed the carrying value of goodwill assigned to a reporting unit and the subsequent reversal of goodwill impairment losses is not permitted.
The determination of fair value requires the Company to make significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions primarily include, but are not limited to, revenue growth and operating earnings projections, discount rates, terminal growth rates, and required capital expenditure projections. In the event the Company determines that goodwill is impaired in the future the Company would need to recognize a non-cash impairment charge.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. The Company’s policy is to assess the realizability of its long-lived assets, including intangible assets, and to evaluate such assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets (or group of assets) may not be recoverable. Impairment is determined to exist if the estimated future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value. Future cash flow projections include assumptions for future sales levels, the impact of cost reduction programs, and the level of working capital needed to support each business. The amount of any impairment then recognized would be calculated as the difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying value of the asset.
Warranty Expense. The Company establishes reserves for future warranty expense at the point when revenue is recognized by the Company and is based on a percentage of revenues. The provision for estimated warranty claims, which is included in cost of sales, is based on historical claims experience.
Retirement Benefit Costs and Termination Benefits. Payments to defined contribution retirement benefit plans are recognized as an expense when employees have rendered service entitling them to the contributions. Employees in Italy are entitled to Trattamento di Fine Rapporto (“TFR”), commonly referred to as an employee leaving indemnity, which represents deferred compensation for employees in the private sector. Under Italian law, an entity is obligated to accrue for TFR on an individual employee basis payable to each individual upon termination of employment (including both voluntary and involuntary dismissal).
Litigation Claims. In determining whether liabilities should be recorded for pending litigation claims, the Company must assess the allegations and the likelihood that it will successfully defend itself. When the Company believes it is probable that it will not prevail in a particular matter, it will then make an estimate of the amount of liability based, in part, on the advice of legal counsel.
Income Taxes.
The Company accounts for income taxes under the provisions of ASC 740 “Income Taxes,” which requires recognition of income taxes based on amounts payable with respect to the current year and the effects of deferred taxes for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the Company’s financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial accounting and tax basis of assets and liabilities, as well as for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more-likely-than-not a tax benefit will not be realized. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income prior to the expiration of any net operating loss carryforwards.
The Jobs Act also establishes global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) provisions that impose a tax on foreign income in excess of a deemed return on tangible assets of foreign corporations. The Company has elected to recognize GILTI as a period cost as incurred, therefore there are no deferred taxes recognized for basis differences that are expected to impact the amount of the GILTI inclusion upon reversal.
ASC 740 also prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return, as well as guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition. The Company records interest and penalties related to income tax matters in the provision for income taxes.
Recently Issued Pronouncements - Not Yet Adopted
In March 2020, the FASB issued guidance under ASC 848, Reference Rate Reform. This guidance provides optional expedients and exceptions to account for debt, leases, contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions that reference LIBOR or another reference rate if certain criteria are met. The guidance is effective immediately and may be applied prospectively to contract modifications made and hedging relationships entered into or evaluated on or before December 31, 2022. We are currently evaluating the potential effects of the adoption of this guidance on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Income Taxes Topic 740-Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes” (“ASU 2019-12”), which intended to simplify various aspects related to accounting for income taxes. ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application of Topic 740. The effective date will be the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 and early adoption is permitted. Adoption of Topic 740 is not expected to have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments,” (“ASU 2016-13”). ASU 2016-13 sets forth a “current expected credit loss” model which requires the Company to measure all expected credit losses for financial instruments held at the reporting date based on historical experience, current conditions and reasonable supportable forecasts. The guidance in this standard replaces the existing incurred loss model and is applicable to the measurement of credit losses on financial assets measured at amortized cost and applies to some off-balance sheet credit exposures. Subsequently, the FASB issued the following standards related to ASU 2016-13: ASU 2018-19, “Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses,” ASU 2019-05, “Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326) Targeted Transition Relief,” and ASU 2019-11, “Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses,” which provided additional guidance and clarity to ASU 2016-13 (collectively, the “Credit Loss Standard”). In April 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-04, “Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses, Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, and Topic 825, Financial Instruments” (“ASU 2019-04”). ASU 2019-04 provides narrow scope amendments for Topics 326, 815 and 825. The effective date is the first quarter of fiscal year 2020 and early adoption is permitted. The Company adopted the new credit loss standard using a modified retrospective approach effective January 1, 2020 and determined it did not have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Except as noted above, the guidance issued by the FASB is not expected to have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.