ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes that are included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this report.
A discussion and analysis regarding our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows for the year ended September 30, 2021 compared to the year ended September 30, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows for the year ended September 30, 2020 compared to the year ended September 30, 2019 is included in Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on November 23, 2020.
Overview
We are a leading provider of cloud revenue management solutions for life sciences and high tech companies. Our software and business services help companies drive mission critical business processes such as pricing, quoting, contracting, regulatory compliance, rebates and incentives. With deep industry expertise, Model N supports the complex business needs of the world’s leading brands in life sciences and high tech including Johnson & Johnson, AstraZeneca, Stryker, Seagate Technology, Broadcom, and Microchip Technology.
Model N Revenue Cloud transforms the revenue life cycle into a strategic, end-to-end process aligned across the enterprise. Deployments may vary from specific divisions or territories to enterprise-wide implementations. Customers may purchase and deploy a single cloud product or a full suite.
We derive revenues primarily from the sale of subscriptions to our cloud-based solutions, as well as subscriptions for managed support services including business services, and maintenance and support related to on-premise solutions. We price our solutions based on a number of factors, including revenues under management and number of users. Subscription revenues are recognized ratably over the coverage period. We also derive revenues from selling professional services related to past sales of perpetual licenses and implementation and professional services associated with our cloud-based solutions and related to the solutions provided by our recent acquisition. The actual timing of revenue recognition may vary based on our customers’ implementation requirements and the availability of our services personnel.
We market and sell our solutions to customers in the life sciences and high tech industries. Historically, our growth was driven by the sale of on-premise solutions. Over the past few years, we have primarily been entering into cloud-based subscription arrangements with our new and existing customers and we anticipate that subscription arrangements will be the majority of new contractual arrangements going forward.
On December 31, 2020, we acquired certain assets, properties and rights and certain liabilities and obligations from Deloitte & Touche LLP’s pricing and contracting solutions business. The acquired business is complementary to our existing solutions and its offerings are configured to meet our life sciences customers’ needs by providing a complete end-to-end solution for reducing revenue loss and protecting profitability all the while meeting compliance requirements. The total purchase consideration was $57.8 million.
Our most significant customers in any given period generally vary from period to period due to the timing in the delivery of our professional services and related revenue recognition. During the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, and 2020, no customer represented more than 10% of our total revenues or more than 10% of our subscription revenues. For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, and 2020, approximately 7% and 9% of our total revenues were derived from customers located outside the United States respectively.
For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, and 2020, our total revenues were $193.4 million and $161.1 million respectively, representing a year-over-year increase of 20%. Revenue increased in fiscal year 2021 primarily due to the addition of subscription and professional services revenues from business services and increased subscription and professional services revenues from new and existing customers.
COVID-19
The World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a pandemic and the U.S. federal government declared it a national emergency in March 2020. Our financial results for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, and 2020 have not been materially impacted by COVID-19. The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our future operational and financial performance, revenues, and liquidity will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, including due to new variants, as well as the impact on our customers, employees, and partners, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. We are conducting business with substantial modifications to employee travel, employee
work locations, and virtualization or cancellation of certain sales and marketing events, among other modifications. Many of our customers have implemented similar measures, which may limit our ability to sell or provide professional services to them. Customers may also delay or cancel purchasing decisions or projects in light of uncertainties to their businesses arising from the COVID-19 pandemic. As the majority of our revenue is subscription-based, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations until future periods.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to the measures of financial performance presented in our Consolidated Financial Statements, we use adjusted EBITDA to establish budgets and operational goals and to evaluate and manage our business internally. We believe adjusted EBITDA provides investors with consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of our operating results and our competitors’ operating results. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measure” below.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
Subscription
Subscription revenues primarily include contractual arrangements with customers accessing our cloud-based solutions. These arrangements, on average, are for committed three-year terms. Included in subscription revenues are revenues associated with managed support services and maintenance and support which generally renew on a one year or three year basis. Managed support services revenue includes supporting, managing and administering our software solutions and providing additional end user support including the support provided by business services. Maintenance and support revenues include post-contract customer support and the right to unspecified software updates and enhancements on a when and if available basis from customers using on-premise solutions. Term-based licenses for current products with the right to use unspecified future versions of the software and maintenance and support during the coverage period are also included in subscription revenues. Subscription revenue is generally recognized ratably over the contractual term of the arrangement beginning on the date our service is made available to the customer. The software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) model is the primary way we sell to our customers in our vertical markets.
Professional Services
Professional services revenues primarily include fees generated from implementation, cloud configuration, on-site support, and other consulting services. Also included in professional services revenues are revenues related to training and customer-reimbursed expenses, as well as services related to software licenses for our on-premise solutions and solutions provided by business services. Professional services revenues are generally recognized as the services are rendered for time and materials contracts or recognized using a proportional performance method as hours are incurred relative to total estimated hours for the engagement for fixed price contracts. The majority of our professional services contracts are on a time and materials basis. The revenue from training and customer-reimbursed expenses is recognized as we deliver these services.
Cost of Revenues
Subscription
Cost of subscription revenues includes costs related to our cloud-based solutions, managed support services and support provided by business services, and maintenance and support for our on-premise solutions. Cost of subscription revenues primarily consists of personnel-related costs including salary, bonus, and stock-based compensation as well as costs for royalties, facilities expense, amortization, depreciation, third-party contractors and cloud infrastructure costs.
Professional Services
Cost of professional services revenues includes costs related to the set-up of our cloud-based solutions, services for on-premise and business services solutions, training and customer-reimbursed expenses. Cost of professional services revenues primarily consists of personnel-related costs including salary, bonus, and stock-based compensation as well as costs for third-party contractors and other expenses. Cost of professional services revenues may vary from period to period depending on a number of factors, including the amount of implementation services required to deploy our solutions and the level of involvement of third-party contractors providing implementation services.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs including salary, bonus, stock-based compensation, and costs related to third-party contractors. Our software development costs are generally expensed as incurred. We capitalize certain development costs incurred in connection with the cloud-based software platform for internal use.
Sales and Marketing
Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs including salary, bonus, commissions, stock-based compensation, as well as amortization of intangibles, travel-related expenses, and marketing programs.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs including salary, bonus, and stock-based compensation, as well as audit and legal fees, costs related to third-party contractors, facilities expenses, costs associated with corporate transactions, and travel-related expenses.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our consolidated results of operations for fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, and 2020 and as a percentage of our total revenues for those periods. The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of financial results to be achieved in future periods.
Comparison of the Fiscal Years Ended September 30, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Subscription
Subscription revenues increased by $26.3 million, or 23%, to $142.4 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, from $116.2 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. As a percentage of total revenues, subscription revenues increased from 72% to 74%. The increase in our subscription revenues was due primarily to the contribution from business services, a large transaction with one customer during the first fiscal quarter of 2021, and an increased number of customer contracts. We intend to continue to focus on growing our recurring revenue from SaaS subscriptions in future periods.
Professional Services
Professional services revenue increased by $6.1 million, or 14%, to $51.0 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, from $44.9 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase in our professional services revenues was caused by the increase in delivery activities experienced during fiscal year 2021 and the contribution from business services. As a percentage of total revenues, professional services revenue decreased from 28% to 26%. The decrease in our professional services revenue as a percentage of total revenue is primarily driven by the change in business model as we continue to move towards cloud-based solutions.
Cost of Revenues
Subscription
Cost of subscription revenues increased by $15.5 million, or 45%, to $49.9 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, from $34.5 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. As a percentage of subscription revenues, cost of subscription revenues increased from 30% in fiscal year 2020 to 35% in fiscal year 2021 primarily due to higher costs from business services. The cost of subscription revenue also included $1.3 million of amortization expense related to the recently acquired intangible assets.
Professional Services
Cost of professional services revenues increased by $5.7 million, or 18%, to $36.7 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, from $31.0 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. As a percentage of professional services revenue, cost of professional services revenues increased from 69% to 72% primarily due to higher costs from business services.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $10.3 million, or 30%, to $44.7 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, from $34.4 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the impact of business services mainly from employee-related costs, outside services, and equipment expense.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $4.3 million, or 11%, to $43.2 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, from $39.0 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $3.9 million increase in employee-related costs, a $1.2 million increase in intangible amortization expense related to the acquisition, and a $0.1 million increase in marketing programs partially offset by a $0.9 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $4.5 million, or 16%, to $33.3 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, from $28.8 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by $2.5 million of acquisition-related expenses, a $1.2 million increase in employee-related costs, a $1.0 million increase in facilities expense, a $0.5 million increase in equipment expense, a $0.3 million increase in depreciation expense, and a $0.3 million increase in office expenses partially offset by a $1.1 million decrease in outside services and a $0.2 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses.
Interest and Other (Income) Expense, Net
Interest expense, net, increased by $8.0 million to $14.3 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, from $6.3 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the interest expense related to the convertible senior notes we issued in May 2020. See “Note 10. Convertible Senior Notes” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
The change in other (income) expense, net was primarily due to currency fluctuations.
Provision for Income Taxes
The income tax provision for fiscal year 2021 was primarily related to foreign taxes on our profitable foreign operations, foreign withholding taxes on dividends, and deferred taxes on goodwill resulting from the acquisition. The income tax provision for fiscal year 2020 was primarily related to foreign taxes on our profitable foreign operations and foreign withholding taxes on dividends partially offset by a discrete tax benefit for a true-up in federal income tax payable.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents. As of September 30, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $165.5 million.
Based on our future expectations and historical usage, we believe our current cash and cash equivalents are sufficient to meet our operating needs including principal payments related to our debt for at least the next twelve months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth, the expansion of our sales and marketing activities, the timing and extent of spending to support research and development efforts, expansion of our business and capital expenditures. To the extent that existing cash and cash equivalents and cash from operations are insufficient to fund our future activities, we may elect to raise additional capital through the sale of additional equity or debt securities, obtain a credit facility or sell certain assets. If additional funds are raised through the issuance of debt securities, these securities could have rights, preferences and privileges senior to holders of common stock and terms of any debt could impose restrictions on our operations.
The sale of additional equity or additional convertible debt securities could result in more dilution to our stockholders and additional financing may not be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us. We may also seek to invest in, or acquire complementary businesses or technologies, any of which could also require us to seek additional equity or debt financing. Additional funds may not be available on terms favorable to us or at all.
In May 2020, we issued $172.5 million aggregate principal amount of 2.625% convertible senior notes (the “Notes”). The Notes mature on June 1, 2025 unless repurchased, redeemed or converted in accordance with their terms prior to such date. The net proceeds from the issuance of the Notes was $166.4 million, net of initial purchasers’ discounts. We used $40.0 million of the net proceeds to repay in full the debt outstanding under, and terminated the credit agreement dated May 4, 2018, as amended, by and among us, Wells Fargo, as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto. Refer to Note 10 in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was primarily the result of non-cash adjustments of $51.0 million exceeding our net loss of $29.7 million partially offset by net cash outflows of $1.7 million from changes in operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash expenses consisting primarily of stock-based compensation of $30.0 million, amortization of debt discount and issuance costs of $9.9 million, depreciation and amortization of $8.0 million, and amortization of capitalized contract acquisition costs of $3.1 million. The net change in operating assets and liabilities primarily reflects an outflow from the changes in prepaid expenses and other assets of $4.2 million, accounts receivable of $3.5 million due to timing of billing and cash collections, and other current and long-term liabilities of $2.0 million, partially offset by an inflow from the changes in deferred revenue of $4.5 million caused by the timing of amounts invoiced and revenue recognized, accrued employee compensation of $1.9 million, and accounts payable of $1.7 million due to timing of vendor invoices and payments.
Net cash provided by operating activities during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, was primarily the result of non-cash adjustments of $34.6 million exceeding our net loss of $13.7 million partially offset by net cash outflows of $6.5 million from changes in operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash expenses consisting primarily of stock-based compensation of $22.5 million, depreciation and amortization of $5.5 million, amortization of debt discount and issuance costs of $3.4 million, and amortization of capitalized contract acquisition costs of $2.5 million. The net change in operating assets and liabilities primarily reflects an outflow from the changes in accounts receivable of $8.8 million due to timing of billing and cash collections, prepaid expenses and other assets of $3.1 million, and other current and long-term liabilities of $2.4 million, partially offset by an inflow from the changes in deferred revenue of $6.4 million caused by the timing of amounts invoiced and revenue recognized, accrued employee compensation of $0.9 million, and accounts payable of $0.5 million due to timing of vendor invoices and payments.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, consisted of $57.8 million used in connection with the acquisition and $1.1 million for purchases of property and equipment. See Note 6 in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information of the acquisition.
Net cash used in investing activities for fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, was primarily due to purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, resulted from $4.3 million proceeds from purchases made under our employee stock purchase plan and the exercise of stock options and $0.3 million increase in funds held for customers.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, consisted of $166.4 million net proceeds from the issuance of our convertible senior notes and $4.2 million proceeds from purchases made under our employee stock purchase plan and the exercises of stock options, partially offset by the $44.8 million repayment of our term loan with Wells Fargo.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs, and expenses, as well as related disclosures. These estimates and assumptions are based on our management’s best estimates and judgment. Our management regularly evaluates these estimates and assumptions using historical experience and other factors; however, actual results could differ significantly from these estimates.
Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with revenue recognition, convertible senior notes, share-based compensation, business combinations, and income taxes have the greatest potential impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates.
Revenue recognition under ASC Topic 606
We account for revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. We apply the five step framework to recognize revenue as described in our revenue recognition policy included in Note 2 in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We derive revenues from the sale of subscriptions to our cloud-based solutions, subscriptions for managed support services and maintenance and support, term based licenses, and implementation and other professional services.
We use estimates and assumptions requiring significant judgment under our revenue policy in accordance with ASC Topic 606. If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on its standalone selling price (“SSP”) in relation to the total fair value of all performance obligations in the arrangement. SSP is estimated for each distinct performance obligation. Some of our performance obligations, such as support and training services, have observable inputs that are used to determine the SSP of those distinct performance obligations. Where SSP is not directly observable, we determine SSP using information that includes market conditions and other observable inputs such as customer type and geography. We evaluate the SSP for our performance obligations on a quarterly basis.
The majority of our contracts contain multiple performance obligations, such as when cloud-based solutions are sold with implementation services or training services. As customers enter into a subscription agreement for cloud-based solutions to migrate from an on-premise application, an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation is required. Additionally, contract modifications for services and products that are distinct but are not priced commensurate with their SSP or are not distinct from performance obligations under the existing contract may affect the initial transaction price or the allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract.
Convertible Senior Notes
In May 2020, we issued $172.5 million aggregate principal amount of 2.625% convertible senior notes. We separate our convertible senior notes (the “Notes”) into liability and equity components. The carrying amount of the liability component is calculated by measuring the fair value of a similar debt instrument that does not have an associated convertible feature. We estimated the discount rate used in measuring the fair value of a similar debt instrument that does not have an associated convertible feature. Because the estimate is uncertain, the actual result may differ from the estimate made. The carrying amount of the equity component representing the conversion option is determined by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the principal amount of the Notes. The excess of the principal amount of the Notes over the carrying amount of the liability component (“debt discount”) is amortized to interest expense at an effective interest rate over the contractual terms of the Notes. The equity component is recorded in additional paid-in capital and is not remeasured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification. We allocate the issuance costs to the liability and equity components of the Notes based on the proportion of the proceeds allocated to the debt and equity components. Issuance costs attributable to the liability component are amortized to interest expense using the effective interest method over the contractual terms of the Notes. Issuance costs attributable to the equity component are netted with the equity component in stockholders’ equity.
Stock-based compensation
We recognize compensation expense for restricted stock units, employee stock purchase plan (“ESPP”), and performance based restricted stock units. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton valuation model to estimate the fair value of ESPP shares. Black-Scholes-Merton valuation model requires the input of subjective assumptions including expected stock price volatility over the expected term. The fair value of restricted stock units and performance based restricted stock units with vesting conditions based on pre-established performance goals of the Company is determined based on the intrinsic value of the award on the grant date. For performance share unit grants with market condition performance criteria, we use a Monte Carlo simulation model to determine their fair value on the grant date. The fair value of these grants with a market condition is recognized using the graded-vesting attribution method over the requisite service period. The Monte-Carlo simulation model takes into account the same input assumptions as the Black-Scholes-Merton model; however, it also further incorporates into the fair value determination the possibility that the performance criteria may not be satisfied. The estimation of the possibility that the performance criteria may not be satisfied is inherently uncertain.
Changes in the estimates used to determine the fair value of share-based equity compensation instruments could result in changes to our stock-based compensation expense. We have not made any material changes to our assumptions and estimates related to our stock-based compensation during the periods presented.
Business Combinations
We use all available information to estimate fair values. We typically engage outside appraisal firms to assist in the fair value determination of identifiable assets such as customer contracts and any other significant assets or liabilities and contingent consideration. We adjust the preliminary purchase price allocation, as necessary, up to one year after the acquisition closing date if we obtain more information regarding asset valuation and liabilities assumed.
Our purchase price allocation methodology contains uncertainties because it requires assumptions and management’s judgment to estimate the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. Management estimates the fair value of assets and liabilities based upon quoted market prices, the carrying value of the acquired assets and widely accepted valuation techniques, including discounted cash flows and market multiple analyses. Our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. Unanticipated events or circumstances may occur which could affect the accuracy of our fair value estimates, including assumptions regarding industry economic factors and business strategies.
On December 31, 2020, we acquired certain assets, properties and rights and certain liabilities and obligations from Deloitte & Touche LLP’s pricing and contracting solutions business. We used significant estimates and assumptions in estimating the fair value of the intangible assets acquired such as customer attrition rate, obsolescence rate, and discount rate, We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the estimates or assumptions we used for the purchase price allocations and the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with the FASB ASC No. 740-Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASC 740). We make certain estimates and judgments in determining income tax expense for financial statement purposes. These estimates and judgments occur in the calculation of tax credits, tax benefits and deductions and in the calculation of certain tax assets and liabilities, which arise from differences in the timing of recognition of revenue and expense for tax and financial statement purposes. Significant changes to these estimates may result in an increase or decrease to our tax provision in the subsequent period when such a change in estimate occurs.
We regularly assess the likelihood that our deferred income tax assets will be realized from future taxable income based on the realization criteria set forth in ASC 740. To the extent that we believe any amounts are not more likely than not to be realized, we record a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred income tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence, including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of tax planning strategies. In the event we determine that all or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Similarly, if we subsequently realize deferred income tax assets that were previously determined to be unrealizable, the respective valuation allowance would be reversed, resulting in an adjustment to earnings in the period such determination is made.
We apply judgment in determining our uncertain tax positions. We account for uncertainty in income taxes using a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. We classify the liability for unrecognized tax
benefits as current to the extent that our anticipated payment or receipt of cash is within one year. Interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions are recognized in the provision for income taxes.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Estimates” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements including the respective expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a financial measure that is not calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). We define adjusted EBITDA as net loss before items discussed below, including: stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization, acquisition related expense, interest expense, net, other expenses (income), net, and provision for (benefit from) income taxes. We believe adjusted EBITDA provides investors with consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of our operating results and our competitors’ operating results. We also use this measure internally to establish budgets and operational goals to manage our business and evaluate our performance.
We understand that, although adjusted EBITDA is frequently used by investors and securities analysts in their evaluations of companies, adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and it should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results of operations as reported under U.S. GAAP. These limitations include:
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect stock-based compensation expense;
•depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, and the assets being depreciated or amortized will often have to be replaced in the future; adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for these replacements;
•adjusted EBITDA does not include acquisition-related expense;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash requirements for income taxes and the cash impact of interest expense and other income and expense; and
•other companies in our industry may calculate adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.