Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected in any forward-looking statements, as discussed in “Disclosure Regarding Forward-Looking Statements”. These risks and uncertainties include but are not limited to those set forth in Item 1A. “Risk Factors”.
Overview of Our Business
Please refer to Item 1. “Business” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of our services and corporate strategy.
ModivCare Inc. is a technology-enabled, healthcare services company, which provides a suite of integrated supportive care solutions for public and private payors and their patients. Its value-based solutions address the SDoH, enable greater access to care, reduce costs, and improve outcomes. ModivCare is a leading provider of NEMT, personal and home care, and nutritional meal delivery. Its core competencies in NEMT include risk underwriting, contact center management, network credentialing, claims management and non-emergency medical transport management. The Company also partners with communities throughout the country, providing food-insecure individuals delivery of nutritional meals. Additionally, its personal and home care services include placements of non-medical personal care assistants, home health aides and skilled nurses primarily to Medicaid patient populations in need of care monitoring and assistance performing daily living activities in the home setting, including senior citizens and disabled adults.
ModivCare’s solutions help health plans manage risks, close care gaps, reduce costs, and connect members to care. With the combination of its historical NEMT business with its in-home personal care business that was previously operated by Simplura Health Group, as described further below, ModivCare has united two complementary healthcare companies that serve similar, highly vulnerable patient populations. Collectively, ModivCare is well positioned to remove the barriers of health inequities and address the SDoH.
ModivCare also holds a 43.6% minority interest in CCHN Group Holdings, Inc. and its subsidiaries, which operates under the Matrix Medical Network brand and which we refer to as “Matrix”. Matrix maintains a national network of community-based clinicians who deliver in-home and on-site services, and a fleet of mobile health clinics that provide community-based care with advanced diagnostic capabilities and enhanced care options. Matrix’s Clinical Care provides risk adjustment solutions that improve health outcomes for individuals and financial performance for health plans. Matrix’s Clinical Solutions provides employee health and wellness services focused on improving employee health with worksite certification solutions that reinforce business resilience and safe return-to-work outcomes. It’s Clinical Solutions also provides clinical trial services which support the delivery of safe and effective clinical trial operations by going where the patients are and ensuring all eligible volunteers, including those with barriers to healthcare access.
Business Outlook and Trends
Our performance is affected by a number of trends that drive the demand for our services. In particular, the markets in which we operate are exposed to various trends, such as healthcare industry and demographic dynamics. Over the long term, we believe there are numerous factors that could affect growth within the industries in which we operate, including:
•an aging population, which is expected to increase demand for healthcare services and transportation and, accordingly, in-home personal care services;
•a movement towards value-based versus fee-for-service and cost plus, or FFS, care and budget pressure on governments, both of which may increase the use of private corporations to provide necessary and innovative services;
•increasing demand for in-home care provision, driven by cost pressures on traditional reimbursement models and technological advances enabling remote engagement, including telehealth and similar internet-based health related services;
•technological advancements, which may be utilized by us to improve services and lower costs, but may also be utilized by others, which may increase industry competitiveness;
•MCO, Medicaid and Medicare plans increasingly are covering NEMT services for a variety of reasons, including increased access to care, improved patient compliance with treatment plans, social trends, and to promote SDoH, and this trend may be accelerated or reinforced by the recent signing into law of The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 ("H.R.133"), a component of which mandates that state Medicaid programs ensure that Medicaid beneficiaries have necessary transportation to and from health care providers.
Since March 2020 and primarily as a result of the COVID pandemic, our Personal Care Segment business has experienced and is expected to continue to experience a material reduction in volume of service hours and visits. Volume has been reduced as patients put services on hold due to infection concerns, and/or because they had the alternative of receiving care from family members and others working remotely or furloughed from their jobs. Cases have also been lost due to patient deaths, and new case referrals slowed as referral sources faced disruption from the various restrictions and “stay at home” orders. Our personal care service volumes are not expected to recover to pre-pandemic levels until the vaccines are more universally applied in the markets where we provide our services. These depressed volumes will continue to result in lower than expected revenue, at least in the near term, in the Personal Care Segment following the Simplura acquisition.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparation of the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes requires that we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements as well as revenue and expenses during the periods reported. We base our estimates on historical experience, where applicable, and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
There are certain critical estimates that require significant judgment in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if:
•it requires us to make an assumption because information was not available at the time or it included matters that were highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made; and
•changes in the estimate or different estimates that could have been selected may have had a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
For more information on each of these significant accounting policies, see Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements, to our consolidated financial statements. We discuss information about the nature and rationale for our critical accounting estimates below.
Accrued Transportation Costs
We generally pay our transportation providers for completed trips based upon documentation submitted after services have been provided. We accrue transportation costs yet to be adjudicated based on requests for services we have received and the amount we expect to be billed by our transportation providers. The transportation cost accrual requires significant judgment, as it is based upon contractual rates and mileage estimates, as well as an estimated rate for unknown cancellations, as members may have requested transportation but not notified us of cancellation. Based upon historical experience and contractual terms, we estimate the amount of transportation cost incurred for invoices which have not yet been submitted. Actual cost could be greater or less than the amounts estimated due to member or transportation provider behavior that differ from historical trends.
Business Combinations
We assign the value of the consideration transferred to acquire a business to the tangible assets and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed on the basis of their fair values at the date of acquisition. Any excess purchase price paid over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired is allocated to goodwill. When determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, management makes significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Critical estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include but are not limited to future expected cash flows from payor relationships, developed technology and trade names, and discount rates. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. As a result, actual results may differ significantly from estimates.
Recoverability of Goodwill and Definite-Lived Intangible Assets
Goodwill. In accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, we review goodwill for impairment annually, or more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that an asset may be impaired. Such circumstances could include, but are not limited to: (1) the loss or modification of significant contracts, (2) a significant adverse change in legal factors or in business climate, (3) unanticipated competition, (4) an adverse action or assessment by a regulator, or (5) a significant decline in our stock price. We perform our annual goodwill impairment test as of December 31.
First, we perform qualitative assessments for each reporting unit to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If the qualitative assessment suggests that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value amount, we then perform a quantitative assessment and compare the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value.
Long-Lived Assets Including Intangibles. In accordance with ASC 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment, we review the carrying value of long-lived assets or groups of assets to be used in operations whenever events or changes in circumstances
indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may be impaired. Factors that may necessitate an impairment assessment include, but are not limited to, significant adverse changes in the extent or manner in which an asset or group of assets is used, significant adverse changes in legal factors or the business climate that could affect the value of an asset or group of assets or significant declines in the observable market value of an asset or group of assets. The presence or occurrence of those events indicates that an asset or group of assets may be impaired. In those cases, we assess the recoverability of an asset or group of assets by determining whether the carrying value of the asset or group of assets exceeds the sum of the projected undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the assets over the remaining economic life of the asset or the primary asset in the group of assets. If such testing indicates the carrying value of the asset or group of assets is not recoverable, we estimate the fair value of the asset or group of assets using appropriate valuation methodologies, which would typically include an estimate of discounted cash flows. If the fair value of those assets or groups of assets is less than carrying value, we record an impairment loss equal to the excess of the carrying value over the estimated fair value.
The use of different estimates or assumptions in determining the fair value of our goodwill and intangible assets may result in different values for those assets, which could result in an impairment or, in the period in which an impairment is recognized, could result in a materially different impairment charge.
Income Taxes
We record income taxes under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect our estimation of the future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for book and tax purposes. We determine deferred income taxes based on the differences in accounting methods and timing between financial statement and income tax reporting. Accordingly, we determine the deferred tax asset or liability for each temporary difference based on the enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when we realize the underlying items of income and expense. We consider many factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of our deferred tax assets, including our recent earnings experience by jurisdiction, expectations of future taxable income, and the carryforward periods available to us for tax reporting purposes, as well as other relevant factors. We may establish a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount we believe is more likely than not to be realized. Due to inherent complexities arising from the nature of our businesses, future changes in income tax law, tax sharing agreements or variances between our actual and anticipated operating results, we make certain judgments and estimates. Therefore, actual income taxes could materially vary from these estimates.
We record liabilities to address uncertain tax positions we have taken in previously filed tax returns or that we expect to take in our current tax returns. The determination for required liabilities is based upon an analysis of each individual tax position, taking into consideration whether it is more likely than not that our tax position, based on technical merits, will be sustained upon examination. For those positions for which we conclude it is more likely than not the position will be sustained, we recognize the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the taxing authority. The difference between the amount recognized and the total tax position is recorded as a liability. The ultimate resolution of these tax positions may be greater or less than the liabilities recorded.
Reinsurance and Self-Insurance Liabilities
We historically reinsured a substantial portion of our automobile, general and professional liability and workers’ compensation costs under reinsurance programs through our wholly-owned subsidiary, Social Services Providers Captive Insurance Company (“SPCIC”), a licensed captive insurance company domiciled in the State of Arizona. In conjunction with the policy renewals on May 16, 2017, SPCIC did not renew the expiring policies. However, SPCIC continues to resolve claims under the historical policy years. In addition, under the current policies, we retain liability up to the policy deductibles.
We also maintain self-funded health insurance programs for employees with a stop-loss umbrella policy with a third-party insurer to limit the maximum potential liability for individual claims and for a maximum potential claim liability based on member enrollment. Additionally, we recently formed our 90% owned, self-funded (on a pro rata basis with our industry counterpart), insurance captive to provide automobile insurance to transportation providers that elect to participate in the program, with respect to which we have contracted for reinsurance coverage with a third-party insurer to limit the maximum potential liability for individual claims and for a maximum potential claim liability associated with potential covered transportation provider claims.
We utilize independent actuarial reports to determine the expected losses and in order to determine the appropriate reserve associated with our reinsurance and self-insurance liabilities. We regularly analyze our reserves for incurred but not reported claims, and for reported but not paid claims related to our reinsurance and self-funded insurance programs. We believe our reserves are adequate. However, significant judgment is involved in assessing these reserves such as evaluating historical paid claims, average lag times between the claims’ incurred date, reported dates and paid dates, and the frequency and severity
of claims. There may be differences between actual settlement amounts and recorded reserves and any resulting adjustments are recorded once a probable amount is known.
Results of Operations
The following results of operations include the accounts of ModivCare and our subsidiaries for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. The Simplura results have been included since the November 18, 2020 acquisition date.
Service Revenue, net
Service Revenue, net for our NEMT Segment includes contracts predominately with state Medicaid agencies and MCOs for the coordination of their members’ non-emergency transportation needs. Most contracts are capitated, which means we are paid on a per-member, per-month basis for each eligible member. For most contracts, we arrange for transportation of members through our network of independent transportation providers, whereby we negotiate rates and remit payment to the transportation providers. However, for certain contracts, we assume no risk for the transportation network, credentialing and/or payments to these providers. For these contracts, we only provide administrative management services to support the customers’ efforts to serve their clients.
Certain other contracts are structured as fee-for-service ("FFS") in which we bill and collect a specified amount for each service that we provide. FFS revenue is recognized in the period in which the services are rendered and is reduced by the estimated impact of contractual allowances and policy discounts in the case of third-party payors.
Service Revenue, net for our Personal Care Segment includes hours incurred by our in-home caregivers that are billed to our customers. Our customers consist of third-party payors including, but not limited to, MCOs, hospitals, Medicaid agencies and programs and other home health care providers who subcontract the services of our caregivers.
Classification of Operating Expenses
“Service expense” for our NEMT Segment includes purchased transportation, operational payroll and other operational related costs. Purchased transportation includes the amounts we pay to third-party service providers and is typically dependent upon service volume. Operational payroll predominately includes our contact center operations, customer advocacy and transportation network team. Other operating expenses primarily include operational overhead costs, and operating facilities and related charges. Service expense for our Personal Care Segment includes payroll and other operational related costs for our caregivers to provide in-home care.
“General and administrative expense” primarily includes the expenses of our administrative functions, including executive, IT, finance and accounting, human resources and legal departments.
"Depreciation and amortization expense" includes depreciation of our fixed assets and amortization expense related primarily to our intangible assets.
Discontinued operations. During the periods presented, we completed the following disposition transactions, which resulted in the presentation of the related operations as Discontinued Operations.
•On November 1, 2015, we completed the sale of our former Human Services segment and since the completion of the sale, we have recorded additional expenses related to legal proceedings for an indemnified legal matter.
•On December 21, 2018, we completed the sale of substantially all of the operating subsidiaries of our former WD Services segment to APM and APM UK Holdings Limited, an affiliate of APM, except for the segment’s employment services operations in Saudi Arabia. Our contractual counterparties in Saudi Arabia, including an entity owned by the Saudi Arabian government, assumed these operations beginning January 1, 2019. Wind down activities of our Saudi Arabian entity are included in our discontinued operations. Additionally, on June 11, 2018, we entered into a Share Purchase Agreement to sell Ingeus France for a de minimis amount. The sale was effective on July 17, 2018.
See Note 24, Discontinued Operations, in our accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
Segment reporting. Our segments reflect the manner in which our operations are organized and reviewed by management.
We operate in three reportable business segments: NEMT, Personal Care and the Matrix Investment. Prior to November 17, 2020, our primary operating segment was NEMT, which provides non-emergency medical transportation services. On November 18, 2020, we acquired Simplura Health Group, resulting in the creation of our Personal Care segment, which operates in the non-medical home care service industry. Our investment in Matrix is also a reportable segment referred to as the “Matrix Investment”. Segment results are based on how our chief operating decision maker manages our business, makes operating decisions and evaluates operating performance. The operating results of our NEMT and Personal Care Segments include revenue and expenses incurred by the segment, as well as our activities related to executive, accounting, finance, internal audit, tax, legal and certain strategic and corporate development functions for each segment. Results prior to January 1, 2019 were reclassified to conform with our new segment presentation as a result of our Organizational Consolidation. See Note 4, Segments, in our accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information on our change in segments.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth results of operations and the percentage of consolidated total revenues represented by items in our consolidated statements of operations for 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Service revenue, net. Service revenue, net for 2020 decreased $141.3 million, or 9.4%, compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the impact on our NEMT Segment of the reduced transportation volumes we experienced throughout the year due to the COVID-19 pandemic. While a majority of our contacts are capitated and we receive monthly payments on a per member basis, we have certain contracts that allow for profit within a certain corridor and once we reach the maximum profit level we discontinue recognizing revenue and instead build a cash liability to return back to the customer upon reconciliation at a later date. Other contracts that are structured as fee-for-service also experienced negative impacts to revenue due to lower volumes. Additionally, our revenue was negatively impacted by a reduction of $40.6 million for certain contracts for which we no longer provide services. These decreases were partially offset by $54.0 million of incremental revenue in our Personal Care Segment due to the acquisition of Simplura in November 2020 as well as $77.1 million of incremental revenue resulting from the NMT acquisition in May 2020.
Service expense. Service expense components are shown below (in thousands):
Service expense for 2020 decreased $322.4 million, or 23.0%, compared to 2019 due primarily to a reduction of third-party transportation costs, defined as "Purchased Services," resulting from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic discussed above. This decrease was partially offset by incremental payroll and related and other operating costs incurred in our Personal Care Segment due to the acquisition of Simplura in November 2020.
General and administrative expense. General and administrative expense for 2020 increased $73.3 million, or 109.0%, compared to 2019. The increase was driven by an investment in employees and technology in our NEMT Segment as we continue to execute on our Six-Pillar strategy. Additionally, we saw an increase of $16.5 million of expense related to cash -settled equity awards, $10.5 million of legal, consulting and transaction fees related to the acquisitions of Simplura and NMT during the year, $7.3 million of incremental expense in our Personal Care Segment and $6.2 million of professional fees related to strategic initiatives, rebranding efforts and other restructuring expense related to closure of our Las Vegas contact center.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization for 2020 increased $9.4 million, or 55.7%, compared to 2019 primarily as a result of increased intangible assets associated with the NMT acquisition in May 2020 and the Simplura acquisition in November 2020, offset by lower depreciation expense due to a reduction of capital expenditures as a percent of revenue.
Interest expense, net. Consolidated interest expense, net for 2020 increased $16.7 million, or 1,970.5%, compared to 2019, as a result of the activity related to the $500.0 million of Senior Unsecured Notes ("the Notes") we issued on November 4, 2020. As a part of the bond issuance process, we incurred a $9.0 million bridge commitment fee that provided a potential funding backstop in the event that the Notes did not meet the desired subscription level to be used to acquire Simplura. That commitment expired unused upon closing of the Notes and the fee was expensed in Q4 2020. We incurred $4.7 million of accrued interest related to the Notes in Q4 2020 as interest payments are made on a biannual basis.
We also had increased borrowings on our Credit Facility throughout 2020 that allowed us the temporary liquidity needed during the year to execute on our Preferred Share Conversion (as defined below), acquisitions and stock buyback program. As of December 31, 2020 we had no borrowings on our Credit Facility.
Equity in net (income) loss of investee. Our equity in net (income) loss of investee for 2020 and 2019 represents our proportional share of the results of Matrix, of which we own 43.6%. The increase in Matrix’s net income in 2020 was primarily due to a new employee health and wellness product offering that was launched in the second quarter of 2020 for companies maintaining critical operations during the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, the company saw increased revenue and income related to a clinical solutions product offering following the October 2020 acquisition of Biocerna LLC, a diagnostic company that, among other tests, provides rapid COVID-19 test kits.
Provision for income taxes. Our effective tax rates from continuing operations for 2020 and 2019 were a provision of 21.7% and a benefit of 10.4%, respectively. The effective tax rate for 2020 was slightly higher than the federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to state taxes and certain nondeductible expenses offset by tax credits and the favorable impact of the CARES Act on the Company's 2018 U.S. net operating losses ("NOLs"). The impact of the CARES Act was to allow the Company to carry NOLs back five years and offset income taxed at 35% compared to a carryforward tax rate of 21%. The effective tax rate for 2019 was substantially lower than the federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to state taxes and certain nondeductible expenses partially offset by the favorable impact of stock option deductions and tax credits.
(Loss) income from discontinued operations, net of tax. (Loss) income from discontinued operations, net of tax, includes the activity related to our former WD Services and Human Services segments. See Note 24, Discontinued Operations, to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, of $0.8 million in 2020 was primarily due to costs incurred for personnel, facilities and miscellaneous administrative expense in our continuing efforts to wind down the WD Services Saudi Arabian entity.
For 2019, income from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $5.9 million as a result of an insurance settlement related to an indemnification matter in our Human Services segment, net of costs to obtain the settlement. Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, for WD Services was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We incurred costs related to the wind-down of the WD Services Saudi Arabian entity, offset by cash distributions from WD Services.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 compared to year ended December 31, 2018
The following table sets forth results of operations and the percentage of consolidated total revenues represented by items in our consolidated statements of operations for 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
Service revenue, net. Service revenue for our NEMT Segment for 2019 increased $125.0 million, or 9.0%, compared to 2018. Service revenue increased by $148.0 million as a result of increased volume within existing contracts as well as rate changes, including retroactive revenue benefits, in addition to $103.1 million in new contracts, including the acquisition of Circulation in the fourth quarter of 2018, MCO contracts in Minnesota and Louisiana and a new state contract in West Virginia. These increases were partially offset by $126.1 million for contracts we no longer serve, including a state contract in Rhode Island and certain MCO contracts in California, Florida, New Mexico, New York and Louisiana.
Service expense. Service expense for our NEMT Segment included the following for 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
Service expense for 2019 increased $147.5 million, or 11.8%, compared to 2018 due primarily to higher purchased transportation costs and operational payroll and related costs. Transportation costs increased as a result of both higher utilization across multiple contracts and higher per unit cost. Payroll and related costs increased in our contact centers as a result of higher volume as well as the acquisition of Circulation.
General and administrative expense. General and administrative expenses in 2019 decreased $9.8 million, or 12.8%, as compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily a result of net cost savings associated with the Organizational Consolidation.
Asset impairment charge. During 2018, following the acquisition of Circulation, we recorded a $14.2 million asset impairment as a result of the abandonment of our internal LCAD NextGen technology software project. There was no such impairment during 2019.
Depreciation and amortization expense. Depreciation and amortization for 2019 increased $1.0 million or 6.3% compared to 2018 primarily as a result of increased intangible assets associated with the Circulation acquisition, and net capital expenditures during the comparative periods.
Interest expense, net. Consolidated interest expense, net for 2019 decreased $0.9 million, or 52.3%, compared to 2018, as a result of lesser borrowings on the Credit Facility during 2019 as compared to 2018. Funds were borrowed under the Credit Facility during 2018 to fund the acquisition of Circulation and repaid prior to December 31, 2018.
Equity in net loss of investee. Our equity in net loss of investee for 2019 and 2018 represents our proportional share of the net loss of Matrix. Included in Matrix’s 2019 full standalone net loss of $69.4 million was $55.1 million of asset impairment charges. Included in Matrix’s 2018 full standalone net loss of $20.0 million were integration related costs of $6.5 million, and merger and acquisition diligence related costs of $2.3 million.
Gain on remeasurement of cost method investment. On September 21, 2018, we acquired all of the outstanding equity of Circulation. The purchase price was comprised of cash consideration of $45.1 million paid to Circulation’s equity holders (including holders of vested Circulation stock options), other than ModivCare. Our initial investment in Circulation was $3.0 million. As a result of the transaction, the fair value of this pre-acquisition interest increased to $9.6 million, and thus we recognized a gain of $6.6 million during 2018.
Provision for income taxes. Our effective tax rates from continuing operations for 2019 and 2018 were a benefit of 10.4% and a provision of 20.4%, respectively. The effective tax rate for 2019 was substantially lower than the federal statutory rate of 21.0% primarily due to state taxes and certain nondeductible expenses partially offset by the favorable impact of stock option deductions and tax credits. The effective tax rate for 2018 was slightly lower than the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21.0% due to tax credits and no income tax provision on the $6.6 million gain on the remeasurement of cost method investment, offset in part, by state taxes and certain nondeductible expenses.
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax. Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax, includes the activity related to our former WD Services and human services segments. See Note 24, Discontinued Operations, to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
For 2019, income from discontinued operations, net of tax, for our former human services segment was $6.0 million as a result of an insurance settlement related to an indemnification matter, net of costs to obtain the settlement. Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, for WD Services was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We incurred costs related to the wind-down of the WD Services Saudi Arabian entity, offset by cash distributions from WD Services. The operations in Saudi Arabia, including personnel, leased facilities and certain assets necessary to provide the employment services, were transferred to a third party as of January 1, 2019, and thus we are no longer providing services in Saudi Arabia; however, we continue to incur costs related to the shutdown of our remaining Saudi Arabian entity.
For 2018, the loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, includes the loss of our former WD Services segment of $37.0 million and of our former human services segment of $0.1 million. Included in the loss was a loss on disposition, net of tax, of $1.8 million as well as an asset impairment charge of $9.2 million related to the sale of WD Services operations in France in the second quarter of 2018.
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest. For 2018, net loss attributable to non-controlling interest related to a minority interest held by a third-party operating partner in our company servicing the offender rehabilitation contract within our historical WD Services segment. We held no such interest in 2019.
Seasonality
Our NEMT Segment's quarterly operating income and cash flows normally fluctuate as a result of seasonal variations in our business, principally due to lower transportation demand during the winter season and higher demand during the summer season.
Our Personal Care Segment’s quarterly operating income and cash flows also normally fluctuate as a result of seasonal variations in the business, principally due to somewhat lower demand for in-home services from caregivers during the summer and periods with major holidays, as patients may spend more time with family and less time alone needing outside care during those periods.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Short-term capital requirements consist primarily of recurring operating expenses, new revenue contract start-up costs and costs associated with our strategic initiatives. We expect to meet our cash requirements through available cash on hand, cash generated from operations, net of capital expenditures, and borrowing capacity under our Credit Facility (as defined below).
Cash flow from operating activities was $348.4 million in 2020. Our balance of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash was $183.4 million and $61.7 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We have restricted cash of $0.1 million and $0.2 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Restricted cash amounts are not included in our balance of cash and cash equivalents in the condensed consolidated balance sheets, although they are included in the cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash balance on the accompanying condensed consolidated statements of cash flows.
2020 cash flows compared to 2019
Operating activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $348.4 million for 2020 compared to $60.9 million in 2019. The increase of $287.5 million was primarily a result of a $130.6 million decrease in cash used for accounts payable and accrued expenses, an $87.9 million increase in net income, an $85.8 million increase in cash provided by accounts receivable, a $61.3 million increase in long-term liabilities, an $11.8 million increase in deferred income taxes and a $10.5 million increase in intangible amortization, offset by a $38.5 million increase in the equity received for the income of our minority investee, a change of $41.1 million in accruals for income tax refunds associated with the sale of WD Services, a $9.6 million increase in cash used for accrued transportation costs and a $7.6 million decrease in provision for doubtful accounts.
Of the cash provided by operating activities, $173.9 million is related to a buildup of reconciliation contract payables that will be repaid to our customers in future periods. $101.7 million of this amount will be repaid at different times throughout 2021, and the remaining $72.2 million is due to be repaid in 2022.
Investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $635.0 million in 2020 compared to $10.9 million in 2019. The increase of $646.3 million was primarily attributable to net cash outflow of $566.4 million for the acquisition of Simplura in November 2020 and $77.7 million for the acquisition of NMT in May 2020.
Financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $408.3 million in 2020 compared to net cash used in financing activities of $0.8 million in 2019. The increase of $409.0 million was primarily the result of proceeds from the issuance of $500 million senior unsecured notes in November 2020 and $14.3 million of proceeds from common stock issued pursuant to stock option exercises, offset by $88.8 million of cash used in the redemption of preferred stock and $3.4 million used in the repurchase of company common stock.
We also had increased borrowings on our Credit Facility throughout 2020 that allowed us the temporary liquidity needed during the year to execute on our Preferred Share Conversion, acquisitions and stock buyback program. As of December 31, 2020 we had no borrowings on our Credit Facility.
2019 cash flows compared to 2018
Operating activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $60.9 million for 2019 compared to $7.9 million in 2018. The increase of $53.0 million was primarily a result of the receipt of $30.8 million in income tax refunds associated with the sale of WD Services during 2018, higher net income during the comparative periods, and changes in accounts payable and accrued expenses, partially offset by the timing of prepaid expenses.
Investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities of $10.9 million in 2019 compared to $45.3 million in 2018. The decrease of $34.4 million was primarily attributable to $30.9 million net cash outflow for the acquisition of Circulation in 2018 and sale of WD Services, as well as a decrease in the purchase of property and equipment of $6.7 million due to discontinued operations.
Financing activities. Net cash used in financing activities of $0.8 million in 2019 decreased $50.8 million as compared to 2018 primarily as a result of lesser common stock repurchases.
Obligations and commitments
Credit Facility. On October 16, 2020, the Company entered into the Eighth Amendment to the Amended and Restated Credit and Guaranty Agreement (the “Eighth Amendment”), which among other things, amended the Credit Facility to permit the incurrence of additional debt to finance the Simplura acquisition permit borrowing under the Credit Facility to partially fund the Simplura Acquisition with limited conditions to such borrowing, increase the top interest rate margin that may apply to loans thereunder, and revise our permitted ratio of EBITDA to indebtedness. In addition, the Eighth Amendment extended the maturity date to August 2, 2023.
Effective as of the Eighth Amendment, interest on the outstanding principal amount of loans under the Credit Facility accrues, at the Company’s election, at a per annum rate equal to the greater of either LIBOR or 1.00%, plus an applicable margin, or the base rate as defined in the agreement plus an applicable margin. The applicable margin ranges from 2.25% to 3.50% in the case of LIBOR loans and 1.25% to 2.50% in the case of the base rate loans, in each case, based on the Company’s consolidated leverage ratio as defined in the credit agreement that governs our Credit Facility. The commitment fee and letter of credit fee ranges from 0.35% to 0.50% and 2.25% to 3.50%, respectively, in each case based on the Company’s consolidated leverage ratio as defined in the credit agreement that governs our Credit Facility.
We had no outstanding borrowings on our Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020.
Senior Unsecured Notes. On November 4, 2020, the Company issued $500.0 million in aggregate principal amount of its 5.875% senior unsecured notes due on November 15, 2025 (the “Notes”). The Notes were issued pursuant to an indenture, dated November 4, 2020 (the “Indenture”), between the Company and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee (the “Trustee”).
The Notes are senior unsecured obligations and rank senior in right of payment to all of the Company's future subordinated indebtedness, rank equally in right of payment with all of the Company's existing and future senior indebtedness, are effectively subordinated to any of the Company's existing and future secured indebtedness, including indebtedness under the Credit Facility, to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness, and are structurally subordinated to all of the existing and future liabilities (including trade payables) of each of the Company’s non-guarantor subsidiaries.
The Company will pay interest on the Notes at 5.875% per annum until maturity. Interest is payable semi-annually in arrears on May 15 and November 15 of each year, with the first interest payment date being May 15th, 2021. Principal payments are not required until the maturity date on November 15, 2025 when 100% of the outstanding principal will be required to be repaid.
Preferred Stock. On June 8, 2020, the Company entered into a Preferred Stock Conversion Agreement (the "Conversion Agreement") with the Coliseum Stockholders. Pursuant to the Conversion Agreement, the Company purchased 369,120 shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share, in exchange for $209.88 in cash per share of Series A Preferred Stock, plus a cash amount equal to accrued but unpaid dividends on such shares of Series A Preferred Stock through the day prior to June 11, 2020. Further, the Coliseum Stockholders converted 369,120 shares of Series A Preferred Stock into 925,567 shares of common stock, a cash payment equal to accrued but unpaid dividends on such shares of Series A Preferred Stock through June 11, 2020, and a cash payment of $8.82 per share of Series A Preferred Stock. The amount of accrued dividends paid pursuant to the Conversion Agreement was equal to $0.8 million.
Further, on September 3, 2020, the Company elected to effect the conversion (the “Conversion”) of all of the outstanding Series A Convertible Preferred Stock. In accordance with the Conversion Agreement, as amended, immediately prior to the Conversion, the Company repurchased 27,509 shares of Series A Preferred Stock from the Coliseum Shareholders for a cash amount equal to $209.88 per share of Series A Preferred Stock and a cash amount equal to accrued but unpaid dividends on such shares through the day prior to the Conversion.
Cash dividends on the Series A Convertible Preferred Stock were payable quarterly in arrears to the Preferred Shareholders on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year, and, if declared, began to accrue on the first day of the applicable dividend period. The Company had the option to pay dividends in kind, but never exercised such option while the shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock were outstanding. Convertible preferred stock dividends earned by the Coliseum Stockholders during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 totaled $2.0 million and $4.2 million respectively, including accrued dividends paid pursuant to the Conversion Agreement.
We may, from time to time, access capital markets to raise equity or debt financing for various business reasons, including acquisitions. We may also raise debt financing to fund future repurchases of our common stock. The timing, term, size, and pricing of any such financing will depend on investor interest and market conditions, and there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain any such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all.
Reinsurance and Self-Funded Insurance Programs
Reinsurance
With respect to the Company’s historical SPCIC captive insurance company, the Company utilizes a report prepared by an independent actuary to estimate the gross expected losses related to historical automobile, general and professional and workers’ compensation liability reinsurance policies, including the estimated losses in excess of SPCIC’s insurance limits, which would be reimbursed to SPCIC to the extent such losses were incurred. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had reserves of $6.3 million and $4.3 million, respectively, for the automobile, general and professional liability and workers’ compensation reinsurance policies, net of expected receivables for losses in excess of SPCIC’s historical insurance limits. The gross reserve as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $8.0 million and $12.8 million, respectively, is classified as “Self-funded insurance programs" and “Other long-term liabilities” in the consolidated balance sheets. The estimated amount to be reimbursed to SPCIC as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $1.7 million and $8.5 million, respectively, and is classified as “Other receivables” and “Other assets” in the consolidated balance sheets.
Further, we had restricted cash of $0.1 million and $0.2 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, which was primarily restricted to secure the reinsured claims losses under the historical automobile, general and professional liability and workers’ compensation reinsurance programs.
Health Insurance
Under our self-funded health insurance program and stop-loss umbrella policy with a third-party insurer, our maximum potential liability for individual claims generally is limited to $0.3 million per person, subject to an aggregating stop-loss limit of $0.4 million. In addition, the program has a total stop-loss limit for total claims, in order to limit the Company’s exposure to catastrophic claims. With respect to this program, the Company considers historical and projected medical utilization data when estimating its health insurance program liability and related expense. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had $2.0 million and $1.9 million, respectively, in reserves for its self-funded health insurance programs. The reserves are classified as “Self-funded insurance programs” in the consolidated balance sheets.
The Company also utilizes analyses prepared by third-party administrators and independent actuaries for health insurance coverage costs, based on historical claims information, to determine the amount of required reserves. For more information on our self-insurance program, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Reinsurance and Self-Insurance Liabilities above.
Contractual Obligations
The following is a summary of our future contractual cash obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)Future interest payments have been calculated at the current rates as of December 31, 2020.
(2)Letters of credit (“LOCs”) are guarantees of potential payments to third parties under certain conditions. Guarantees include surety bonds we provide to certain customers to protect against potential non-delivery of our non-emergency transportation services. Our LOCs are provided by our Credit Facility and reduce our availability under this agreement. The surety bonds and LOC amounts in the above table represent the amount of commitment expiration per period.
(3)The operating leases are for office space and related office equipment. Certain leases contain periodic rent escalation adjustments and renewal options.
(4)The purchased service commitment includes the maximum penalty we would incur if we do not meet our minimum volume commitment over the remaining term of the agreement under certain contracts.
In August 2020, the Company entered into an 11-1/2 year operating lease agreement for new corporate office space in Denver, Colorado. The lease is expected to commence when construction of the asset is completed in the second quarter of 2021. Total estimated base rent payments over the life of the lease are approximately $29.7 million.
Stock repurchase programs
Pursuant to previously announced stock repurchase programs, authorized by our Board of Directors we purchased a total of 0.8 million shares, or approximately an aggregate of $55.8 million, of our common stock during the year ended December 31, 2018 through a combination of open market repurchases (including Rule 10b5-1 trading plans), privately negotiated transactions, accelerated share repurchase transactions and other derivative transactions. Furthermore, pursuant to subsequent previously announced stock repurchase programs authorized by our Board of Directors, we purchased a total of 0.2 million and 0.1 million shares of our common stock, for approximately $10.2 million and $6.0 million, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, through a combination of open market repurchases (including Rule 10b5-1 trading plans), privately negotiated transactions, accelerated share repurchase transactions and other derivative transactions. All of the Company’s stock repurchase programs have since expired.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
New Accounting Pronouncements
The new accounting pronouncements that impact our business are included in Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements, to our consolidated financial statements and are incorporated herein by reference.
In August 2020, the SEC issued final rules 33-10825 and 34-89670 “Modernization of Regulation S-K Items 101, 103, and 105,” which amend the disclosure requirements in Item 101, Description of Business; Item 103, Legal Proceedings; and Item 105, Risk Factors of Regulation S-K. Consistent with the SEC’s ongoing efforts to modernize Regulation S-K disclosure requirements, the amendments aim to improve the readability of disclosures, reduce repetition, and eliminate immaterial information. Amendments to disclosure requirements include changes to the description of business and risk factors to a principles-based approach, providing more flexibility to tailor disclosures, while disclosure amendments to legal proceedings
continue to reflect the current, more prescriptive approach. The final rules are effective for all registration statements, annual reports and quarterly reports filed on or after November 9, 2020. The Company has reflected the changes throughout this Annual Report.
In November 2020, the SEC issued final rules 33-10890 and 34-90459 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Selected Financial Data, and Supplementary Financial Information,” which modernizes and simplifies certain disclosure requirements of Regulation S-K. Certain key rule amendments eliminate the requirement to disclose Selected Financial Data; Selected Quarterly Financial Data, with certain exceptions; the impact of inflation and changing prices, provided the impact is not material; off-balance sheet arrangements in tabular form; and the aggregate amount of contractual obligations in tabular form. The final rules also amended various aspects of Item 303, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” among others. The final rules are effective for all registration statements, annual reports and quarterly reports filed on or after August 9, 2021, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of the disclosure changes in its Annual Report.