ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition to historical financial information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and belief. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in the section titled “Risk Factors” under Item 1A below. These forward-looking statements may include, but are not limited to, statements regarding our future results of operations and financial position, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, business strategy, market size, potential growth opportunities, preclinical and clinical development activities, efficacy and safety profile of our product candidates, use of net proceeds from our offerings, our ability to maintain and recognize the benefits of certain designations received by product candidates, the timing and results of preclinical studies and clinical trials, commercial collaborations with third parties and the receipt and timing of potential regulatory designations, approvals and commercialization of product candidates. The words “believe,” “may,” “will,” “potentially,” “estimate,” “continue,” “anticipate,” “predict,” “target,” “intend,” “could,” “would,” “should,” “project,” “plan,” “expect,” and similar expressions that convey uncertainty of future events or outcomes are intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements contain these identifying words. We undertake no obligation to update forward-looking statements, which reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company applying our proprietary insights into integrins to discover and develop a pipeline of potentially first-in-class oral small molecule integrin therapeutics. Integrins are a target class with multiple approved injectable blockbuster drugs for the treatment of serious chronic diseases, including autoimmune, cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, fibrosis and cancer. To date, no oral small molecule integrin therapies have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA. Despite significant unsuccessful efforts, we believe tremendous untapped potential remains for us to develop oral integrin therapies. The Morphic integrin technology platform, or MInT Platform, was created leveraging our unique understanding of integrin structure and function to develop novel product candidates designed to achieve the potency, high selectivity, and pharmaceutical properties required for oral administration. We are advancing our pipeline, including our wholly-owned product candidate MORF-057, an α4β7-specific integrin inhibitor affecting inflammation, into clinical development for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease, or IBD.
On July 1, 2019, we completed the initial public offering, or the IPO, of our common stock and issued and sold 6,900,000 shares of common stock at a price of $15.00 per share resulting in net proceeds of $93.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. In July 2020, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement, or the ATM Agreement, with Jefferies LLC, or Jefferies, with respect to an at-the-market offering program under which we may offer and sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock, having an aggregate offering price of up to $75,000,000, referred to as Placement Shares, through Jefferies as its sales agent. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued and sold 1,157,693 shares of common stock resulting in net proceeds of $33.6 million under the ATM Agreement. Refer to Note 1 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
Since inception, our operations have focused on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, establishing our intellectual property portfolio, and performing research to discover and develop oral small-molecule integrin therapeutics. Revenue generation activities to date have been limited to payments received from our collaboration agreements with AbbVie and Janssen, discussed further in Note 11 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. From inception through December 31, 2020, we raised an aggregate of approximately $417.7 million of gross proceeds primarily through the issuance of equity, including our
convertible preferred equity securities, our IPO, and sales of shares of our common stock pursuant to the ATM Agreement, along with payments received under our collaboration agreements.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $142.5 million. We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future, as we advance our current and future product candidates through preclinical and clinical development, seek regulatory approval for them, maintain and expand our intellectual property portfolio, hire additional research and development and business personnel, and operate as a public company.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates. In addition, if we obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates and do not enter into a third-party commercialization partnership, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing, manufacturing, and distribution activities.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of public or private equity offerings and debt financings or other sources, such as additional collaboration agreements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $228.3 million. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into 2023.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The extent of the impact of the novel strain of coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, or COVID-19, on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, impact on our clinical and preclinical studies, employee or industry events, and effect on our suppliers and manufacturers, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. The COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse effects is prevalent in the locations where we, our collaborators, our contract research organizations, or CROs, suppliers or third-party business partners conduct business. Although we currently have not experienced much of an impact on our business, including minor changes to our development timelines, if there are closures or other restrictions in places we or our vendors work or transport supply that may result in constrained supply of our product candidates or delays in our clinical and preclinical studies or planned clinical trials, our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods could be materially adversely impacted. In addition, we have experienced impacts from changes in how we and companies worldwide conduct business due to the COVID-19 pandemic, including but not limited to restrictions on travel and in-person meetings, delays in future site activations and future enrollment of clinical trials, prioritization of hospital resources toward the COVID-19 pandemic effort, and delays in review by the FDA and comparable foreign regulatory agencies. As of the filing date of this Form 10-K, the extent to which COVID-19 may impact our financial condition, results of operations or guidance is uncertain. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic will not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods. See “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Financial Operations Overview
Collaboration Revenue
We do not have any products approved for sale, and as a result, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the foreseeable future.
To date, all of our collaboration revenue has been derived from our agreements with AbbVie and Janssen. We expect that until we have a marketed product, our revenue, if any, will be derived primarily from payments under our collaboration and option agreements with AbbVie and Janssen or other collaboration and license agreements that we may enter into in the future, if any.
Collaboration Revenue - AbbVie
In October 2018, we entered into a collaboration with AbbVie, an investor that held approximately 5% of our common stock at the time of the agreement, designed to advance a number of our oral integrin therapeutics for fibrosis-related indications. Under the terms of the agreement, AbbVie paid us an upfront payment of $100.0 million for research and development activities, and we provided to AbbVie exclusive license options on product candidates directed at multiple targets. In August 2020, AbbVie exercised its option to license the selective αvβ6 -specific integrin inhibitors program and paid us a one-time payment of $20.0 million.
For each lead compound against a target under the AbbVie Agreement, we conduct research and development activities through the completion of IND-enabling studies, at which point AbbVie may pay a license fee of $20.0 million, on a target-by-target basis, to exercise its exclusive license option and assume responsibility for global development and commercialization. We are also eligible for clinical and commercial milestone payments and tiered royalties from high single digit to low teens on worldwide net sales for each licensed product. In addition, for certain compounds for which we have completed IND-enabling studies and which meet certain advancement criteria for a liver indication, we have the option to commit to share development costs in exchange for an increased fixed royalty rate. We may exercise this option following completion of the first Phase 2b clinical trial for the relevant product.
Collaboration Revenue - Janssen
In February 2019, we entered into the Janssen Agreement to discover and develop novel integrin therapeutics for patients with conditions not adequately addressed by current therapies. The Janssen Agreement focuses on three integrin targets, each target the subject of a research program, with the ability to substitute up to two integrin targets not explored by us. Upon completing IND-enabling studies, on a research program-by-research program basis, Janssen may exercise an exclusive option to obtain an exclusive license with respect to the target that is the subject of the research program, including all licensed compounds that are the subject of the applicable research program, and then Janssen will be responsible for global clinical development and commercialization. In consideration of the rights granted, during 2019, Janssen paid us an upfront fee of $10.0 million for each of the first two research programs, and in December 2020 we agreed with Janssen to commence work on the third research program and Janssen agreed to pay us $5.0 million for the third research program commencement fee. Janssen also funds research activities at agreed upon rates. Pursuant to the terms of the agreement, we are also eligible to receive additional milestone and royalty payments.
Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research and development activities, including our product candidate discovery efforts and preclinical studies under our research programs, which include:
◾ employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and equity-based compensation expense for our research and development personnel;
◾ costs of funding research performed by third parties that conduct research and development, clinical and preclinical activities on our behalf;
◾ costs of manufacturing clinical supply related to any of our current or future product candidates;
◾ expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations and investigative sites that conduct our clinical trials;
◾ costs of conducting preclinical studies of any of our current or future product candidates;
◾ consulting and professional fees related to research and development activities, including equity-based compensation to non-employees;
◾ costs of purchasing laboratory supplies and non-capital equipment used in our preclinical studies;
◾ costs related to compliance with clinical regulatory requirements;
◾ facility costs and other allocated expenses, which include expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance, depreciation and other supplies; and
◾ fees for maintaining licenses and other amounts due under our third-party licensing agreements.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Costs for certain activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as information provided to us by our vendors and analyzing the progress of our preclinical studies or other services performed. Significant judgment and estimates are made in determining the accrued expense balances at the end of any reporting period. Non-refundable advance payments for research and development goods or services to be received in the future from third parties are capitalized and expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. As such, at this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing, and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete our future product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from the sale of our product candidates, if approved. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing product candidates, including the uncertainty of:
◾ the scope, rate of progress, and expenses of our ongoing research activities as well as any additional preclinical studies and clinical trials and other research and development activities;
◾ establishing an appropriate safety profile;
◾ successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
◾ whether our product candidates show safety and efficacy in our clinical trials;
◾ receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities, if any;
◾ establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
◾ obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
◾ commercializing the product candidates, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
◾ continued acceptable safety profile of the products following any regulatory approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of our current and future product candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of those product candidates.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our product candidates. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our product candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our clinical development programs and plans.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and equity-based compensation expenses for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, business development, legal, and human resources functions. Other significant general and administrative expenses include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters, and fees for accounting and consulting services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as our business expands to support expected growth in research and development activities, including our future clinical programs. These increases will likely include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and fees to outside consultants, among other expenses. We also incur expenses associated with being a public company, including costs for audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, (“SEC”), and listing standards applicable to companies listed on Nasdaq, director and officer compensation and insurance premiums, and investor relations costs. In addition, if we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates and do not enter into a third-party commercialization collaboration, we expect to incur significant general and administrative expenses related to supporting product sales, marketing and distribution activities.
Interest Income, Net
Interest income, net consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Benefit from (Provision for) Income Tax Expense
We record a provision or benefit for income taxes on pre-tax income or loss based on our estimated effective tax rate for the year. On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security, or the CARES Act, was signed into law. The CARES Act included several income tax changes, included allowing for the carryback of net operating losses, expanding interest deductibility, and allowing for accelerated expensing of certain capital improvements. We evaluated the changes and anticipate a full recovery of all federal income tax paid for the December 31, 2019 tax period due to the carryback allowance of the net operating loss generated during fiscal year 2020. Based on the anticipated recovery of the federal income tax paid for the December 31, 2019 tax period, we recorded a $0.6 million benefit from income taxes during the year ended December 31, 2020, discussed further in Note 9 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We recorded $0.9 million in income tax expense during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the current tax liability associated with the tax recognition of the upfront AbbVie collaboration payment received in 2018.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue increased to $44.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The overall increase in revenue is primarily attributable to $25.3 million increase in revenue recognized under our collaboration with AbbVie, which included $20.0 million from the option exercise payment received from AbbVie during the year, discussed further in Note 11 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. Revenue we recognize from satisfaction of performance obligations under the AbbVie agreement is impacted by our estimates of the remaining costs to complete our obligations as well as the extent of activities conducted in each period, which require significant judgment, and may cause fluctuation in the revenue recognized from period to period. Additionally, revenue recognized from our collaboration with Janssen increased $2.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to higher FTE cost reimbursements in 2020 as the collaboration agreement with Janssen was executed in February 2019.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expense increased by $19.9 million, or 37%, from $53.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $73.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. A significant portion of our research and development costs have been external clinical and pre-clinical contract research organization (CRO) costs, which we track on a program-by-program basis related to a clinical product candidate that has been identified. Our internal
research and development costs are primarily personnel-related costs, depreciation, and other indirect costs. The following table summarizes our research and development expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The increase in research and development expense was primarily attributable to the following:
◾ The $7.6 million increase in external costs resulted primarily from the increase in preclinical development, manufacturing costs, and clinical trials costs associated with MORF-057, external research costs associated with our research programs targeting αvβ1 and αvβ8 integrins, partially offset by a decrease in expenditures on MORF-720 and other AbbVie programs, primarily due to the August 2020 AbbVie option exercise for our αvβ6-specific integrin inhibitor program.
◾ The $12.3 million increase in internal costs was primarily attributable to a $6.5 million increase in employee compensation and benefits costs related to increased headcount to support increased activities in our research and development function, a $4.0 million increase in stock-based compensation expenses, $1.5 million increase in facility and other expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expense increased by $8.3 million, or 81%, from $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $18.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expense was primarily attributable to a $3.6 million increase in non-cash stock-based compensation expenses, an increase of $2.4 million in employee compensation and benefits due to increased headcount, an increase of $1.0 million in D&O insurance premiums, an increase of $0.8 million in professional services and consulting fees primarily due to increases in legal fees related to business development, regulatory and patent costs, and expenses related to public company administrative costs, and a $0.5 million increase in other expenses.
Interest Income, Net
Interest income decreased by $3.0 million from $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest income, net was attributable to lower yields on the U.S. Treasury securities held by the Company.
Provision for Income Tax
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law. The CARES Act included several income tax changes, included allowing for the carryback of net operating losses, expanding interest deductibility, and allowing for accelerated expensing of certain capital improvements.
We evaluated the changes and anticipate a full recovery of all federal income tax paid for the December 31, 2019 tax period due to the carryback allowance of the net operating loss generated during fiscal year 2020 permitted under the CARES Act. Based on the anticipated recovery of the federal income tax paid for the December 31, 2019 tax period, we recognized an income tax benefit of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We recorded $0.9 million in income tax expense during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the current tax liability associated with the tax recognition of the upfront AbbVie collaboration payment received in 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
From inception through December 31, 2020, we raised an aggregate of approximately $417.7 million of gross proceeds primarily through the issuance of equity, including our convertible preferred equity securities, our IPO, and sales of shares of our common stock pursuant to the ATM Agreement, along with payments received under our collaboration agreements.
The following table provides information regarding our total cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities, each of which are stated at their respective fair values as of December 31, 2020 and of December 31, 2019:
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
The use of cash in all periods resulted primarily from our net losses adjusted for non-cash charges and charges in components of working capital. Net cash used in operating activities was $46.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $41.7 million in cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year was primarily driven by a $28.2 million increase in operating expenses which was partially offset by the $20.0 million option
exercise payment received from AbbVie. The increase in operating expenses during fiscal year 2020 was attributable to increased development activities associated with MORF-057 and increased headcount to support our development efforts.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $8.2 million for year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net cash used in investing activities of $136.0 million for year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $144.2 million. Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from proceeds from maturities of marketable securities exceeding purchases of marketable securities by $8.7 million. Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily resulted from purchases of marketable securities to invest the upfront payments received from AbbVie and Janssen and our IPO proceeds.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $38.3 million for year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $93.3 million in the comparable prior year period, a decrease of $55.0 million. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from issuance of shares of common stock under the ATM agreement resulting in net proceeds of $33.6 million, proceeds from stock option exercises of $3.5 million, and proceeds from share purchases by employees under the Employee Stock Purchase Plan of $1.1 million. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted from our IPO.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue research and development, conduct clinical trials, and seek marketing approval for our current and any of our future product candidates. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our current or our future product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution, which costs we might offset through entry into collaboration agreements with third parties. Accordingly, we will need to obtain substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on acceptable terms, including, but not limited to, as a result of COVID-19, we would be forced to delay, reduce, or eliminate our research and development programs or future commercialization efforts. We expect our existing cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into 2023.
We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
◾ the costs of conducting additional clinical and preclinical studies and future clinical trials;
◾ the costs of future manufacturing;
◾ the scope, progress, results and costs of discovery, preclinical development, laboratory testing, and clinical trials for other potential product candidates we may develop, if any;
◾ the costs, timing, and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
◾ our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
◾ the achievement of milestones or occurrence of other developments that trigger payments under any collaboration agreements we might have at such time;
◾ the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
◾ the amount of revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates, should any of our product candidates receive marketing approval;
◾ the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, obtaining, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights, and defending intellectual property-related claims;
◾ our headcount growth and associated costs as we expand our business operations and research and development activities;
◾ the potential delays in our preclinical studies, our development programs and our current and planned clinical trials due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic; and
◾ the cost of operating as a public company.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments and estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts, and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates, if any, will be reflected in the consolidated financial statements prospectively from the date of change in estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements require the most significant judgments and estimates.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
As of December 31, 2020, all of our revenue to date has been generated from the AbbVie Agreement and Janssen Agreement. We account for revenue pursuant to ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, which is a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes most current revenue recognition guidance, including industry-specific guidance. The revenue standard is based on the principle that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The revenue standard also requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customer contracts and costs to obtain or fulfill contracts. We applied ASC 606 on January 1, 2018 to all contracts using the full retrospective transition method. For additional details regarding our adoption of ASC 606 and our associated accounting policies, refer to Notes 2 and 11 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by our vendors in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced. In certain instances, we prepay for services to be provided in the future. These amounts are expensed as the services are performed.
We base our expenses related to research and development activities on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with vendors that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid balance accordingly. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts incurred.
Equity-Based Compensation
We account for all equity-based awards granted to date as equity-classified awards. We measure employee and nonemployee equity-based compensation based on the grant date fair value of the equity-based awards and recognize equity-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We recognize forfeitures as they occur.
We classify equity-based compensation expense in our consolidated statements of operations in the same manner in which the award recipient’s salary and related costs are classified or in which the award recipient’s service payments are classified. In future periods, we expect equity-based compensation expense to increase, due in part to our existing unrecognized stock-based compensation expense and as we grant additional stock-based awards to continue to attract and retain our employees.
We determine the fair value of restricted common stock awards granted based on the fair value of our common stock. We estimate the fair value of stock option awards granted using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which uses as inputs, the fair value of our common stock and subjective assumptions we make, including the expected stock price volatility, the expected term of the award, the risk-free interest rate, and expected dividends. Due to insufficient company-specific historical data, we base the estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a representative group of publicly traded companies for which historical information is available; however, starting with the awards granted in the fourth quarter of 2020, we also incorporate historical information for our stock in calculation of expected volatility. The historical volatility is generally calculated based on a period of time commensurate with the expected term assumption. We use the simplified method to calculate the expected term for options granted to employees and directors. We utilize this method as we do not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term. For options granted to non-employees, we utilize the
expected term. The risk-free interest rate is based on a U.S. treasury instrument whose term is consistent with the expected term of the stock options. The expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero, as we have never paid dividends and do not have current plans to pay any dividends on our common stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have, during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable SEC rules.
Contractual Obligations
The Company has entered into an operating lease agreement for its office and laboratory facility; the lease agreement is set to expire in 2022 and the remining minimum payment obligations totaled $1.8 million as of December 31, 2020.
We entered into contracts with a number of third parties, including external CROs, that require us to make upfront payments, some of which may be non-refundable. Under various licensing and related agreements with third parties, we have agreed to make milestone payments and pay royalties to third parties. Pursuant to an exclusive license agreement with Children’s Medical Center Corporation, as amended in 2018, we are required to pay $80,000 per year until the agreement is terminated. We will also be responsible for up to $1.3 million of development milestone payments through the first regulatory approval of a licensed product, tiered royalty payments of low single-digit percentages on net sales of licensed products in the event that we realize sales from products covered by the license agreement, and between 10% and 20% of non-royalty income attributable to a sublicense of the CMCC rights. Amounts paid to CMCC are recorded as research and development expense in the statements of operations.
Pursuant to a collaboration agreement with Schrödinger, we may be required to pay Schrödinger certain development milestones, not to exceed in the aggregate, on a target-by-target basis, a low six-figure payment upon initiation of lead optimization and $3.1 million on a compound-by-compound basis, as well as royalties in the low single digits on sales of products containing such compounds. In addition, we have agreed to pay Schrödinger a percentage, in the mid-single digits, of certain payments we receive from third parties in connection with the licensing or transfer of the rights to exploit such compounds to such third parties, including a one-time fee of $1.0 million paid in 2019.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with vendors for preclinical studies, preclinical and clinical supply and manufacturing services, professional consultants for expert advice, and other vendors for other services for operating purposes. We have not included these payments in the table of contractual obligations above since the contracts do not contain any minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon 30 days prior written notice, and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” or EGC, under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an EGC can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an EGC can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of delayed adoption of new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will be subject to the same requirements to adopt new or revised accounting standards as private entities.
As an EGC, we may take advantage of certain exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions, as an EGC:
◾ we will avail ourselves of the exemption from providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
◾ we will avail ourselves of the exemption from complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, or PCAOB, regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor report on Critical Audit Matters;
◾ we will provide reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements; and
◾ we will not require nonbinding advisory votes on executive compensation or stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments.
We will remain an EGC until the earliest of (i) December 31, 2024 (the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO), (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more, (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the previous rolling three-year period, or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act.
We are also a “smaller reporting company,” meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million and our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company if either (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million as of the last day of the second quarter of the most recently completed fiscal year.
If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, similar to emerging growth companies, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We have reviewed all recently issued standards and have determined that, other than as disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, such standards will not have a material impact on our financial statements or do not otherwise apply to our operations.