ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and the related notes and the other financial information included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly those under “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We have developed the Pure-Vu System (the “Pure-Vu System”), a medical device that has received 510(k) clearance from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”). In June 2019, the 510(k) premarket notification for the second-generation of the Pure-Vu System was reviewed and cleared by the FDA. The second-generation of our Pure-Vu System has received CE Mark approval in the European Economic Area. The Pure-Vu System is indicated to help facilitate the cleaning of a poorly prepared colon during the colonoscopy procedure. The device integrates with standard and slim colonoscopes to enable safe and rapid cleansing during the procedure while preserving established procedural workflow and techniques by irrigating the colon and evacuating the irrigation fluid (water), feces and other bodily fluids and matter. We believe that the technology may be useful in the future as a tool to help reduce user dependency on conventional pre-procedural bowel prep regimens. Challenges with bowel preparation for inpatient colonoscopy represent a significant area of unmet need that directly affects clinical outcomes and increases the cost of care for a hospital in a market segment where most of the reimbursement is under a bundle payment based on a Medicare Severity Diagnostic Related Group (a “MS-DRG”). Based on our review and analysis of 2019 market data and 2021 projections for the U.S. and Europe, as obtained from iData Research Inc., we estimate that during 2021 approximately 1.5 million inpatient colonoscopy procedures will be performed in the U.S. and approximately 4.8 million inpatient colonoscopy procedures will be performed worldwide. The Pure-Vu System does not currently have a unique reimbursement code with any private or governmental third-party payors in any country. We began commercialization in the fourth quarter of 2019, with the first commercial placements of our second generation Pure-Vu System as part of our initial U.S. market launch targeting early adopter hospitals. We do not expect to generate significant revenue from product sales until the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided and we expand our commercialization efforts for the Pure-Vu System, which is subject to significant uncertainty.
Financial Operations Overview
We have generated limited revenues to date from the sale of products. We have never been profitable and have incurred significant net losses each year since our inception, including a loss of $19.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and we expect to continue to incur net operating losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2020, we had $20.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and an accumulated deficit of $103.7 million. We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities to commercialize and market the Pure-Vu System. Furthermore, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. Accordingly, we will need additional financing to support our continuing operations. We will seek to fund our operations through public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, which may include collaborations with third parties. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. We will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability, and we may never do so. Furthermore, the extent of the impact and effects of the recent outbreak of the coronavirus COVID-19 on the operation and financial performance of our business will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, related travel advisories and restrictions, production delays, or the uncertainty with respect to the accessibility of additional liquidity or capital markets, all of which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the demand for our second generation system is impacted by this outbreak for an extended period, our results of operations may be materially adversely affected.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. We expect our expenses will increase in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
● continue commercialization which began in the fourth quarter of 2019, with the first commercial placements of our Pure-Vu System as part of our initial U.S. market launch targeting early adopter hospitals;
● scale manufacturing with our contracted partners for both the workstation and disposable portions of the Pure-Vu System;
● develop future generations of the Pure-Vu System to improve user interface, optimize handling and reduce the cost structure;
● raise sufficient funds to effectuate our business plan, including commercialization activities related to our Pure-Vu System and our research and development activities, including clinical and regulatory development and the continued development and enhancement of our Pure-Vu System; and
● operate as a public company.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgement and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition
We generate revenue from the sale or lease of our Pure-Vu System Workstation (“Workstation”) and from the sale of our single-use disposable sleeves (“Disposables”), and related services, which are primarily support and maintenance services on our Workstations. See Note 3 for further discussion of revenue recognition.
Sales of our Workstation and Disposables are accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers to depict the transfer of control to our customers in an amount reflecting the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to. Revenue from the sale of a Workstation is recognized after a customer commits to purchase the Workstation and the Workstation is delivered, which is when title is transferred. Disposables are identified as a separate performance obligation, and therefore, revenue from the sale of Disposables is recognized when the Disposables are delivered to the customer and title is transferred.
For contracts outside the scope of ASC 606, we determine income for proposed supply arrangements with an embedded lease in accordance with ASC 842 and certain components of sales within the proposed supply arrangement in accordance with ASC 606. We allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations within the proposed supply arrangements using the total estimated purchases method for both (i) arrangements that contain minimum purchase commitments and (ii) those arrangements that do not contain a minimum purchase commitment, but instead offer a volume discount for purchases that exceed a specified tier.
Inventory
Inventory is accounted for at lower of cost and net realizable value using the weighted average cost method and is evaluated at least annually for impairment. Write-downs for potentially obsolete or excess inventory are made based on management’s analysis of inventory levels, historical obsolescence and future sales forecasts.
Share-Based Compensation
Our share-based compensation programs grant awards that have included stock options, warrants, and restricted stock units. Grants are awarded to employees and non-employees, including directors.
We account for our stock-based compensation awards in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, or ASC 718. ASC 718 requires all stock-based payments to employees and non-employee directors, including grants of employee stock options and restricted stock units and modifications to existing stock options, to be recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss based on their fair values.
We account for forfeitures as they occur instead of estimating forfeitures at the time of grant and revising those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from its estimates. Share-based compensation expense recognized in the financial statements is based on awards for which performance or service conditions are expected to be satisfied.
Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting, or ASU 2018-07, on July 1, 2018, the measurement date for non-employee awards was generally the date the services were completed, resulting in financial reporting period adjustments to stock-based compensation during the vesting terms for changes in the fair value of the awards. After adoption of ASU 2018-07, the measurement date for non-employee awards is the date of grant without changes in the fair value of the award.
Our share-based awards are subject to service or performance-based vesting conditions. Compensation expense related to awards to employees, directors and non-employees with service-based vesting conditions is recognized on a straight-line basis based on the grant date fair value over the associated service period of the award, which is generally the vesting term.
We expense restricted stock unit awards to employees based on the fair value of the award on a straight-line basis over the associated service period of the award.
We estimate the fair value of our option awards to employees, directors and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires the input of subjective assumptions, including (i) the expected stock price volatility, (ii) the calculation of expected term of the award, (iii) the risk-free interest rate and (iv) expected dividends. Due to the lack of complete company-specific historical and implied volatility data for the full expected term of the stock-based awards, we base our estimate of expected volatility on a representative group of publicly traded companies in addition to our own volatility data. For these analyses, we selected companies with comparable characteristics to our own, including enterprise value, risk profiles, position within the industry and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. We compute historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of the stock-based awards. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available. We have estimated the expected term of our employee stock options using the “simplified” method, whereby, the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option due to its lack of sufficient historical data. The risk-free interest rates for periods within the expected term of the option are based on the U.S. Treasury securities with a maturity date commensurate with the expected term of the associated award. We have never paid, and do not expect to pay, dividends in the foreseeable future.
Contingent Royalty Obligation
We estimate and record a contingent royalty obligation in relation to our royalty obligation, which is payable over the life of certain patents after certain conditions are met. Forecasted revenue over an expected life of the product is the largest driver of the estimated obligation, with other factors being growth rate, patent expiration assessments, and the discount rate. All these drivers are subject to a high degree of uncertainty which we determine at present based on a very limited-commercialized product.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Under Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 3, “Significant Accounting Policies and Basis of Presentation”, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
As of December 31, 2020, as part of our initial launch, we have generated a small amount of revenue from the sales of products. We do not expect to generate significant revenue from product sales until we expand our commercialization efforts for the Pure-Vu System, which is subject to significant uncertainty.
Revenue totaled $98.0 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $107.0 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $9.0 thousand was largely driven by the impact of COVID-19 on the commercial launch of the Pure-Vu System in U.S. hospitals during 2020.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $496.0 thousand, compared to $136.0 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $360.0 thousand was primarily attributable to the net increase of inventory reserves and obsolete inventory of $344.0 thousand, due to the lengthening of sales cycles and lower than anticipated sales volume in light of COVID-19, and an increase to the cost of our system disposable evaluation and commercial units of $16.0 thousand.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of costs relating to the advancement of our development and clinical programs for the Pure-Vu System. We have research and development capabilities in electrical and mechanical engineering with laboratories in our facility in Israel for development and prototyping, and electronics design and testing. We also use consultants and third-party design houses to complement our internal capabilities.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $5.6 million, compared to $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $3.4 million was primarily attributable to decreases of $2.1 million in salaries and other personnel related costs, $0.9 million in material costs and clinical costs, $0.3 million in travel, and $0.1 million in share-based compensation as we shifted our focus to expanding our commercialization efforts for the Pure-Vu System.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist of costs primarily related to our sales and marketing personnel and infrastructure supporting the commercialization of the second generation Pure-Vu System.
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $3.5 million, compared to $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $1.4 million was primarily attributable to decreases of $1.0 million in salaries and other personnel related cost and professional services and $0.2 million in travel, and $0.2 million in promotional items as we implemented our 2020 cost reduction strategy.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of costs associated with our overall operations and being a public company. These costs include personnel, legal and financial professional services, insurance, investor relations, compliance related fees, and expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $9.6 million, compared to $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other Income and Expenses
Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $0.2 million compared to other income, net of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change of $0.6 million in other income and expenses, net was primarily attributable to a change of $0.7 million from finance income to finance expense offset by an increase of $0.1 million from the gain on the change in estimated fair value of contingent royalty obligation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have generated minimal revenues, experienced negative operating cash flows and have incurred substantial operating losses from our activities. We expect operating costs will increase significantly as we incur costs associated with commercialization activities related to the Pure-Vu System. We expect to continue to fund our operations primarily through utilization of our current financial resources, future product sales, and through the issuance of debt or equity.
In December 2019, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement, as subsequently amended from time to time (the “Loan Agreement”), for $8.0 million with Silicon Valley Bank (the “Bank” or “SVB”). Under the terms of the Loan Agreement we must maintain unrestricted cash in accounts held at SVB of at least $10.0 million (the “Liquidity Covenant”). We will need to raise additional capital or generate substantial revenue in order to ensure compliance with the Liquidity Covenant to support our development and commercialization efforts. If adequate funds are not available to us on a timely basis, or at all, we may breach the Liquidity Covenant, in which case, we would be required to immediately pledge to the bank and thereafter maintain in a separate account, unrestricted and unencumbered cash in an amount equal to the amount then outstanding under the Loan Agreement.
On September 1, 2020 we entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) under which we sold and issued to an institutional investor (the “Holder”), in a registered direct offering, an aggregate of 3,200,000 shares of our common stock par value $0.0001 per share (the “Common Stock”), and pre-funded warrants to purchase an aggregate of 5,533,625 shares of Common Stock (the “Pre-Funded Warrants”). The offering price was $1.145 for each share of Common Stock and $1.144 for each Pre-Funded Warrant. The Pre-Funded Warrants were immediately exercisable at a price of $0.001 per share of Common Stock. Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, in a concurrent private placement, we also agreed to issue to the Holder warrants to purchase up to 8,733,625 shares of Common Stock (the “Private Placement Warrants”). These warrants were immediately exercisable at an exercise price of $1.30 per share and expire on the fifth anniversary of the date of issuance. In connection with the closing of the offering, we received gross proceeds of $10.0 million before deducting placement agent fees and other offering expenses of $0.8 million, from the issuance of the Common Stock, the Pre-Funded Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants.
On January 27, 2021, we entered into a Warrant Exercise Agreement (the “Exercise Agreement”) with the Holder, at which time 8,000,000 of the Private Placement Warrants remained outstanding, due to the prior exercise of 733,625 of the Private Placement Warrants on January 22, 2021. Pursuant to the Exercise Agreement, in order to induce the Holder to exercise all of its remaining outstanding 8,000,000 Private Placement Warrants for cash, we agreed to issue to the Holder, new warrants (the “New Warrants”) to purchase 0.75 shares of Common Stock for each share of Common Stock issued upon such exercise of the remaining 8,000,000 Private Placement Warrants pursuant to the Exercise Agreement, or an aggregate of 6,000,000 New Warrants. The terms of the New Warrants are substantially similar to those of the Private Placement Warrants, except that the New Warrants will have an exercise price of $2.12, will be immediately exercisable and will expire five years from the date of the Exercise Agreement. In addition, the Holder paid a cash payment of $0.10 for each New Warrant issued to the Holder, for an aggregate of $600,000 to the Company. We received aggregate gross proceeds before expenses of approximately $11.0 million from the exercise of all of the remaining 8,000,000 outstanding Private Placement Warrants held by the Holder and the payment of the purchase price for the New Warrants.
In connection with the Exercise Agreement, we entered into a financial advisory agreement (the “Letter Agreement”) with A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners (“A.G.P.”), pursuant to which A.G.P. acted as exclusive financial advisor to us in this transaction and received a cash fee of $300,000 upon full cash exercise of the Private Placement Warrants. As additional compensation, A.G.P. will receive a cash fee equal to $200,000 upon the cash exercise in full of the New Warrants.
Since March 2020, we have been evaluating the actual and potential business impacts related to the COVID-19 pandemic. While the full impact of the pandemic continues to evolve, the financial markets have been subject to significant volatility that adversely impacts our ability to enter into, modify, and negotiate favorable terms and conditions relative to equity and debt financing initiatives. The uncertain financial markets, potential disruptions in supply chains, mobility restraints, and changing priorities could also affect our ability to enter into key agreements. The outbreak and government measures taken in response to the pandemic have also had a significant impact, both direct and indirect, on businesses and commerce, as worker shortages have occurred; supply chains have been disrupted; facilities and production have been suspended; and demand for certain goods and services, such as medical services and supplies, have spiked, while demand for other goods and services have fallen. The future progression of the outbreak and its effects on our business and operations are uncertain. We and our third-party contract manufacturers, contract research organizations, and clinical sites may also face disruptions in procuring items that are essential to our research and development activities, including, for example, medical and laboratory supplies, in each case, that are sourced from abroad or for which there are shortages because of ongoing efforts to address the outbreak.
At the end of the first quarter of 2020, we adopted a cost reduction plan (the “2020 Plan”) in response to the ongoing disruptions from the COVID-19 outbreak, and to better align our cost structure with the resources required to more efficiently and effectively execute on our commercial strategy of creating a strong foundation in the market by establishing national and regional hospital networks as Pure Vu reference centers. Most significantly, the 2020 Plan resulted in the reduction of our overall headcount by 50%, including a significant reduction of our commercial team in the US, the implementation of tighter expense controls, and the termination of the lease of our planned corporate office facility in Norwood, Massachusetts. These activities were initiated in the first quarter of 2020, of which the majority were completed in the second quarter of 2020.
Our ability to continue as a going concern for the next twelve months from the issuance of our Annual Report on Form 10K, depends on our ability to execute our business plan, increase revenue and reduce expenditures. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $20.8 million and an accumulated deficit of $103.7 million. We will need to raise significant additional capital to continue to fund operations and to maintain the Liquidity Covenant under our existing debt facility. We may seek to sell common or preferred equity, convertible debt securities or seek other debt financing. In addition, we may seek to raise cash through collaborative agreements or from government grants. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our shareholders and certain of those securities may have rights senior to those of our common shares. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of preferred stock, convertible debt securities or other debt financing, these securities or other debt could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Any other third-party funding arrangement could require us to relinquish valuable rights. The source, timing and availability of any future financing will depend principally upon market conditions, and, more specifically, on the progress of our product and clinical development programs as well as commercial activities. Funding may not be available when needed, at all, or on terms acceptable to us. Lack of necessary funds may require us, among other things, to delay, scale back or eliminate expenses including those associated with our planned product development, clinical trial and commercial efforts.
These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. For more information, refer to note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for each of the periods below:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $17.0 million of cash, due to our net loss of $19.3 million, offset by non-cash expenses principally related to share based compensation expense of $2.9 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.4 million, impairment of inventory of $0.4 million, issuance of common stock for board of directors’ compensation of $0.1 million, offset by the gain on the change in estimated fair value of contingent royalty obligation of $0.3 million, and offset by changes in net working capital items principally related to the decrease in inventory of $0.6 million, the decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $0.5 million, and the increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.1 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities used $19.9 million of cash, due to our net loss of $23.1 million, offset by non-cash expenses of $3.7 million principally related to share based compensation expense of $3.2 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.2 million, the write-down of obsolete inventory of $0.1 million, and non-cash operating lease expense of $0.2 million partially offset by the gain on the change in estimated fair value of contingent royalty obligation of $0.1 million, and cash used by the change in net working capital items of $0.5 million principally related to the increase in inventory of $1.0 million and the decrease in operating lease liabilities of $0.2 million, partially offset by the increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of 0.6 million and the decrease of prepaid and other current assets of $0.1 million.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $8.1 million, principally related to the proceeds from the sale of available-for-sale securities of $8.2 million, offset by the purchase of fixed assets of $0.1 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $5.6 million, principally related to the purchase of available-for-sale securities of $9.6 million and the purchase of fixed assets of $0.5 million, offset with $4.5 million of proceeds from the sale of available for sale securities.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 30, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $9.2 million, consisting primarily of the to $10.0 million in proceeds received from an offering, partially offset by $0.8 million paid for financing fees related to the equity financing.
During the year ended December 30, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $28.0 million, consisting primarily of the proceeds received from public offerings and the exercise of over-allotment options of $21.9 million, proceeds obtained from debt financing of $8.0 million, partially offset by $1.9 million paid for financing fees.
Shelf Registration Statement
On March 26, 2019, we filed a shelf registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which was declared effective on April 24, 2019, that allows us to offer, issue and sell up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $75.0 million of any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, warrants, debt securities, subscription rights and/or units from time to time, together or separately, in one or more offerings. Each issuance under the shelf registration statement will require the filing of a prospectus supplement identifying the amount and terms of the securities to be issued. As of December 31, 2020, we have sold approximately $31.8 million of securities under our shelf registration statement. Our ability to issue securities is subject to market conditions and other factors including, in the case of our debt securities, our credit ratings.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
For Operating Leases and Other Commitments
For further information, refer to Note 5 and Note 7 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Pages through of this Annual Report of Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable SEC rules.