Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
GENERAL
Net Sales
The Company operates and manages its business in two principal business segments: Watch and Accessory Brands and Company Stores. The Company also operates in two geographic locations: United States and International.
The Company divides its watch and accessory business into two principal categories: the owned brands category and the licensed brands category. The owned brands category consists of the Movado®, Concord®, Ebel®, Olivia Burton® and MVMT® brands. Products in the licensed brands category include the following brands manufactured and distributed under license agreements with the respective brand owners: Coach®, Tommy Hilfiger®, Hugo Boss®, Lacoste®, and SCUDERIA FERRARI®.
The primary factors that influence annual sales are general economic conditions in the Company’s U.S. and international markets, new product introductions, the level and effectiveness of advertising and marketing expenditures and product pricing decisions.
57.6% of the Company’s total sales are from international markets (see Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements), and therefore reported sales made in those markets are affected by foreign exchange rates. The Company’s international sales are primarily billed in local currencies (predominantly Euros, British Pounds and Swiss Francs) and translated to U.S. dollars at average exchange rates for financial reporting purposes.
The Company divides its business into two major geographic locations: United States operations, and International, which includes the results of all other non-U.S. Company operations. The allocation of geographic revenue is based upon the location of the customer. The Company’s International operations in Europe, the Middle East, the Americas (excluding the United States), and Asia account for 37.4%, 7.3%, 6.6% and 6.3%, respectively, of the Company’s total net sales for fiscal 2021. A vast majority of the Company’s tangible International assets are owned by the Company’s Swiss and Hong Kong subsidiaries.
The Company’s business is seasonal. There are two major selling seasons in the Company’s markets: the spring season, which includes school graduations and several holidays; and, most importantly, the Christmas and holiday season. Major selling seasons in certain international markets center on significant local holidays that occur in late winter or early spring. The Company’s net sales historically have been higher during the second half of the fiscal year. The second half of each fiscal year accounted for 68.8% and 56.6% of the Company’s net sales for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The Company’s retail operations consist of 45 retail outlet locations in the United States and two locations in Canada.
The significant factors that influence annual sales volumes in the Company’s retail operations are similar to those that influence U.S. wholesale sales. In addition, most of the Company’s retail outlet locations are near vacation destinations and, therefore, the seasonality of these stores is driven by the peak tourist seasons associated with these locations.
In December 2019, COVID-19 emerged and subsequently spread worldwide. The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic in March 2020, resulting in federal, state and local governments and other authorities mandating various restrictions, including travel restrictions, quarantines and other social distancing requirements. The Company’s operating results for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 were materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. See “The COVID-19 pandemic has materially affected how we and our customers and suppliers operate, and the duration and extent to which COVID-19, new strains or variants, or other public health threats and epidemics will impact our future results of operations and overall financial performance remains uncertain” under Item 1A. Risk Factors, above.
Gross Margins
The Company’s overall gross margins are primarily affected by four major factors: channel and product sales mix, product pricing strategy, manufacturing costs and fluctuation in foreign currency exchange rates, in particular the relationship between the U.S. dollar and the Swiss Franc, British Pound and the Euro. Gross margins for the Company may not be comparable to those of other companies, since some companies include all the costs related to their distribution networks in cost of sales whereas the Company does not include the costs associated with its warehousing and distribution facilities nor the occupancy costs for the Company Stores segment in the cost of sales line item. Those costs are included in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Gross margins vary among the brands included in the Company’s portfolio and also among watch models within each brand. Watches in the Company’s owned brands category generally earn higher gross margin percentages than watches in the licensed brands category. The difference in gross margin percentages within the licensed brands category is primarily due to the impact of royalty
payments made on the licensed brands. Gross margins in the Company’s e-commerce business generally earn higher gross margin percentages than those of the traditional wholesale business. Gross margins in the Company’s outlet business are affected by the mix of product sold and may exceed those of the wholesale business since the Company earns margins on its outlet store sales from manufacture to point of sale to the consumer.
All of the Company’s brands compete with a number of other brands not only on styling but also on wholesale and retail price. The Company’s ability to improve margins through price increases is therefore, to some extent, constrained by competitors’ actions.
Cost of sales of the Company’s products consists primarily of costs for raw materials, component costs, royalties, depreciation, amortization, assembly costs, shipping to customers, design costs and unit overhead costs associated with the Company’s supply chain operations predominately in Switzerland and Asia. The Company’s supply chain operations consist of logistics management of assembly operations and product sourcing predominately in Switzerland and Asia and minor assembly in Switzerland. A majority of the Swiss watch movements used in the manufacture of Movado, Ebel and Concord watches are purchased from two suppliers, one of which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of one of the Company’s competitors. That competitive supplier announced in February 2021 that it will no longer sell mechanical Swiss movements to third parties. Although mechanical movements are only used in a relatively small number of the Company’s watch styles, the elimination of a source of supply could make it more difficult for the Company to satisfy its requirements for mechanical movements. Through productivity improvement efforts, the Company has controlled the level of overhead costs and maintained flexibility in its cost structure by outsourcing a significant portion of its component and assembly requirements.
Since a significant amount of the Company’s product costs are incurred in Swiss Francs, fluctuations in the U.S. dollar/Swiss Franc exchange rate can impact the Company’s cost of goods sold and, therefore, its gross margins. The Company reduces its exposure to the Swiss Franc exchange rate risk through a hedging program. Under the hedging program, the Company manages most of its foreign currency exposures on a consolidated basis, which allows it to net certain exposures and take advantage of natural offsets. In the event these exposures do not offset, the Company has the ability to hedge its Swiss Franc purchases using a combination of forward contracts and purchased currency options. The Company’s hedging program mitigated the impact of the exchange rate fluctuations on product costs and gross margins for fiscal years 2021 and 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses
The Company’s SG&A expenses consist primarily of marketing, selling, distribution, general and administrative expenses.
Marketing expenditures are based principally on overall strategic considerations relative to maintaining or increasing market share in markets that management considers to be crucial to the Company’s continued success as well as on general economic conditions in the various markets around the world in which the Company sells its products. Marketing expenses include salaries, various forms of media advertising, digital advertising (including social media), customer acquisition costs and co-operative advertising with customers and distributors and other point of sale marketing and promotion spending.
Selling expenses consist primarily of salaries, sales commissions, sales force travel and related expenses, credit card fees, depreciation and amortization, expenses associated with the Company’s annual worldwide customer conference and other industry trade shows and operating costs incurred in connection with the Company’s retail business. Sales commissions vary with overall sales levels. Retail selling expenses consist primarily of payroll related and store occupancy costs.
Distribution expenses consist primarily of costs of running distribution centers and customer service and include salaries, rental and other occupancy costs, security, depreciation and amortization of furniture and leasehold improvements and shipping supplies.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other employee compensation including performance-based compensation, employee benefit plan costs, office rent, management information systems costs, professional fees, bad debts, depreciation and amortization of furniture, computer software, leasehold improvements, amortization of finite lived intangible assets, patent and trademark expenses and various other general corporate expenses.
Impairment of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
As a result of the economic conditions caused by the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company performed a quantitative assessment of its goodwill and long-lived intangible assets at April 30, 2020. The Company recorded a goodwill impairment of $133.7 million related to the Company’s Watch and Accessory Brands reporting unit, as the carrying value of goodwill exceeded the fair value at April 30, 2020. The Company also recorded a $22.2 million impairment charge related to MVMT’s trade name and customer relationships as the carrying amount of these long-lived intangible assets exceeded the fair value.
Other Non-Operating Income
The Company recorded a gain on sale of a non-operating asset of $1.3 million related to a sale of a building in an international location for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021.
Based on updated revenue and EBITDA (as defined in the acquisition agreement) performance expectations during the earn-out period for MVMT, the Company recorded a non-cash gain on remeasurement of the contingent consideration of $15.4 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020. As the remeasurement is not a direct benefit realized from operating the MVMT business, the Company has recorded the change in contingent consideration within non-operating income.
Interest Expense
To the extent it borrows, the Company records interest expense on its revolving credit facility. Additionally, interest expense includes the amortization of deferred financing costs, and unused commitment fees associated with the Company’s revolving credit facility.
Income Taxes
The Company follows the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes as prescribed under the Accounting Standards Codification guidance for Income Taxes (“ASC Topic 740”). ASC Topic 740 requires the Company to recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and tax bases of existing assets and liabilities.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and those significant policies are more fully described in Note 1 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements. The preparation of these financial statements and the application of certain critical accounting policies require management to make judgments based on estimates and assumptions that affect the information reported. On an on-going basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to sales discounts and markdowns, product returns, bad debt, inventories, income taxes, warranty obligations, useful lives of property, plant and equipment, impairments, stock-based compensation and contingencies and litigation. Management bases its estimates and judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources on historical experience, contractual commitments and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from these estimates. Management believes the following are the critical accounting policies requiring significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
In the wholesale channel, revenue is recognized and recorded when a contract is in place, obligations under the terms of a contract with the customer are satisfied and control is transferred to the customer. Such revenue is measured as the ultimate amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring goods including variable consideration. The Company considers transfer of control passes to the wholesale customer upon shipment or upon receipt depending on the agreement with the customer and shipping terms. Control passes to outlet store customers at the time of sale and to substantially all e-commerce upon shipment. Prior to January 1, 2021, the requirement for recognizing revenue for e-commerce was met upon delivery to the customer. Factors considered in the transfer of control include the right to payment, transfer of legal title, physical possession and customer acceptance of the goods and whether the significant risks and rewards for the goods belong with the customer. The Company records estimates of variable consideration, which includes sales returns, markdowns, volume-based programs and sales and cash discount allowances as a reduction of revenue in the same period that the sales are recorded. These estimates are based upon the expected value method considering all reasonably available information including historical analysis, customer agreements and/or currently known factors that arise in the normal course of business. Returns, discounts and allowances have historically been within the Company’s expectations and the provisions established. The future provisional rates may differ from those experienced in the past. Taxes imposed by governmental authorities on the Company's revenue-producing activities with customers, such as sales taxes and value added taxes, are excluded from net sales.
The Company’s sale of smart watches contains multiple performance obligations. The Company allocates revenue to each performance obligation using the relative standalone selling price method. The Company determines the standalone selling prices based on the prices charged to customers. Amounts allocated to the delivered smart watch collections and the related essential software are recognized at the time of sale. The Company’s smart watch collections have been available in limited quantities and in limited distribution, and, as a result, the amounts related to cloud service and app updates were immaterial to all periods presented and thereby recognized at time of sale.
The Company has considered each transaction to sell goods as separate and distinct, with no additional promises made. The Company uses the understanding of what the customer expects to receive as the final product to determine whether goods or services should be combined and accounted for as a single performance obligation. The Company does not incur significant costs to obtain or fulfill its contracts.
Goodwill
At the time of an acquisition, in accordance with applicable guidance, the Company records all acquired net assets at their estimated fair values. These estimated fair values are based on management’s assessments and independent third-party appraisals. The excess of the purchase consideration plus the fair value of any noncontrolling interest in the acquired company over the aggregate estimated fair values of the acquired net assets, including any contingent consideration, is recorded as goodwill.
Goodwill is not amortized but is assessed for impairment at least annually on November 1st. Under applicable guidance, the Company generally performs its annual goodwill impairment analysis using a qualitative approach to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill is less than its carrying value. If, based on the results of the qualitative assessment, it is concluded that it is more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill is less than its carrying value, a quantitative test is performed.
The quantitative impairment test is performed to measure the amount of impairment loss, if any. The quantitative impairment test identifies the existence of potential impairment by comparing the fair value of each reporting unit with its carrying value, including goodwill. If a reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, the Company will record an impairment charge, as an operating expense item, based on that difference. The impairment charge will be limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Determination of the fair value of a reporting unit and the fair value of individual assets and liabilities of a reporting unit is based on management’s assessment, including the consideration of independent third-party appraisals when necessary. Furthermore, this determination is subjective in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions could have a significant impact on whether or not an impairment charge is recognized and the amount of any such charge. Estimates of fair value are primarily determined using discounted cash flows, market comparisons, and recent transactions. These approaches use significant estimates and assumptions, including projected future cash flows, discount rates, growth rates, and determination of appropriate market comparisons.
The Company performs its annual impairment assessment of goodwill at the beginning of the fourth quarter of each fiscal year. The Company determined that there was no impairment in fiscal 2020. During the three months ended April 30, 2020, in light of the COVID-19 pandemic that resulted in the closing of the Company’s stores and of the vast majority of the stores of the Company’s wholesale customers (resulting in a decrease in revenues and gross margin), a decrease in customer spending and the recent decline in the Company’s market capitalization, the Company concluded that a triggering event had occurred during the first quarter, resulting in the need to perform a quantitative interim impairment assessment over the Company’s Olivia Burton, MVMT and Company Stores’ long-lived assets as well as the Watch and Accessory Brands reporting unit.
After adjusting the carrying value of MVMT’s intangible assets, the Company completed an interim quantitative impairment test of goodwill as of April 30, 2020 in which the Company compared the fair value of the Watch and Accessory Brands reporting unit to its respective carrying value. An impairment test of goodwill was not performed for the Company Stores reporting unit as there was no goodwill at this reporting unit. The fair value estimate for the Watches and Accessory reporting unit was based on the income and market approaches. The discounted cash flow method under the income approach involves estimating the cash flows in a discrete forecast period and a terminal value based on the Gordon Growth Model and discounting at a rate of return that reflects the relative risk of the cash flows. The market approach involves applying valuation multiples to the operating performance of the Watch and Accessory Brands reporting unit derived from comparable publicly traded companies based on the relative historical and projected operations of the reporting unit.
The key estimates and assumptions used in the discounted cash flows model included the Company’s discount rate, revenue growth rates, EBIT margins and long-term growth rate. The Company’s assumptions were based on the actual historical performance of the reporting units and took into account the recent severe and continued weakening of operating results as well as the anticipated rate of recovery, and implied risk premiums based on market prices of the Company’s common stock as of the assessment date. The
significant estimates in the market approach model included identifying similar companies with comparable business factors such as size, growth, profitability, risk and return on investment and assessing comparable revenue and earnings multiples in estimating the fair value of the reporting unit. The excess of the Watch and Accessory Brands unit’s carrying value over the estimate of the fair value was recorded in the Watch and Accessory Brands segment as the goodwill impairment charge in the first quarter of 2021, totaling $133.7 million which resulted in zero goodwill remaining.
Intangibles
Intangible assets consist primarily of trade names, customer relationships and trademarks. In accordance with applicable guidance, the Company estimates and records the fair value of purchased intangible assets at the time of their acquisition. The fair values of these intangible assets are estimated based on independent third-party appraisals. Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives, which range from three to ten years, and are evaluated for impairment periodically and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their related carrying values may not be fully recoverable. Estimates of fair value for finite-lived intangible assets are primarily determined using discounted cash flows analysis of such assets, with consideration of market comparisons and recent transactions. This approach uses significant estimates and assumptions, including projected future cash flows, discount rates and growth rates. The Company determined that there was no impairment in fiscal 2020.
During the three months ended April 30, 2020, in light of the COVID-19 pandemic that resulted in the closing of the Company’s stores and of the vast majority of the stores of the Company’s wholesale customers (resulting in a decrease in revenues and gross margin), a decrease in customer spending and the recent decline in the Company’s market capitalization, the Company concluded that a triggering event had occurred during the first quarter, resulting in the need to perform a quantitative interim impairment assessment over the Company’s Olivia Burton, MVMT and Company Stores’ long-lived assets as well as the Watch and Accessory Brands reporting unit.
The Company performed recoverability tests for the long-lived assets of MVMT, Olivia Burton and the Company Stores as of April 30, 2020. The Company concluded that the carrying amounts of the long-lived assets of Olivia Burton and the Company Stores were recoverable, while the long-lived assets of MVMT may not be recoverable. Utilizing a royalty rate to determine discounted projected future cash flows in the valuation of MVMT’s trade name and a discounted cash flow method for the valuation of MVMT’s customer relationships, the Company concluded that the fair values of MVMT’s tradenames and customer relationships did not exceed their carrying values. As a result, the Company recorded impairment charges in the Watch and Accessory Brands segment totaling $22.2 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2021, decreasing MVMT’s trade name to $2.4 million and MVMT’s customer relationships to zero.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
In the first quarter of 2021, the Company adopted ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (ASU 2016-13). As a result of adoption, the Company replaced its methodology in determining the allowance for doubtful accounts which was based on an analysis of the aging of accounts receivable, assessments of collectability based on historical trends, the financial condition of the Company’s customers and an evaluation of economic conditions with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires the use of a forward-looking expected credit loss rate for its trade accounts receivables. The adoption had no material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
Inventories
The Company values its inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using the average cost method. The Company performs reviews of its on-hand inventory to determine amounts, if any, of inventory that is deemed discontinued, excess, or unsaleable. Inventory classified as discontinued, together with the related component parts that can be assembled into saleable finished goods, is sold primarily through the Company’s retail outlet locations.
Long-Lived Assets
The Company periodically reviews the estimated useful lives of its depreciable assets based on factors including historical experience, the expected beneficial service period of the asset, the quality and durability of the asset and the Company’s maintenance policy including periodic upgrades. Changes in useful lives are made on a prospective basis unless factors indicate the carrying amounts of the assets may not be recoverable and an impairment is necessary.
The Company performs an impairment review of its long-lived assets once events or changes in circumstances indicate, in management’s judgment, that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. When such a determination has been made, management compares the carrying value of the asset groups with their estimated future undiscounted cash flows. If it is determined that an impairment has occurred, the fair value of the asset group is determined and compared to its carrying value. The excess of the
carrying value over the fair value, if any, is recognized as a loss during that period. The impairment is calculated as the difference between asset carrying values and their estimated fair values. Other than as it relates to intangibles, as described above, no impairment charge was recorded in fiscal 2021 or in fiscal 2020, respectively.
Warranties
All watches sold by the Company come with limited warranties covering the movement against defects in material and workmanship for periods ranging from two to three years from the date of purchase, with the exception of Tommy Hilfiger watches, for which the warranty period is two to ten years. In addition, the warranty period is five years for the gold plating on certain Movado watch cases and bracelets. The Company records an estimate for future warranty costs based on historical repair costs. Warranty costs have historically been within the Company’s expectations and the provisions established. If such costs were to substantially exceed estimates, they could have an adverse effect on the Company’s operating results.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company utilizes the Black-Scholes option-pricing model which requires that certain assumptions be made to calculate the fair value of each option at the grant date. The expected life of stock option grants is determined using historical data and represents the time period during which the stock option is expected to be outstanding until it is exercised. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. treasury note interest rate in effect on the date of grant for the expected life of the stock option. The expected stock price volatility is derived from historical volatility and calculated based on the estimated term structure of the stock option grant. The expected dividend yield is calculated using the Company’s historical average of annualized dividend yields and applied over the expected term of the option. Management monitors stock option exercises and employee termination patterns to estimate forfeitures rates within the valuation model. Separate groups of employees that have similar historical exercise behavior are considered separately for valuation purposes.
In addition to stock options, the Company may also grant stock awards to employees and directors. The stock awards are generally in the form of time-vesting restricted stock unit awards (pursuant to which unrestricted shares of Common Stock are issued to the grantee when the award vests) or performance-based awards (under which vesting occurs only if one or more predetermined financial goals are achieved within the relevant performance period); both are subject to the participant’s continued employment (or board service) with the Company through such vesting date. Stock awards generally are cliff-vested after three years from the date of grant (one year in the case of directors’ awards). The fair value of stock awards is equal to the closing price of the Company’s publicly-traded common stock on the grant date.
Compensation expense for all awards is accrued based on the estimated number of instruments for which the requisite service is expected to be rendered. This estimate is reflected in the period the stock option and stock awards are either granted or canceled. Expense related to stock options and stock awards compensation is recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting term.
Contingent Consideration
Under the MVMT acquisition agreement (see Note 4 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements), the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration was determined using a Monte Carlo simulation with key assumptions that include revenue and brand EBITDA (as defined in the acquisition agreement), volatilities, estimated discount rates, risk-free interest rate, and correlation. Each reporting period after the acquisition, the Company will revalue the contingent purchase price liability and record increases or decreases in the fair value of the liability in its Consolidated Statements of Operations. Changes in fair value can result from the estimated achievement of the revenue and brand EBITDA performance hurdles, and movement in discounts rates, volatilities, and the other key assumptions. The inputs and assumptions are not observable in the market but reflect the assumptions the Company believes would be made by a market participant. The possible outcomes for the contingent consideration range from $0 to $100 million on an undiscounted basis. As a result, changes in the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration over time may result in significant volatility in the Company’s reported earnings.
Based on updated revenue and EBITDA (as defined in the acquisition agreement) performance expectations during the earn-out period for MVMT, the Company remeasured the contingent consideration to $1.9 million at July 31, 2019 and to zero at January 31, 2020. Of the $16.9 million decrease in the liability, $15.4 million is included in non-operating income (portion of contingent consideration allocated to purchase price) in the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, and 0.5 million and $1.0 million are reflected as a reduction of deferred compensation (portion of contingent consideration allocated to deferred compensation based on future service requirements) within other current assets and other non-current assets, respectively, in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As the remeasurement is not a direct benefit realized from operating the MVMT business, the Company has recorded the change in contingent consideration within non-operating income in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, and
as such, has not included it in operating income for the Watch and Accessory Brands segment. Refer to Note 20 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for Segment and Geographic Information.
Pension Benefit Obligation
The Company sponsors a plan in Switzerland. The pension expense and obligation are developed from actuarial valuations. Two critical assumptions in determining pension expense and obligations are discount rate and expected long-term return on plan assets. The Company will evaluate these assumptions annually. Other assumptions reflect demographic factors such as retirements, mortality and turnover and are evaluated periodically and updated to reflect actual experience. Actual results may differ from actuarial assumptions. The discount rate represents the market rate for high-quality AAA and AA-rated corporate bonds with durations corresponding to the expected durations of the benefit obligations and service time and is used to calculate the present value of the expected future cash flows for benefit obligations under the pension plan. A decrease in the discount rate increases the present value of pension benefit obligations. The discount rate used to determine the Company’s benefit obligation at January 31, 2021 is 0%. A 25-basis point increase in the discount rate would decrease the present value of pension obligation by approximately $0.5 million at January 31, 2021. The Company considers the current and expected asset allocations of the pension plan, as well as historical and expected long-term rates of return on those types of plan assets, in determining the expected long-term return on plan assets. A 25 basis point decrease in the expected long-term return on plan assets would not have resulted in a material impact on the Company’s pension expense for fiscal 2021.
Income Taxes
The Company, under ASC Topic 740, follows the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax laws and tax rates, in each jurisdiction where the Company operates, and applied to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities due to a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. In addition, the amounts of any future tax benefits are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent such benefits are not expected to be realized on a more-likely-than-not basis. The Company calculates estimated income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which it operates. This process involves estimating actual current tax expense along with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for both book and tax purposes.
The Company follows guidance for accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. This guidance clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in a company’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement standard for the financial statement recognition and measurement of an income tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. This guidance also provides guidance for de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosures and transitions.
The Company elected to account for the tax on GILTI as a period cost and therefore has not recorded deferred taxes related to GILTI.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND INITIATIVES
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic and related public health measures materially impacted the Company’s operating results for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 and continue to materially affect how we and our customers and suppliers operate our businesses. For example, temporary closures and other restrictions affecting brick and mortar retail stores resulted in sales declines in the Company’s outlet stores and in its wholesale business relative to the prior year period. These declines were partially offset by strong growth in e-commerce sales, by both the Company and many of its retail customers. In addition, during the 2021 fiscal year, the Company implemented remote work policies and employed additional safety measures for people continuing critical on-site work. These policies and measures caused strain for, and may have adversely impacted the productivity of, certain employees, and these conditions may persist and harm our business, including future operating results.
The Company expects adverse impacts on net sales to continue into fiscal 2022 in its retail and wholesale channels as consumers continue to follow social distancing requirements or recommendations and other safety measures, which may decrease demand for our products as consumers have fewer occasions to use and wear our products, as well as face layoffs and other negative economic impacts from the COVID-19 outbreak that adversely affect their disposable income and discretionary purchases. These trends could worsen if either COVID-19 infections increase as new variants and strains emerge or treatments and vaccines are not as effective as expected. The ongoing impact of the outbreak of COVID-19 on the Company’s liquidity, revenues, impairment considerations
surrounding the Company’s long-lived assets and results of operations cannot be reasonably predicted at this time due to the high level of uncertainty regarding future developments, the duration of containment measures, the speed at which vaccines are administered to the general public and the timeline for recovery. The global macroeconomic effects of the pandemic as well as the microeconomic effects on our customers, consumers and their purchasing decisions may persist for an undeterminable period even after the pandemic has subsided.
In response to this challenging environment, while the Company’s focus has remained on the health and safety of its associates, customers and business partners, the Company has taken and continues to take the following actions:
Revenue-Generating Activities
•
Optimizing the Company’s e-commerce platforms and ensuring that distribution centers remain operational across all major regions; and
•
Supporting the Company’s wholesale customers as local containment measures ease throughout the world.
Minimizing Non-Essential Operating Costs Across All Key Areas of Spend
•
Driving SG&A savings by minimizing non-essential operating costs, right-sizing marketing expenses to the lower revenue base while maintaining a focus on digital, and driving procurement savings, including by reducing third party services. These initiatives resulted in fiscal 2021 SG&A savings of approximately $90 million (Organizational Costs savings of this $90 million are detailed below) as compared to the prior year. The Company anticipates that approximately half of these savings will recur in fiscal 2022.
Strengthening the Company’s Balance Sheet and Enhancing Financial Flexibility
•
Adapting our inventory management to more precisely take account of market conditions and expected demand; and
•
Reducing capital expenditures while prioritizing investment in high-return projects, particularly in digital.
Preserving Liquidity
•
Suspending the share repurchase program during fiscal 2021. The Company subsequently announced on March 25, 2021 the establishment of a new share repurchase program under which the Company is authorized to purchase up to $25.0 million of its outstanding common stock from time to time; and
•
Suspending the Company’s regular quarterly cash dividend during fiscal 2021. The Company subsequently paid a cash dividend of $0.10 per share on February 5, 2021 to shareholders of record on January 21, 2021 and declared an additional cash dividend of $0.20 per share payable on April 21, 2021 to shareholders of record on April 7, 2021.
Addressing Organizational Costs
•
Applied for and received an aggregate of approximately $6.0 million in government payroll subsidy programs in various countries in fiscal 2021 to mitigate payroll expense;
•
Furloughed approximately 80% of the Company’s North American workforce from early April generally through early August 2020, resulting in compensation expense savings of approximately $10.5 million;
•
Reduced salaries during the furlough period of all active salaried employees by 15% to 25%, except for Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Efraim Grinberg, who volunteered to forego all salary during the furlough period. The Board of Directors also waived the cash portion of their compensation during that period. These actions resulted in compensation expense savings of approximately $1.5 million;
•
Froze the Company’s match on executive deferred compensation plans and the Company’s 401(k) match from early April through the end of fiscal 2021, with such matches being resumed in the first quarter of fiscal 2022. The freeze resulted in compensation expense savings of approximately $1.3 million; and
•
Implemented a permanent workforce reduction that resulted in savings of approximately $9 million in fiscal 2021 and is expected to result in savings of approximately $16 million in fiscal year 2022.
The Company will continue to consider near-term demands and the long-term financial health of the business as steps are taken to mitigate the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and the uncertain business environment.
On March 27, 2020, Congress passed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) which provides economic relief to assist American families and companies during the COVID-19 global pandemic. The CARES Act includes, among
other things, provisions related to net operating loss carryback periods, refundable payroll tax credits and the delay of certain payroll taxes, and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. The impacts of the CARES Act are included in the calculation of the Company’s effective tax rate. See Note 14- Income Taxes for more information.
Fiscal 2021 Impairments
During the three months ended April 30, 2020, in light of the COVID-19 pandemic that resulted in the closing of the Company’s stores and of the vast majority of the stores of the Company’s wholesale customers (resulting in a decrease in revenues and gross margin), a decrease in customer spending and the recent decline in global equity markets, the Company concluded that a triggering event had occurred during the first quarter, resulting in the need to perform a quantitative interim impairment assessment over the Company’s Olivia Burton, MVMT and Company Stores’ long-lived assets as well as the Watch and Accessory Brands reporting unit.
The Company made revisions to its internal forecasts, resulting in a reduction in both current and future expected cash flows, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the uncertain business environment. As a result, during the first quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company recorded impairment charges related to goodwill of $133.7 million and intangible assets related to MVMT’s tradename and customer relationships of $22.2 million.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a discussion of the results of operations for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 along with a discussion of the changes in financial condition during fiscal 2021. For a discussion of our results of operations in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019, please see “Results of Operations” in Item 7 (Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations) of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 26, 2020.
In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company’s results of operations for fiscal 2021 should not be deemed indicative of the results that we will experience in fiscal 2022. See “Recent Developments and Initiatives” above. See also “The COVID-19 pandemic has materially affected how we and our customers and suppliers operate, and the duration and extent to which COVID-19, new strains or variants, or other public health threats and epidemics will impact our future results of operations and overall financial performance remains uncertain” under Item 1A. Risk Factors, above.
The following are net sales by business segment and geographic location (in thousands):
The following are net sales by category (in thousands):
The following table presents the Company’s results of operations expressed as a percentage of net sales for the fiscal years indicated:
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Net Sales
Net sales in fiscal 2021 were $506.4 million, $194.6 million or 27.8% below the prior year. This decrease is primarily a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. For fiscal 2021, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates positively impacted net sales by $8.3 million when compared to the prior year.
Watch and Accessory Brands Net Sales
Net sales in fiscal 2021 in the Watch and Accessory Brands segment were $447.4 million, below the prior year period by $165.0 million, or 26.9%. The decrease in net sales was primarily attributable to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the resultant closure of the stores of the Company’s wholesale customers during a portion of the period and continued restrictions on some stores of the Company’s wholesale customers during the period. There were decreases in net sales in both the United States and International locations of the Watch and Accessory Brands segment.
United States Watch and Accessory Brands Net Sales
Net sales in fiscal 2021 in the United States locations of the Watch and Accessory Brands segment were $158.0 million, below the prior year period by $58.2 million, or 26.9%, resulting from net sales decreases across most brands in both the owned and licensed brand categories due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The net sales recorded in the owned brands category decreased by $42.8 million, or 25.8%, and net sales recorded in the licensed brand category decreased $12.8 million, or 28.9%.
International Watch and Accessory Brands Net Sales
Net sales in fiscal 2021 in the International locations of the Watch and Accessory Brands segment were $289.4 million, below the prior year by $106.8 million, or 27.0%, which included fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates which favorably impacted net sales by $8.3 million when compared to the prior year. The decrease in net sales was across all brands in both the owned and licensed brand categories due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The net sales decrease recorded in the owned brands category was $36.9 million, or 40.1% and is due to sales decreases primarily in Europe, the Americas (excluding the United States), Asia, and the Middle East. The net sales decrease in the licensed brands category was $69.6 million, or 23.1%, primarily due to net sales decreases in Europe, the Americas (excluding the United States), Asia and the Middle East.
Company Stores Net Sales
Net sales in fiscal 2021 in the Company Stores segment were $59.0 million, $29.5 million or 33.3% below the prior year period. The net sales decrease is primarily the result of the closure of the Company’s retail stores during a portion of the period in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and continued restrictions on some of the Company’s retail stores during the period in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. This decrease was partially offset by the addition of new stores that did not exist in the prior-year period but contributed to sales in the current period prior to and after the COVID-19 related closures that began in mid-March. As of January 31, 2021, all of the Company stores are open.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for fiscal 2021 was $270.5 million or 53.4% of net sales as compared to $374.9 million or 53.5% of net sales in the prior year. The decrease in gross profit of $104.4 million was primarily due to lower net sales while gross margin percentage remained relatively flat as compared to the prior year period. Gross margin percentage benefitted from cost savings of approximately 110 basis points and a positive impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates of approximately 30 basis points, offset by the decreased leveraging of certain fixed costs as a result of lower sales of approximately 130 basis points, corporate initiatives related to an increase in inventory reserves in response to the COVID-19 pandemic of approximately 10 basis points and additional U.S. special tariffs of approximately 10 basis points.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”)
SG&A expenses in fiscal 2021 were $256.7 million, representing a decrease from the prior year period of $75.2 million, or 22.7%, primarily from lower marketing expenses of $44.0 million; a decrease in payroll related expenses of $32.8 million primarily as a result of the furloughing of employees and temporary salary reductions starting at the beginning of April (with the majority of these actions ending in July), permanent staff reductions and government subsidies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic; a $4.4 million decrease in consulting and recruiting charges; a decrease of $4.1 million in travel and entertainment charges due to travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic; a decrease of $2.7 million in trade show costs due to the cancellation of a global customer event due to COVID-19 health concerns and travel restrictions; a decrease in amortization expense of $2.2 million as a result of a reduction in intangible assets due to the impairment taken during the current period; a decrease of $1.3 million in sales commissions; and a reduction in credit card fees of $0.7 million due to less sales in the current year period as compared to the prior year period. The decrease in SG&A was partially offset by an increase in corporate initiative charges primarily in response to the COVID-19 pandemic of $11.9 million consisting of $8.3 million in severance and payroll related, $1.5 million in write-off of unrefunded trade show deposits, $1.2 million in other restructuring charges and $0.9 million in additional accounts receivable reserves; and an increase in performance-based compensation of $9.8 million. For the year ended January 31, 2021, fluctuations in foreign currency rates related to the foreign subsidiaries negatively impacted SG&A expenses by $2.2 million when compared to the prior year.
Impairment of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
As a result of the economic conditions caused by the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company performed a quantitative assessment of its goodwill and long-lived intangible assets at April 30, 2020. The Company recorded a goodwill impairment of $133.7 million related to the Company’s Watch and Accessory Brands reporting unit as the carrying value of goodwill exceeded the fair value at April 30, 2020. The Company also recorded a $22.2 million impairment charge related to MVMT’s trade name and customer relationships as the carrying amount of these long-lived intangible assets exceeded the fair value.
Watch and Accessory Brands Operating (Loss)/Income
For fiscal 2021 the Company recorded an operating loss of $152.7 million in the Watch and Accessory Brands segment which included goodwill and intangible assets impairment charges of $133.7 million and $22.2 million, respectively. Without these charges, for the twelve months ended January 31, 2021, the Company would have generated operating income of $3.2 million as compared to operating income of $29.5 million for the twelve months ended January 31, 2020, which includes $29.1 million and $29.0 million, respectively, of unallocated corporate expenses as well as $63.0 million and $73.3 million, respectively, of certain intercompany profits related to the Company’s supply chain operations. In addition to the assets impairments, the decrease in operating income was the result of a decrease in gross profit of $93.4 million, which included corporate initiative costs of $0.7 million comprising an increase in inventory reserves, partially offset by a decrease in SG&A expenses of $67.1 million when compared to the prior year period. The decrease in gross profit was primarily the result of lower sales, and to a lesser extent, lower gross margin percentage. The decrease in SG&A expenses of $67.1 million resulted primarily from lower marketing expenses of $43.8 million; a decrease in payroll related expenses of $27.9 million primarily as a result of the furloughing of employees and temporary salary reductions starting at the beginning of April (with the majority of these actions ending in July), permanent staff reductions and government subsidies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic; a $4.4 million decrease in consulting and recruiting charges a decrease of $3.8 million in travel and entertainment charges due to travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic; a decrease of $2.7 million in trade show costs due to the cancellation of a global customer trade show due to COVID-19 health concerns and travel restrictions; a decrease in amortization expense of $2.2 million as a result of a reduction in intangible assets due to the impairment taken during the current period; and a decrease of $0.6 million in sales commissions. The decrease in SG&A was partially offset by an increase in corporate initiative charges primarily in response to the COVID-19 pandemic of $11.9 million consisting of $8.3 million in severance and payroll related, $1.5 million in write-off of unrefunded trade show deposits, $1.2 million in other restructuring charges and $0.9 million in additional accounts receivable reserves; and an increase in performance-based compensation of $10.0 million. For the twelve months ended January 31, 2021, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates positively impacted the Watch and Accessory Brands segment operating loss by $1.2 million when compared to the prior year.
U.S. Watch and Accessory Brands Operating Loss
For fiscal 2021 the Company recorded an operating loss of $138.4 million in the United States locations of the Watch and Accessory Brands segment which included goodwill and impairment charges of $77.5 million and $22.2 million, respectively. Without these charges, for the twelve months ended January 31, 2021, operating loss would have been $38.7 million as compared to operating loss of $35.7 million for the twelve months ended January 31, 2020, which includes unallocated corporate expenses of $29.1 million and $29.0 million, respectively. In addition to the assets impairments, the increase in operating loss was the result of lower gross profit of $37.2 million, which reflected corporate initiative costs of $0.7 million comprising of an increase in inventory reserves, partially offset by lower SG&A expenses of $34.2 million. The decrease in gross profit of $37.2 million was due to lower sales and, to a lesser extent, a lower gross margin percentage. The decrease in SG&A expenses of $34.2 million resulted primarily from lower marketing costs of $25.0 million; a decrease in payroll related expenses of $16.6 million primarily as a result of the furloughing of employees and temporary salary reductions starting at the beginning of April (with the majority of these actions ending in July) and permanent staff reductions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic; a decrease in amortization expense of $2.2 million as a result of a reduction in intangible assets due to the impairment taken during the current period; a decrease of $1.8 million in travel and entertainment charges due to travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic; a decrease of $1.8 million in consulting and recruiting charges and a decrease of $0.3 million in sales commissions. The decrease in SG&A was partially offset by an increase in corporate initiative charges primarily in response to the COVID-19 pandemic of $7.3 million consisting of $6.3 million in severance and payroll related and $1.0 million in other restructuring charges; and an increase in performance-based compensation of $7.1 million.
International Watch and Accessory Brands Operating (Loss)/Income
For fiscal 2021 the Company recorded an operating loss of $14.3 million in the International locations of the Watch and Accessory Brands segment which included goodwill impairment charges of $56.2 million. Without these charges, for the twelve months ended January 31, 2021, the Company would have generated operating income of $41.9 million as compared to operating income of $65.2 million for the twelve months ended January 31, 2020, which amounts include $63.0 million and $73.3 million, respectively, of certain intercompany profits related to the Company’s International supply chain operations. In addition to the goodwill impairment charges, the decrease in operating income was primarily related to lower gross profit of $56.2 million, partially offset by lower SG&A expenses of $32.9 million. The decrease in gross profit of $56.2 million was primarily related to lower net sales, partially offset by a higher gross margin percentage. The decrease in SG&A expenses of $32.9 million resulted primarily from lower marketing costs of $18.8 million; a decrease in payroll related expense of $11.3 million primarily as a result of the furloughing of employees and temporary salary reductions starting at the beginning of April (with the majority of these actions ending in July), permanent staff reductions and government subsidies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic; a decrease of $2.7 million in trade show costs due to cancellation of a global customer event due to COVID-19 health concerns and travel restrictions; a decrease of $2.6 million in consulting and recruiting charges; a decrease of $2.0 million in travel and entertainment charges due to travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic; and a decrease of $0.3 million in sales commissions. The decrease in SG&A was partially offset by an increase in corporate initiative charges primarily in response to the COVID-19 pandemic of $4.6 million consisting of $2.0 million in severance and payroll related, $1.5 million in write-off of unrefunded trade show deposits, $0.9 million in additional accounts receivable reserves and $0.2 million in other restructuring charges; and an increase in performance-based compensation of $2.9 million. Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates positively impacted operating loss by $1.2 million when compared to the prior year.
Company Stores Operating Income
The Company recorded operating income of $10.5 million and $13.5 million in the Company Stores segment for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in operating income of $3.0 million was primarily related to lower gross profit of $11.0 million mainly due to lower sales, partially offset by lower SG&A expenses of $8.0 million and a higher gross margin percentage. The decrease in SG&A expenses was primarily due to a decrease in payroll related expenses of $4.9 million primarily due to the closing of the Company’s stores and the furloughing of employees during portions of the period due to the COVID-19 pandemic; a decrease of $0.7 million in credit card fees due to less sales in the current year period as compared to the prior year period; a decrease of $0.7 million in sales commissions; and a decrease in travel and entertainment charges of $0.3 million due to travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic. As of January 31, 2021, and 2020, the Company operated 47 retail outlet locations.
Other Non-Operating Income
The Company recorded a gain on sale of a non-operating asset of $1.3 million related to a sale of a building in an international location for fiscal 2021.
The Company recorded other income of $0.3 million related to the non-service components of the Company’s Swiss pension plan for fiscal 2021.
Based on updated revenue and EBITDA (as defined in the MVMT acquisition agreement) performance expectations during the earn-out period for MVMT, the Company recorded a non-cash gain on remeasurement of the contingent consideration of $15.4 million for fiscal 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $2.0 million for fiscal 2021 as compared to $0.9 million for fiscal 2020. The increase was due to higher weighted average interest rate and higher weighted average borrowings outstanding under the Company’s revolving credit facility during fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
Income Taxes
The Company recorded an income tax benefit of $31.2 million and an income tax provision of $15.1 million for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was 21.9%, and differed from the U.S. statutory tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to the CARES Act NOL Carryback Provision and related tax effects, and U.S. state net operating loss carryforwards generated in the current fiscal year, partially offset by impairments of the portion of goodwill of the Watch and Accessory Brands reporting unit which is not tax deductible. The effective rate for fiscal 2020 was 26.3%, and differed from the U.S. statutory tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to a limitation on a portion of the foreign tax credits related to GILTI tax.
Net (Loss)/ Income Attributable to Movado Group, Inc.
The Company recorded net loss attributable to Movado Group, Inc. of $111.5 million and net income attributable to Movado Group, Inc. of $42.7 million for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
At January 31, 2021 and January 31, 2020, the Company had $223.8 million and $185.9 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents. Of this total, $150.9 million and $121.3 million, respectively, consisted of cash and cash equivalents at the Company’s foreign subsidiaries.
The Company believes that cash flows from operations, including the impact of the Company corporate initiatives, combined with existing cash on hand and amounts available under its credit lines provide adequate funds to support its operating, capital and debt service requirements for the next twelve months subsequent to the issuance of these financial statements. During fiscal 2021 the Company’s cash generated from operations was negatively impacted due to widespread closures of the Company’s retail locations and the Company’s wholesale customers’ stores as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company entered this period of uncertainty with a healthy liquidity position, and it took actions to enhance the Company’s financial liquidity and flexibility, including minimizing all non-essential operating expenses (including marketing, travel and consulting services), reevaluating all capital expenditures, furloughing approximately 80% of the Company’s North American workforce during March through June and temporarily reducing the work-rate of international employees while applying for available government payroll subsidies in accordance with local government guidelines and programs, suspending the Company’s share repurchase program and regular quarterly dividend during fiscal 2021, reducing salaries and suspending Board of Director fees from April through June 2020, amending license agreements to reduce its royalty obligations in fiscal 2021, and negotiating rent deferrals or other arrangements in respect of its rent obligations for all of its Company Stores and certain other leases. As a precautionary measure, the Company borrowed an additional $30.9 million under its revolving credit facility in March 2020 and amended its revolving credit facility to modify some of its financial covenants. Effective as of the date of this annual report on Form 10-K, certain of these modifications were eliminated as a result of the Company’s achievement of certain milestones as of and for the periods ending January 31, 2021, as described below. During the second, third and fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company repaid $36.8 million, $10.9 million and $16.8 million, respectively, under its revolving credit facility. At January 31, 2021, $21.2 million remained outstanding under the Company’s revolving facility. Although the Company believes it has adequate sources of liquidity over the long term, continued uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, an economic recession or a slow recovery could adversely affect the Company’s business and liquidity.
At January 31, 2021 the Company had working capital of $374.0 million as compared to $355.3 million at January 31, 2020. The increase in working capital was primarily the result of additional cash of $37.9 million partially offset by lower inventory levels as the Company continues to monitor its inventory levels to align with expected sales. The Company defines working capital as the difference between current assets and current liabilities.
The Company had $68.4 million of cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2021 as compared to $32.1 million for fiscal 2020. Cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2021 included net loss attributable to the Movado Group, Inc. of $111.5 million, positively adjusted by $162.6 million related to non-cash items. Cash provided by operating activities included a decrease in investment in inventories of $21.6 million, an increase in accrued payroll of $11.3 million primarily due to an increase in performance-based compensation and an increase in severance accrual as a result of the Company’s corporate initiatives and an increase in accrued liabilities of $4.5 million primarily as a result of timing of payments. Cash used by operating activities for fiscal
2021 included an increase in income taxes receivable of $21.0 primarily due to the Company’s net loss in fiscal 2021 and a decrease of $7.8 million in accounts payable as a result of timing of payments.
Cash used in investing was $1.9 million for fiscal 2021 as compared to $13.4 million for fiscal 2020. The cash used in fiscal 2021 was primarily related to capital expenditures of $3.0 million primarily due to website platform upgrades and the construction of shop-in-shops at some of the Company’s wholesale customers, partially offset by proceeds from a sale of a non-operating asset in Switzerland of $1.3 million.
The Company expects that capital expenditures in fiscal 2022 will be approximately $10.0 million as compared to $3.0 million in fiscal 2021. The capital spending will be primarily for projects in the ordinary course of business including facilities improvements, shop-in-shops, website development, computer hardware and software and tooling costs. The Company has the ability to manage a portion of its capital expenditures on discretionary projects.
Cash used by financing activities was $34.4 million for fiscal 2021 as compared to $23.9 million for fiscal 2020. The cash used in fiscal 2021 included net repayment of bank borrowings of $33.6 million (net of proceeds from borrowings of $30.9 million) and $0.3 million in debt issuance cost resulting from the Company amending its revolving credit facility. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company suspended its quarterly dividends and share repurchases during fiscal 2021. However, on January 11, 2021, with consent of its bank group, the Company’s Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.10 per share, payable on February 5, 2021 to shareholders of record on January 21, 2021. In addition, on March 25, 2021, the Board of Directors approved the payment of a cash dividend in the amount of $0.20 for each share of the Company’s outstanding common stock and class A common stock. The dividend will be paid on April 21, 2021 to all shareholders of record as of the close of business on April 7, 2021. The Company paid $18.4 million in dividends and $4.2 million in share repurchases during fiscal 2020.
On October 12, 2018, the Company, together with Movado Group Delaware Holdings Corporation, Movado Retail Group, Inc. and Movado LLC (together with the Company, the “U.S. Borrowers”), each a wholly owned domestic subsidiary of the Company, and Movado Watch Company S.A. and MGI Luxury Group S.A. (collectively, the “Swiss Borrowers” and, together with the U.S. Borrowers, the “Borrowers”), each a wholly owned Swiss subsidiary of the Company, entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with the lenders party thereto and Bank of America, N.A. as administrative agent (in such capacity, the “Agent”). The Credit Agreement amends and restates the Company’s prior credit agreement dated as of January 30, 2015 and extends the maturity of the $100.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility (the “Facility”) provided thereunder to October 12, 2023. The Facility includes a $15.0 million letter of credit subfacility, a $25.0 million swingline subfacility and a $75.0 million sublimit for borrowings by the Swiss Borrowers, with provisions for uncommitted increases to the Facility of up to $50.0 million in the aggregate subject to customary terms and conditions.
On June 5, 2020, the Company and its lenders entered into an amendment (the “Second Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement effective as of July 31, 2020. Among other things, the Second Amendment provided for the following temporary relief with respect to the financial maintenance covenants in the Credit Agreement from April 30, 2020 through the date on which the Company delivers a compliance certificate in respect of the period ended July 31, 2021 (or earlier if the Company demonstrates satisfaction of certain earnings and leverage milestones) (the “Suspension Period”): (i) the maximum consolidated leverage ratio was increased from 2.50 to 1.0 to 2.75 to 1.0 for the four quarter period ended April 30, 2020 and suspended thereafter until the end of the Suspension Period when it would resume at 2.50 to 1.0 and (ii) the minimum EBITDA covenant levels were reduced. In addition, the Second Amendment provided that (i) through April 30, 2021, the Company was required to maintain minimum liquidity (comprised of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents and unutilized commitments under the Credit Agreement) of $100.0 million, (ii) during the Suspension Period, certain covenants, including covenants related to dividends, share repurchases, debt incurrence, investments and capital expenditures, were tightened and (iii) during the Suspension Period, the interest rate for borrowings under the Credit Agreement was increased to LIBOR plus 2.75% per annum and the commitment fee in respect of the unutilized commitments was increased to 0.45% per annum. In addition, the Second Amendment permanently increased the LIBOR floor for loans under the Credit Agreement from 0% to 1.00% and permanently reduced the minimum EBITDA financial covenant level to $35.0 million starting with the four-quarter period ending July 31, 2021. On January 11, 2021, the lenders party to the Credit Agreement granted the Company a written consent permitting the Company to pay up to two cash dividends to equity holders that would not otherwise be permitted by the Credit Agreement. Specifically, the consent permitted the Company to pay two dividends prior to May 31, 2021 in an aggregate amount not to exceed $5 million. On February 5, 2021, the Company paid the first such dividend, in an aggregate amount of $2.3 million, to shareholders of record as of January 21, 2021. Effective as of the date of this annual report on Form 10-K, the suspension Period has ended as a result of the Company’s achievement of certain financial milestones as of and for the periods ending January 31, 2021.
The foregoing summary of the Second Amendment is qualified by reference to the full text of the amendment, which is attached as Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended April 30, 2020 and incorporated herein by reference.
As of January 31, 2021, and January 31, 2020, there was 10.0 million and 50.0 million in Swiss Francs, respectively (with a dollar equivalent of $11.2 million and $51.9 million, respectively), in addition to $10.0 million as of January 31, 2021, in loans outstanding under the Facility. Availability under the Facility was reduced by the aggregate number of letters of credit outstanding, issued in connection with retail and operating facility leases to various landlords and for Canadian payroll to the Royal Bank of Canada, totaling approximately $0.3 million at both January 31, 2021 and January 31, 2020. At January 31, 2021, the letters of credit have expiration dates through June 1, 2021. As of January 31, 2021, and January 31, 2020, availability under the Facility was $78.5 million and $47.8 million, respectively. For additional information regarding the Facility, see Note 9 - Debt and Lines of Credit to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company had weighted average borrowings under the facility of $53.1 million and $51.1 million, with a weighted average interest rate of 2.59% and 1.00% during the fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively.
A Swiss subsidiary of the Company maintains unsecured lines of credit with an unspecified maturity with a Swiss bank. As of January 31, 2021, and 2020, these lines of credit totaled 6.5 million Swiss Francs for both periods, with a dollar equivalent of $7.3 million and $6.7 million, respectively. As of January 31, 2021, and 2020, there were no borrowings against these lines. As of January 31, 2021, and 2020, two European banks had guaranteed obligations to third parties on behalf of two of the Company’s foreign subsidiaries in the dollar equivalent of $1.3 million, and $1.2 million, respectively, in various foreign currencies, of which $0.6 million, in both periods, was a restricted deposit as it relates to lease agreements.
Cash paid for interest, including unused commitments fees, was $1.7 million and $0.7 million during fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The Company did not pay cash dividends during fiscal 2021. The Company paid cash dividends of $0.80 per share or $18.4 million during fiscal 2020. However, on January 11, 2021, with the consent of its bank group, the Company’s Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.10 per share, payable on February 5, 2021 to shareholders of record on January 21, 2021. In addition, on March 25, 2021, the Board of Directors approved the payment of a cash dividend in the amount of $0.20 for each share of the Company’s outstanding common stock and class A common stock. The dividend will be paid on April 21, 2021 to all shareholders of record as of the close of business on April 7, 2021. Although the Company currently expects to continue to declare cash dividends in the future the decision of whether to declare any future cash dividend, including the amount of any such dividend and the establishment of record and payment dates, will be determined, in each quarter, by the Board of Directors, in its sole discretion.
On August 29, 2017, the Board approved a share repurchase program under which the Company was authorized to purchase up to $50.0 million of its outstanding common stock from time to time. This authorization expired on August 29, 2020. During fiscal 2021, the Company did not repurchase any shares of its common stock. On March 25, 2021, the Board approved a share repurchase program under which the Company is authorized to purchase up to $25.0 million of its outstanding common stock from time to time, depending on market conditions, share price and other factors. Under this share repurchase program, the Company is permitted to purchase shares of its common stock through open market purchases, repurchase plans, block trades or otherwise. This authorization expires on September 30, 2022.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Payments due by period (in thousands):
(1)
Includes store operating and finance leases, which generally provide for payment of direct operating costs in addition to rent. These obligation amounts only include future minimum lease payments and exclude direct operating costs.
(2)
The Company had outstanding purchase obligations with suppliers at the end of fiscal 2021 for raw materials, finished watches and packaging in the normal course of business. These purchase obligation amounts do not represent total anticipated purchases but represent only amounts to be paid for items required to be purchased under agreements that are enforceable, legally binding and specify minimum quantity, price and term.
(3)
Other long-term obligations primarily consist of minimum commitments related to the Company’s license agreements and endorsement agreements with brand ambassadors, and also include service agreements. The Company sources, distributes, advertises and sells watches pursuant to its exclusive license agreements with unaffiliated licensors. Royalty amounts are generally based on a stipulated percentage of revenues, although most of these agreements contain provisions for the payment of minimum annual royalty amounts. The license agreements have various terms, and some have renewal options, provided that minimum sales levels are achieved. Additionally, the license agreements require the Company to pay minimum annual advertising amounts.
(4)
The Transition Tax obligation is due to the enactment of the 2017 Tax Act and will be paid in installments over eight years, with the first payment having been made in fiscal 2019.
Liabilities for unrecognized income tax benefits are excluded from the table above as the Company is unable to reasonably predict the ultimate amount or timing of a settlement of such liabilities. See Note 14- Income Taxes for more information.
Long-term liabilities associated with the Company’s defined benefit plan in Switzerland are excluded from the table above due to the uncertainty of the timing of these cash disbursements. The amount and timing of cash funding related to these benefit plans will generally depend on local regulatory requirements, various economic assumptions and Company contributions.
Management’s estimate of contributions the Company will make to its Swiss pension plan for the fiscal year ending 2022 is approximately $1.1 million. In addition, total benefit payments to be paid to participants in the Swiss pension plan for the fiscal year ending 2022 from the Company’s plan are estimated to be approximately $0.3 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have off-balance sheet financing or unconsolidated special-purpose entities.
Accounting Changes and Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements for a description of recent accounting pronouncements which may impact the consolidated financial statements in future reporting periods.