ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 (this “Annual Report”). This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition, see “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” References herein to the “Company,” “we,” “our,” and “us,” refer to MP Materials Corp. and its subsidiaries.
Overview
We own and operate one of the world’s largest integrated rare earth mining and processing facilities and the only major rare earths resource in the Western Hemisphere.
Rare earth elements (“REE”) are fundamental building blocks of the modern economy, impacting trillions of dollars in global gross domestic product through the enablement of end products across industries including transportation, clean energy, robotics, national defense and consumer electronics, among others. Neodymium (“Nd”) and praseodymium (“Pr”) are rare earth elements which in combination form neodymium-praseodymium (“NdPr”), which represents the Company’s primary revenue opportunity. NdPr is most often utilized in NdPr magnets, which are also commonly referred to as “neo,” “NdFeB,” “NIB,” or permanent magnets and are made predominantly from an alloy of NdPr, iron and boron. NdPr magnets are the most widely used type of rare earth magnets and are critical for many advanced technologies that are experiencing strong secular growth, including electric vehicles (“EV”), drones, defense systems, medical equipment, wind turbines, robotics and many others. The rapid growth of these and other advanced motion technologies is expected to drive substantial demand growth for NdPr.
We produce our materials at Mountain Pass, one of the world’s richest rare earth deposits, co-located with integrated state-of-the-art processing and separation facilities. We believe Mountain Pass is the only such integrated facility in the Western Hemisphere and one of the few separation facilities outside of Asia. Current ownership and management acquired the Mountain Pass assets in 2017, restarted operations from cold-idle status and embarked on a deliberate, two-stage plan to optimize the facility and position the Company for growth and profitability. See the section entitled “History of Ownership and Current Operations” within Item 1. Business above. Approximately $1.7 billion has been invested in the Mountain Pass facility since 2011, in addition to the investments in utilities and active infrastructure completed between the 1960s and 2008. We commenced mining, comminution, beneficiation, and tailings management operations, which we designated Stage I of our multi-stage optimization plan, between December 2017 and February 2018. We currently produce a rare earth concentrate that we sell to Shenghe Resources (Singapore) International Trading Pte. Ltd. (“Shenghe”), an affiliate of Shenghe Resources Holding Co., Ltd., a leading global rare earth company that is publicly listed in China, which, in turn, sells that product to end customers in China. These customers separate the constituent REE contained in our concentrate and sell the separated products to various end users. We believe our concentrate represents approximately 15% of the rare earth content consumed in the global market during the last 12 months. Upon completion of our Stage II optimization project, we anticipate separating rare earth oxides (“REO”) at our Mountain Pass site and selling our products directly to end users, at which time we would no longer sell our concentrate.
As technological innovation drives significant anticipated global growth in demand for REO, we also believe global economic trends, geopolitical realities and sustainability mandates are combining to further support an opportunity for us to create shareholder value. We believe businesses are increasingly prioritizing diversification and security of their global supply chains so as to reduce reliance on a single producer or region for critical supplies. This trend has national security implications as well, illustrated by recent U.S. Presidential directives seeking the onshoring of production in industries deemed critical, including rare earth minerals. For example, on February 24, 2021, President Biden signed an executive order requiring the U.S. government to review supply chains for critical minerals and other identified strategic materials, including rare earth elements, in an effort to ensure that the U.S. is not reliant on other countries, such as China. This executive order calls for a review of a broader set of U.S. supply chains covering the defense, health care, information technology, energy, transportation and agriculture sectors. According to the CRU Group, China accounted for approximately 79% of global REO production in 2020. We believe an even higher percentage of the NdPr magnet supply chain is based in China. Finally, public and private interests are increasingly demanding sustainability throughout production value chains to limit negative environmental and societal impacts from business activity, including pollution and acceleration of climate change. As the only scaled source in North America for critical rare earths, with a processing facility designed to operate with best-in-class sustainability and a competitive cost structure, we believe we are well-positioned to thrive in a transforming global economy.
Recent Developments and Comparability of Results
Business Combination and Reverse Recapitalization
The Business Combination (as defined below) was consummated on November 17, 2020, pursuant to the terms of a merger agreement entered into on July 15, 2020 (the “Merger Agreement”). Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, MP Mine Operations LLC (“MPMO”) and Secure Natural Resources LLC (“SNR”), the company that holds the mineral rights to our mine, were combined with Fortress Value Acquisition Corp. (“FVAC”), a special purpose acquisition company (the “Business Combination”), and became indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries of FVAC, which was in turn renamed MP Materials Corp.
The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). The acquisition of SNR (the “SNR Mineral Rights Acquisition”) was treated as an asset acquisition. Furthermore, MPMO was deemed to be the accounting acquirer and FVAC the accounting acquiree, which, for financial reporting purposes, results in MPMO’s historical financial information becoming that of the Company.
The SNR Mineral Rights Acquisition did not meet the criteria for the acquisition of a business and was accounted for as an asset acquisition. The principal asset acquired in the SNR Mineral Rights Acquisition was the mineral rights for the rare earth ores contained in our mine, which SNR acquired in 2016 and which was SNR’s sole operating asset. In connection with the SNR Mineral Rights Acquisition, we recorded a mineral rights asset (classified as a component of “Property, plant and equipment” within our Consolidated Balance Sheets) in the amount of $434.7 million, which will be depleted on a straight-line basis over approximately 24 years. As a result, we expect to record significantly higher depletion expense within our Consolidated Statements of Operations for periods following the Business Combination.
In April 2017, MPMO entered into a 30-year lease and license agreement with SNR under which MPMO paid royalties to SNR in the amount of 2.5% of gross revenue from the sale of rare earth products made from ores extracted from the mine, subject to a minimum non-refundable royalty of $0.5 million per year. Our consolidated results of operations for reporting periods following the consummation of the Business Combination will no longer reflect the payment of such royalties. SNR’s results of operations and cash flows are substantially eliminated in consolidation in our Consolidated Financial Statements and, except as noted above, we do not expect the SNR Mineral Rights Acquisition to materially impact the comparability of our historical results of operations with our results of operations for periods following the Business Combination.
Pursuant to the amended and restated letter agreement dated July 15, 2020, and amended and restated on August 26, 2020, by and among FVAC and the holders of FVAC Class F common stock, all of the shares of FVAC Class A common stock issued upon the conversion of FVAC Class F common stock (held by insiders initially purchased prior to the FVAC initial public offering), were subject to certain vesting and forfeiture provisions (the “Vesting Shares”) based on the achievement of certain volume weighted-average price (“VWAP”) thresholds of the Company’s common stock. In December 2020, such VWAP thresholds were achieved, resulting in the vesting of 8,625,000 shares.
The holders of MPMO Holding Company (a Delaware corporation formed by MPMO pursuant to the Merger Agreement) (“MPMO HoldCo”) preferred stock and common stock and SNR Holding Company, LLC (a Delaware limited liability company formed by SNR pursuant to the Merger Agreement) common stock immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination were given the contingent right to receive up to an additional 12,860,000 shares of the Company’s common stock (the “Earnout Shares”) based on the achievement of certain VWAP thresholds of the Company’s common stock. In December 2020, 12,859,898 Earnout Shares (adjusted for fractional shares) were issued upon the attainment of such VWAP thresholds.
Our Relationship and Agreements with Shenghe
Original Commercial Agreements
In connection with the acquisition and development of the Mountain Pass facility, we entered into a set of commercial arrangements with Shenghe. Shenghe and its affiliates primarily engage in the mining, separation, processing and distribution of rare earth products. MPMO also issued to Leshan Shenghe Rare Earth Co., Ltd. (“Leshan Shenghe”), the majority stockholder of Shenghe, 110.98 MPMO preferred units, which represented all of the issued and outstanding MPMO preferred units at the time. As discussed above, in connection with the Business Combination, these MPMO preferred units were exchanged for MPMO HoldCo preferred stock and eventually our common stock and the contingent right to receive Earnout Shares.
The original commercial arrangements with Shenghe were entered into in May 2017, prior to MPMO’s acquisition of the Mountain Pass facility. These agreements principally consisted of a technical services agreement (the “TSA”), an offtake agreement (the “Original Offtake Agreement”), and a distribution and marketing agreement (the “DMA”).
Under the TSA, Shenghe provided technical services, know-how and other assistance to MPMO in order to facilitate the development and operations of Mountain Pass. In addition, both the TSA and Original Offtake Agreement imposed certain funding obligations on Shenghe. The Original Offtake Agreement required Shenghe to advance an initial $50.0 million (the “Initial Prepayment Amount”) over time to MPMO to fund the restart of operations at the mine and the TSA required Shenghe to fund any additional operating and capital expenditures required to bring the Mountain Pass facility to full operability. Shenghe also agreed to provide additional funding in the amount of $30.0 million to MPMO pursuant to a separate letter agreement dated June 20, 2017 (the “Letter Agreement”) (the “First Additional Advance”), in connection with MPMO’s acquisition of the Mountain Pass facility. In addition to the repayment of the First Additional Advance in cash, pursuant to the Letter Agreement, the Initial Prepayment Amount was increased by $30.0 million. We refer to the aggregate prepayments made by Shenghe pursuant to the Original Offtake Agreement and the Framework Agreement (as defined below), as adjusted for Gross Profit Recoupment (as defined below) amounts and any other qualifying repayments to Shenghe, inclusive of the $30.0 million increase to the Initial Prepayment Amount, as the “Prepaid Balance.”
The entrance into the Letter Agreement constituted a modification to the Original Offtake Agreement for accounting purposes (referred to as the “June 2017 Modification”), which ultimately resulted in the Shenghe Implied Discount (as defined below). Under the terms of these agreements, the amounts funded by Shenghe constitute prepayments for the rare earth products to be sold to Shenghe historically under the Original Offtake Agreement (and currently under the A&R Offtake Agreement, as defined below).
Under the Original Offtake Agreement, upon the mine achieving certain milestones and being deemed commercially operational (which was achieved on July 1, 2019), MPMO sold to Shenghe, and Shenghe purchased on a firm “take or pay” basis, all of the rare earth products produced at the Mountain Pass facility. Shenghe marketed and sold these products to customers, and retained the gross profits earned on subsequent sales. The gross profits were credited against the Prepaid Balance, and provided the means by which MPMO repaid, and Shenghe recovered, such amounts (the “Gross Profit Recoupment”). Under the Original Offtake Agreement, MPMO was obliged to sell all Mountain Pass facility rare earth products to Shenghe until Shenghe had fully recouped all of its prepayments (i.e., the Prepaid Balance is reduced to zero), at which point the Original Offtake Agreement would terminate automatically.
As originally entered, the DMA was to become effective upon termination of the Original Offtake Agreement. The DMA provided for a distribution and marketing arrangement between MPMO and Shenghe, subject to certain agreed exceptions. MPMO retained the right to distribute its products directly to certain categories of customers. As compensation for Shenghe’s distribution and marketing services, the DMA entitled Shenghe to a portion of the net profits from the sale of rare earth products produced at the Mountain Pass facility. See below for further discussion of the DMA termination and associated accounting treatment.
In order to secure Shenghe’s performance under the Original Offtake Agreement and TSA, Leshan Shenghe issued a parent guaranty to MPMO in May 2017 (the “Shenghe Guaranty”), and entered into an equity pledge agreement (the “Shenghe Pledge Agreement”) in June 2017.
Framework Agreement and Restructured Commercial Agreements
In May 2020, we entered into a framework agreement and amendment (the “Framework Agreement”) with Shenghe and Leshan Shenghe that significantly restructured the parties’ commercial arrangements and provided for, among other things, a revised funding amount and schedule to settle Shenghe’s prepayment obligations to MPMO, as well as either the amendment or termination of the various agreements between the parties, as discussed below.
Pursuant to the Framework Agreement, we entered into an amended and restated offtake agreement with Shenghe and Leshan Shenghe on May 19, 2020 (the “A&R Offtake Agreement”), which, upon effectiveness, superseded and replaced the Original Offtake Agreement, and MPMO issued to Shenghe a warrant on June 2, 2020 (the “Shenghe Warrant”), exercisable at a nominal price for 89.88 MPMO preferred units, which, at the time, reflected approximately 7.5% of MPMO’s equity on a diluted basis, subject to certain restrictions. Pursuant to the Framework Agreement, Shenghe funded the remaining portion of the Initial Prepayment Amount and agreed to fund an additional $35.5 million advance to us (the “Second Additional Advance” and together with the Initial Prepayment Amount, inclusive of the $30.0 million increase pursuant to the Letter Agreement, the “Offtake Advances”), which amounts were fully funded on June 5, 2020. As discussed below, the Shenghe Warrant was exercised in full for MPMO preferred units which were exchanged for MPMO HoldCo preferred stock and eventually our common stock and the contingent rights to receive Earnout Shares in connection with the Business Combination.
Upon the funding of the remaining obligations on June 5, 2020, (i) the TSA and the DMA were terminated (as described below), (ii) the A&R Offtake Agreement and the Shenghe Warrant became effective, and (iii) the Shenghe Guaranty and the Shenghe Pledge Agreement were terminated (such events are collectively referred to as the “June 2020 Modification”). Thus, at the present time, Leshan Shenghe’s and Shenghe’s involvement with MPMO and the Mountain Pass facility consists of only the A&R Offtake Agreement.
The A&R Offtake Agreement maintains the key take-or-pay, amounts owed on actual and deemed advances from Shenghe, and other terms of the Original Offtake Agreement, with the following material changes: (i) modifies the definition of “offtake products” in order to remove from the scope of that definition lanthanum, cerium and other rare earth products that do not meet the specifications agreed to under the A&R Offtake Agreement; (ii) as to the offtake products subject to the A&R Offtake Agreement, provides that if we sell such offtake products to a third party, then, until the Prepaid Balance has been reduced to zero, we will pay an agreed percentage of our revenue from such sale to Shenghe, to be credited against the amounts owed on Offtake Advances; (iii) replaces the Shenghe Sales Discount (as discussed and defined below) under the Original Offtake Agreement with a fixed monthly sales charge; (iv) provides that the purchase price to be paid by Shenghe for our rare earth products (a portion of which reduces the Prepaid Balance rather than being paid in cash) will be based on market prices (net of taxes, tariffs and certain other agreed charges) less applicable discounts, instead of our cash cost of production; (v) obliges us to pay Shenghe, on an annual basis, an amount equal to our annual net income, less any amounts recouped through the Gross Profit Recoupment mechanism over the course of the year, until the Prepaid Balance has been reduced to zero; (vi) obliges us to pay Shenghe the net after-tax profits from certain sales of assets until the Prepaid Balance has been reduced to zero (this obligation was previously contained in the TSA); and (vii) provides for certain changes to the payment, invoicing and delivery terms and procedures for products.
The purchase price and other terms applicable to a quantity of offtake products are set forth in monthly purchase agreements between MPMO and Shenghe. As with the Original Offtake Agreement, the A&R Offtake Agreement will terminate when Shenghe has fully recouped all of its prepayment funding. Following that termination, MPMO will have no contractual arrangements with Shenghe for the distribution, marketing or sale of rare earth products.
Accounting Implications of the June 2017 Modification
As discussed above, pursuant to the Letter Agreement, Shenghe agreed to provide additional funding via a short-term non-interest-bearing note in the amount of $30.0 million to the Company (defined above as the “First Additional Advance”), which required repayment within one year. Furthermore, under the terms of the Letter Agreement, Shenghe became entitled to an additional $30.0 million recovery through an increase to the Prepaid Balance. Therefore, under the terms of the Letter Agreement, Shenghe would ultimately receive repayment of the short-term debt instrument from the Company, and also be entitled to realize an additional $30.0 million as a part of the contractual Gross Profit Recoupment from ultimate sales to its customers.
As discussed in more detail within Note 4, “Relationship and Agreements with Shenghe,” in the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, based on the relationship between (i) the deemed proceeds the Company would ultimately receive from the Initial Prepayment Amount (adjusted for (a) the fair value of the preferred interest provided to Shenghe at the time of entering into the aforementioned commercial arrangements of $2.3 million and (b) the fair value allocated to the modification to the revenue arrangement of $3.5 million) and (ii) the contractual amount owed to Shenghe (i.e., the Prepaid Balance, which included the Initial Prepayment Amount and the additional $30.0 million adjustment to the Prepaid Balance in connection with the Letter Agreement) at the time, the June 2017 Modification resulted in an implied discount of 36% on the Company’s sales prices to Shenghe under the Original Offtake Agreement, for accounting purposes (the “Shenghe Implied Discount”). The Shenghe Implied Discount applied only to sales made to Shenghe between July 2019 and early June 2020.
Beginning in July 2019, and through early June 2020, the Company periodically agreed on a cash sales price, which was intended to approximate the Company’s cash cost of production, with Shenghe for each metric ton (“MT”) of rare earth concentrate delivered by the Company. Such sales during this period were made under the Original Offtake Agreement and also reflected the Shenghe Sales Discount. The Company recognized the cash sales prices as revenue upon each sale. In addition, since the Shenghe Implied Discount applied to sales made to Shenghe during the period from July 2019 through early June 2020, we also recognized an amount of deferred revenue applicable to these sales equal to 64% of the gross profit realized by Shenghe of this product to its own customers.
For example, for a hypothetical shipment of REO to Shenghe on which it realized gross profit of $1.00 (the difference between the sales price to its customers and its cash cost paid to us), we would recognize $0.64 as non-cash revenue through a reduction in the deferred revenue balance, and the remaining $0.36 would not be recorded as revenue. The full gross profit amount realized by Shenghe on such sales reduced the Prepaid Balance (and consequently, our contractual obligations to Shenghe). Shenghe’s gross profit is influenced by market conditions as well as import duties, which were imposed on our
products by the General Administration of Customs of the People’s Republic of China during this period. The drivers of our production costs are described below under “Key Performance Indicators.”
In addition, sales to Shenghe under the Original Offtake Agreement between July 2019 and early June 2020 typically provided Shenghe with a discount generally in the amount of between 3% and 6% of the initial cash price of our rare earth products sold in consideration of Shenghe’s sales efforts to resell our rare earth products (the “Shenghe Sales Discount”). The Shenghe Sales Discount was considered a reduction in the transaction price; thus, was not recognized as revenue. Additionally, the Shenghe Sales Discount was not applied to reduce the Prepaid Balance; however, it was considered as part of Shenghe’s cost of acquiring our product in the calculation of Shenghe’s gross profit.
Accounting Implications of the June 2020 Modification
As noted above, in May 2020, the Company renegotiated various aspects of its relationship with Shenghe and entered into the Framework Agreement to significantly restructure the aforementioned set of arrangements. Prior to the June 2020 Modification, for accounting purposes, the Original Offtake Agreement constituted a deferred revenue arrangement; however, as a result of the June 2020 Modification, the A&R Offtake Agreement constituted a debt obligation as well as provided for the issuance of the Shenghe Warrant. In addition, as a result of the renegotiations, the accounting treatment specific to the Shenghe Implied Discount was no longer required.
In accounting for the June 2020 Modification, on June 5, 2020, we:
•Derecognized the existing deferred revenue balance of $37.5 million;
•Recognized, at fair value, a non-interest-bearing debt instrument with a principal balance of $94.0 million and a debt discount of $8.3 million (implied debt discount of 4.4%), resulting in a carrying amount of $85.7 million;
•Recorded the $35.5 million proceeds received from the Second Additional Advance;
•Recognized the issuance of the Shenghe Warrant at its fair value of $53.8 million; and
•Recorded a $66.6 million non-cash settlement charge (reflecting a deemed payment to terminate the DMA).
As noted above, the June 2020 Modification provided that the purchase price to be paid by Shenghe for our rare earth products will be based on market prices (net of taxes, tariffs and certain other agreed charges) less applicable discounts, instead of our cash cost of production, as was the case with sales made under the Original Offtake Agreement. A portion of the purchase price is in the form of debt repayment, with the remainder paid in cash. The elimination of the Shenghe Sales Discount and replacement with the aforementioned fixed monthly sales charge is not expected to have a material impact on our results of operations (both are treated as a reduction to the transaction price).
As a result of the above, the amount of revenue we recorded for periods that included any portion of the period from July 1, 2019, until June 5, 2020 (the date the Original Offtake Agreement was modified), is not comparable, in the aggregate or on a per unit basis, to the amount of revenue recorded in other periods that concluded before July 1, 2019, or that commenced after June 5, 2020. Furthermore, assuming static market prices, we would expect to record more revenue per REO MT sold subsequent to June 5, 2020. See also “Key Performance Indicators” section.
Tariff-Related Rebates
Starting in May 2020, the government of the People’s Republic of China granted retroactive tariff relief to certain importers of rare earth minerals including Shenghe and its affiliates, relating to periods prior to the formal lifting of the tariffs. As a result, Shenghe’s actual realized prices for the REO sold prior to May 2020 were higher than originally reported to us and resulted in rebates to Shenghe. On account of these rebates in the second and third quarters of 2020, we received from Shenghe certain credits against our contractual commitments to them. As a result of these credits, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized non-cash revenue of $8.9 million and deferred revenue of $1.4 million and reductions in debt principal of $9.7 million and debt discount of $0.8 million.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (known as “COVID-19”) began to impact the population of China, where our principal customer is located. The outbreak of COVID-19 has grown both in the United States and globally, and related government and private sector responsive actions have adversely affected the global economy. In December 2019, a series of emergency quarantine measures taken by the Chinese government disrupted domestic business activities in China during the weeks after the initial outbreak of COVID-19. Since that time, an increasing number of countries, including the United States,
have imposed restrictions on travel to and from China and elsewhere, as well as general movement restrictions, business closures and other measures imposed to slow the spread of COVID-19.
At the onset of the outbreak, we initially experienced shipping delays due to overseas port slowdowns and container shortages, but we did not experience a reduction in production or sales. However, in the fourth quarter of 2020, we began to again see shipping delays and container shortages from congestion at port facilities, which has been exacerbated by COVID-19. Congestion at U.S. and international ports could affect the capacity at ports to receive deliveries of products or the loading of shipments onto vessels.
As the situation continues to develop, it is impossible to predict the effect and ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business and results of operations. While the quarantine, social distancing and other regulatory measures instituted or recommended in response to COVID-19 are expected to be temporary, the duration of the business disruptions, and related financial impact, cannot be estimated at this time.
Key Performance Indicators
We use the following key performance indicators to evaluate the performance of our business and prospects. Our calculations of these performance indicators may differ from similarly-titled measures published by other companies in our industry or in other industries. The following table presents our key performance indicators:
REO Production Volume
We measure our REO-equivalent production volume for a given period in MTs, our principal unit of sale. This measure refers to the REO content contained in the rare earth concentrate we produce. Our REO production volume is a key indicator of our mining and processing capacity and efficiency.
The rare earth concentrate we currently produce is a processed, concentrated form of our mined rare earth-bearing ores. While our unit of production and sale is a MT of embedded REO, the actual weight of our rare earth concentrate is significantly greater, as the concentrate also contains non-REO minerals and water. We target REO content of greater than 60% per dry MT of concentrate (referred to as “REO grade”). The elemental distribution of REO in our concentrate is relatively consistent over time and batch. We consider this the natural distribution, as it reflects the distribution of elements contained, on average, in our ore. Upon the completion of our Stage II optimization project, we expect to refine our rare earth concentrate to produce separated rare earths, including separated NdPr oxide. See also “Key Factors Affecting Our Performance” section below.
REO Sales Volume
Our REO sales volume for a given period is calculated in MTs. A unit, or MT, is considered sold once we recognize revenue on its sale. Our REO sales volume is a key measure of our ability to convert our production into revenue. See also “Key Components of Sales and Expenses” section below.
Realized Price per REO MT
We calculate the realized price per REO MT for a given period as the quotient of: (i) our Total Value Realized (see below) for a given period and (ii) our REO sales volume for the same period. We calculate our Total Value Realized, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, as the sum of: (x) the revenue recognized on our sales of REO for a given period (excluding the revenue impact of tariff-related credits from Shenghe on account of prior sales) and (y) in connection with our sales of REO to Shenghe between July 1, 2019, and June 5, 2020, the total amount of the Shenghe Implied Discount. The consideration described in clause (y) is the difference between (1) Shenghe’s average realized price, net of taxes, tariffs and certain other agreed-upon charges (such as one-time demurrage charges) on our products once sold to their ultimate customers and (2) the amount of revenue we recognized on the sales of those products to Shenghe for sales between July 1, 2019, and June 5, 2020, which includes the non-cash portion discussed above. As further discussed above, for sales under the Original Offtake
Agreement, a portion of this non-cash consideration, the Shenghe Implied Discount, was not recorded as revenue in our Consolidated Financial Statements, but was applied as a reduction to the Prepaid Balance.
Under the terms of the Original Offtake Agreement, for the period between July 1, 2019, and June 5, 2020, Shenghe purchased our rare earth products at an agreed-upon price per MT, which was intended to approximate our cash cost of production, and in turn resold it at market prices to its customers. Our treatment of the non-cash consideration is the result of the June 2017 Modification, which impacted the relationship between the amount of prepayments we had received from Shenghe and the amount we owed contractually. The $30.0 million increase to the Prepaid Balance pursuant to the Letter Agreement (as discussed above), effectively provided Shenghe with an enhanced margin. Upon entrance into the A&R Offtake Agreement, we began to recognize revenue at the full value of our product. Accordingly, we calculate realized price per REO MT for the period between July 1, 2019, and June 5, 2020, by adding back the amount of the Shenghe Implied Discount. See also “Recent Developments and Comparability of Results” section above.
Realized price per REO MT is an important measure of the market price of our product. Accordingly, we calculate realized price per REO MT, as described above, to reflect a consistent basis between periods by eliminating the impact of recognizing revenue at a discount in the period between July 1, 2019, and June 5, 2020, as a result of the Shenghe Implied Discount, and the revenue impact of tariff-related credits. See the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section below for a reconciliation of our Total Value Realized, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, to our product sales, which is determined in accordance with GAAP, as well as the calculation of realized price per REO MT.
Production Cost per REO MT
We calculate the production cost per REO MT for a given period as the quotient of: (i) our Production Costs (see below) for a given period and (ii) our REO sales volume for the same period. We calculate our Production Costs, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, as our cost of sales (excluding depletion, depreciation and amortization) less costs attributable to sales of legacy stockpiles, stock-based compensation expense included in cost of sales (as opposed to general and administrative expenses), and shipping and freight costs, for a given period.
Production cost per REO MT is a key indicator of our production efficiency. As a significant portion of our cash costs of Stage I production are fixed, our production cost per REO MT is influenced by mineral recovery, REO grade, plant feed rate and production uptime. See the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section below for a reconciliation of our Production Costs, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, to our cost of sales (excluding depletion, depreciation and amortization), which is determined in accordance with GAAP, as well as the calculation of production cost per REO MT.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe we are uniquely positioned to capitalize on the key trends of electrification and supply chain security, particularly as domestic EV production grows. Our success depends to a significant extent on our ability to take advantage of the following opportunities and meet the challenges associated with them.
Demand for REE
The key demand driver for REE is their use in a diverse array of growing end markets, including: Clean-Energy and Transportation Technologies (e.g., traction motors in EVs and generators in wind power turbines); High-Technology Applications (e.g., miniaturization of smart phones and other mobile devices, fiber optics, lasers, robotics, medical devices, etc.); Critical Defense Applications (e.g., guidance and control systems, global positioning systems, radar and sonar, drones, etc.); and essential Industrial Infrastructure (e.g., advanced catalyst applications in oil refining and pollution-control systems in traditional internal-combustion automobiles, etc.). We believe these drivers will fuel the continued growth of the rare earth market, particularly the market for NdPr. See the section entitled “Rare Earth Industry Overview and Market Opportunity” within Item 1. Business for more information.
We believe we benefit from several demand tailwinds for REE, and particularly for NdPr. These include the trend toward geographic supply chain diversification, particularly in relation to China, which accounted for approximately 79% of global REE production in 2020, the U.S. government strategy to restore domestic supply of key minerals, and increasing acceptance of environmental, social and governance mandates, which impact global capital allocation throughout production value chains to limit negative environmental and societal impacts. However, changes in technology may also drive down the use of REE, including NdPr, in the components in which they are now used, or lead to a decline in reliance on such components altogether. We also operate in a competitive industry, and many of our key competitors are based in China, where production costs are typically lower than in the United States. If our assumptions about the growth in demand for REE, and particularly NdPr, prove wrong, our business prospects, financial condition and results of operations could suffer materially.
Our Mineral Reserves
Our ore body has proven over more than 60 years of operations to be one of the world’s largest and highest-grade rare earth resources. As of July 1, 2020, SRK Consulting (U.S.), Inc., an independent consulting firm that we have retained to assess our reserves, estimates total proven and probable reserves of 1.5 million short tons of REO contained in 21.1 million short tons of ore at Mountain Pass, with an average ore grade of 7.06%. These estimates use an estimated economical cut-off of 3.83% total rare earth oxide. Based on these estimated reserves and our expected annual production rate of REO upon completion of our Stage II optimization project, our expected mine life is approximately 24 years. We expect to be able to significantly grow our expected mine life through exploratory drilling programs and incorporation of the profitability uplift of our Stage II optimization project over time.
Mining activities in the United States are heavily regulated, particularly in California. Regulatory changes may make it more challenging for us to access our reserves. In addition, new mineral deposits may be discovered elsewhere, which could make our operations less competitive.
Maximizing Production Efficiency
Over the last twelve months, REO production is approximately 3.2x greater than the highest ever production in a twelve-month period by the former operator using the same capital equipment. We have achieved these results through an optimized reagent scheme, lower process temperatures, better management of the tailings facility, and a commitment to operational excellence, driving approximately 95% uptime-a significant improvement to that of our predecessor. We also believe that these Stage I optimization initiatives have enabled us to achieve world-class production cost levels for rare earth concentrate. All of these achievements have enabled us to become operating cash flow positive, despite significant Chinese trade tariffs on ore and concentrates in place over the optimization period. These trade tariffs have recently been suspended, further enhancing the earnings power of our Stage I operations. See the section entitled “History of Ownership and Current Operations-Stage I Execution Successful” within Item 1. Business.
We believe that the success of our business will reflect our ability to manage our costs. Our Stage II optimization plan (discussed below) is designed to enable us to manage our cost structure for separating REE through a revised facility process flow. The reintroduction of the oxidizing roasting step will allow us to capitalize on the inherent advantages of the bastnaesite ore at Mountain Pass, which is uniquely suitable to low-cost refining by selectively eliminating the need to carry lower-value cerium through the separations process. The recommissioning of our natural gas-powered combined heat and power (“CHP”) facility will reduce energy, heating and steam costs as well as minimize or eliminate our reliance on the regional electric power grid. Further, our location offers significant transportation advantages that create meaningful cost efficiencies in securing incoming supplies and shipping of our final products.
We currently operate a single site in a single location, and any stoppage in activity, including for reasons outside of our control, could adversely impact our production, results of operations and cash flows. In addition, several of our current and potential competitors are government supported and may have access to substantially greater capital, which may allow them to make similar or greater efficiency improvements or undercut market prices for our product.
Development of Our REE Refining Capabilities and Other Opportunities
Our Stage II optimization process is focused on advancing from concentrate production to the separation of individual REE. Engineering, procurement, preliminary construction and other recommissioning activities are underway and involve upgrades and enhancements to the existing facility process flow to produce separated REE more reliably, at significantly lower cost and with an expected smaller environmental footprint per volume of REO produced than the prior operator of the Mountain Pass facility. As part of our Stage II optimization project, we plan to reintroduce a roasting circuit, reorient the plant process flow, increase product finishing capacity, improve wastewater management and make other improvements to materials handling and storage, in addition to recommissioning our currently idled CHP plant to produce electricity. Our process redesign and engineering for our Stage II optimization project is substantially complete and we believe that our Stage II optimization project investments will enable us to materially increase the recovery of NdPr from our concentrate, increase NdPr production and dramatically lower the cost of production, in each case, as compared to the prior owner’s operations. Upon the completion of Stage II, we expect to be a low-cost producer of separated NdPr oxide, which represents a majority of the value contained in our ore. See the section entitled “History of Ownership and Current Operations-Stage II Underway” within Item 1. Business.
In the longer term, following our completion of the Stage II optimization project, we believe we will then be in a position to consider opportunities to integrate further downstream into the business of upgrading NdPr into metal alloys and magnets, ultimately expanding our presence as a global source for rare earth magnetics. We also believe integration into magnet production would provide some protection from commodity pricing volatility, while enhancing our business profile as the
producer of a critical industrial output in addition to a producer of resources. We expect these Stage III downstream opportunities to be driven by geopolitical developments, including bringing critical rare earth mining and refining production capability to the United States, as well as the restoration of the full U.S. magnetics supply chain. See the section entitled “History of Ownership and Current Operations-Stage III Downstream Expansion Opportunity” within Item 1. Business.
The completion of our Stage II optimization project and any development of Stage III is expected to be capital intensive. With recent enhancements to our Stage II process design, we now expect to invest a total of approximately $220 million, principally in 2021 and 2022. The scope of the project has been revised versus our prior expectations to include process design innovations that reduce reagent consumption by greater than 10% while increasing the planned recovery of separated REO and improving potential product mix. We now expect to be able to reach targeted production rates and profitability in 2023 without the need to recommission our chlor-alkali facility, which we previously estimated would cost approximately $30 million. We believe this significantly reduces the operational risks in achieving our targeted profitability. However, our estimated costs or estimated time to completion may increase, potentially significantly, due to factors outside of our control. See “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors.” While we believe that we have sufficient cash resources to fund our Stage II optimization and operating working capital in the near term, we cannot assure this. Any delays in our ongoing optimization plans or substantial cost increases related to their execution could significantly impact our ability to maximize our revenue opportunities and adversely impact our business and cash flows.
Key Components of Sales and Expenses
Product Sales
A substantial majority of our product sales are generated from the sale of REO concentrate to Shenghe, although we also sell small amounts to third parties. The table below presents our product sales by customer type:
We recognize a product sale when we have a binding purchase agreement and the product is delivered to the agreed-upon shipping point, at which point the control of the product is transferred to the customer. The transaction price is typically based on an agreed-upon price per REO MT, subject to certain quality adjustments and discounts. See also Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of sales (excluding depreciation, depletion and amortization) consists of production- and processing-related labor costs (including wages and salaries, benefits, and bonuses), mining and processing supplies (such as reagents), parts and labor for the maintenance of our mining fleet and processing facilities, other facilities-related costs (such as utilities), packaging materials, and freight and shipping costs.
Royalty expense to SNR relates to our obligation to pay SNR for the right to extract rare earth ores contained in our mine and was based on 2.5% of product sales, subject to certain minimums, prior to the Business Combination. See Note 18, “Related Party Transactions,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Following the Business Combination, we do not incur royalty expenses on a consolidated basis.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of accounting, finance and administrative personnel costs, including stock-based compensation expense related to these personnel; professional services (including legal, regulatory, audit and others); certain engineering expenses; insurance, license and permit costs; facilities rent and other costs; office supplies; property taxes; general facilities expenses; and certain environmental, health, and safety expenses.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization consist of depreciation of property, plant and equipment related to our mining equipment and processing facilities, depletion of our mineral resources and amortization of capitalized computer software. As a result of the Business Combination, specifically the SNR Mineral Rights Acquisition, depletion will be higher in future periods.
Accretion of asset retirement and environmental obligations is based on the requirement to reclaim and remediate the land surrounding our mine and processing facilities upon the expiration of the mineral lease and on the estimated future cash flow requirement to monitor groundwater contamination related to prior owners’ activities, respectively.
Other income, net consists mainly of gains or losses on the disposal of property, plant and equipment and interest income.
Interest expense, net consists mainly of the amortization of the discount on our debt obligations to Shenghe (all of which is non-cash) and, to a lesser extent, interest on other debt instruments, offset by interest capitalized.
Income tax benefit (expense) consists of an estimate of U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in the jurisdictions in which we conduct business, adjusted for federal, state and local allowable income tax benefits, the effect of permanent differences and any valuation allowance against deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations:
n.m. - Not meaningful.
Product sales increased year over year by $60.9 million, or 83%, to $134.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven primarily by higher REO sales volume, which increased by 11,546 MTs to 38,367 MTs for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, reflecting the improved efficiency of our processing operations, while our realized price per REO MT increased 19% year over year, primarily reflecting lower tariffs. Tariff credits from Shenghe contributed $10.3 million in product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. However, product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020, were negatively impacted by the accounting treatment of the Shenghe Implied Discount in connection with the Original Offtake Agreement, in which $3.7 million of the value of products sold to Shenghe from January 1, 2020, until June 5, 2020, was not recognized as product sales. As mentioned above, starting June 5, 2020, the accounting treatment specific to the Shenghe Implied Discount is no longer required and, going forward, we will recognize product sales on the full value of our sales to Shenghe. See also “Recent Developments and Comparability of Results” section above.
Cost of sales (excluding depreciation, depletion and amortization) increased year over year by $2.5 million, or 4%, to $63.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by higher sales volume and higher operating lease costs from leases that commenced in the second half of 2020, offset by significantly lower per unit production costs. The decrease in production cost per REO MT from $1,980 for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $1,430 for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflected the increased efficiency in processing our rare earth concentrate, driven by higher mineral
recoveries in our froth flotation circuit, higher concentrate grade, lower reagent usage per ton of concentrate produced, economies of scale, and improved operational uptime. We believe our cost of sales on a per unit basis has stabilized in the short-term, although we anticipate additional efficiency opportunities as we increase REO production volumes in our milling and flotation circuit over time.
Royalty expense to SNR increased year over year by $0.5 million, or 28%, to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting our increased product sales (prior to the Business Combination, the royalty rate was 2.5% of our gross revenue from products derived from mined ore). Subsequent to the Business Combination in November 2020, we no longer incur this expense on a consolidated basis.
General and administrative expenses increased year over year by $15.9 million, or 143%, to $27.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting $4.7 million in stock-based compensation expense from grants of restricted stock and restricted stock units (“Stock Awards”) during the fourth quarter of 2020 and a $7.1 million increase in professional service and legal fees, including accounting advisory services related to the Business Combination. The majority of the Stock Awards were issued upon the consummation of the Business Combination, and thus, are not necessarily reflective of future grants. Furthermore, prior to the fourth quarter of 2020, we had not granted any Stock Awards nor recorded any stock-based compensation expense. Excluding these items, the increase was $4.1 million, or 37%, mainly due to an increase in personnel costs, reflecting headcount growth, including new hires to support our operations as a public company.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization increased year over year by $2.2 million, or 48%, to $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting the impact of additional equipment purchases and depletion of the mineral rights resulting from the SNR Mineral Rights Acquisition in November 2020.
Accretion of asset retirement and environmental obligation remained relatively flat year over year.
Settlement charge of $66.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was non-cash, was recorded in connection with the termination of the DMA. See also “Recent Developments and Comparability of Results” section above.
Other income, net was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily reflecting interest income and an environmental incentive credit. Other income, net, for the year ended December 31, 2019, was $4.3 million, primarily reflecting a gain on the disposal of idle assets and interest income.
Interest expense, net increased year over year by $1.6 million, or 47%, to $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, mainly reflecting implied interest expense from the amortization of a debt discount on the issuance of a non-interest-bearing debt instrument to Shenghe in connection with the June 2020 Modification. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we capitalized interest of $0.2 million. See also “Recent Developments and Comparability of Results” section above.
Income tax benefit (expense) was $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and related to current year activity as well as the release of a valuation allowance, which were partially offset by current California state income tax expense, mainly attributable to our inability to offset this obligation with state net operating losses due to temporary new legislation. Income tax expense was negligible for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net loss increased year over year by $15.1 million to $21.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the settlement charge, as well as other reasons discussed above.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We present Total Value Realized, Production Costs, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Free Cash Flow, which are non-GAAP financial measures that we use to supplement our results presented in accordance with GAAP. These measures are similar to measures reported by other companies in our industry and are regularly used by securities analysts and investors to measure companies’ financial performance. Total Value Realized, Production Costs, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Free Cash Flow are not intended to be a substitute for any GAAP financial measure and, as calculated, may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of performance or liquidity of other companies within our industry or in other industries.
Total Value Realized
Total Value Realized, which we use to calculate our key performance indicator, realized price per REO MT, is a non-GAAP financial measure. As mentioned above, realized price per REO MT is an important measure of the market price of our
product. The following table presents a reconciliation of our Total Value Realized, to our product sales, which is determined in accordance with GAAP, as well as the calculation of realized price per REO MT:
(1)Shenghe Implied Discount represents the difference between the contractual amount realized by Shenghe and the amount of deferred revenue we recognized.
(2)Includes mainly the net impact of a tariff rebate from Shenghe due to the retroactive effect of lifting of a Chinese tariff in 2020 (an additional $10.3 million in tariff rebate was applied to reduce the Prepaid Balance) and sales of PhosFix stockpiles in 2019.
(3)May not recompute as presented due to rounding.
Production Costs
Production Costs, which we use to calculate our key performance indicator, production cost per REO MT, is a non-GAAP financial measure. As mentioned above, production cost per REO MT is a key indicator of our production efficiency. The following table presents a reconciliation of our Production Costs to our cost of sales (excluding depreciation, depletion and amortization), which is determined in accordance with GAAP, as well as the calculation of production cost per REO MT:
(1)Pertains only to the amount of stock-based compensation expense included in cost of sales (as opposed to general and administrative expenses).
(2)May not recompute as presented due to rounding.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as our GAAP net income or loss before interest expense, net; income tax expense or benefit; and depreciation, depletion and amortization; further adjusted to eliminate the impact of stock-based compensation expense, transaction-related costs, other non-recurring costs, non-cash accretion of asset retirement and environmental obligations and gain on sale or disposal of long-lived assets. We present Adjusted EBITDA because it is used by management to evaluate our underlying operating and financial performance and trends.
Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain expenses that are required in accordance with GAAP because they are non-recurring, non-cash or are not related to our underlying business performance. This non-GAAP financial measure is intended to supplement our GAAP results and should not be used as a substitute for financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP.
Our Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our results of operations on a comparable basis between periods because of the accounting consequences of the modifications of our agreements with Shenghe (see the “Recent Developments and Comparability of Results” section above). Accordingly, our Adjusted EBITDA trend for the years presented may not be indicative of future trends. If the Shenghe Implied Discount applicable to sales made under the Original Offtake Agreement had been included in our deferred revenue, our Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, would have been higher by $3.7 million and $1.9 million, respectively.
The following table presents a reconciliation of our Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, to our net loss, which is determined in accordance with GAAP:
(1)Principally included in “General and administrative expenses” within our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(2)Includes mainly advisory, consulting, accounting, legal expenses, and one-time employee bonuses in connection with the Business Combination.
(3)Includes mainly non-recurring costs for SAP implementation for the year ended December 31, 2020, and one-time severance payments to certain former members of our executive team for the year ended December 31, 2019.
(4)Represents royalty expenses paid to SNR prior to the completion of the SNR Mineral Rights Acquisition. As mentioned above, the royalty expense to SNR eliminates in consolidation after the consummation of the Business Combination.
(5)As discussed in the “Recent Developments and Comparability of Results” section above, in connection with terminating the DMA, we recognized a one-time, non-cash settlement charge.
(6)Represents non-cash revenue recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020, in connection with the tariff credits received from Shenghe relating to product sales primarily from prior periods.
(7)Primarily represents gains or losses on disposals of equipment and interest income. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a gain on sales of idle mining equipment following the acquisition of the Mountain Pass mine and processing facilities.
Adjusted Net Income (Loss)
We calculate Adjusted Net Income (Loss) as our GAAP net income or loss excluding the impact of depletion, stock-based compensation expense, transaction-related costs, and other non-recurring costs, adjusted to give effect to the income tax impact of such adjustments. To calculate the income tax impact of such adjustments on a year-to-date basis, we utilize an effective tax rate equal to our income tax expense excluding material discrete costs and benefits, with any impacts of changes in effective tax rate being recognized in the current period. We present Adjusted Net Income (Loss) because it is used by management to evaluate our underlying operating and financial performance and trends.
Adjusted Net Income (Loss) excludes certain expenses that are required in accordance with GAAP because they are non-recurring, non-cash, or not related to our underlying business performance. As a result of the SNR Mineral Rights Acquisition,
the mineral rights for the rare earth ores contained in our mine were recorded at fair value as of the date of the Business Combination, resulting in a significant step-up of the carrying amount of the asset which will cause depletion to be meaningfully higher in future periods. This non-GAAP financial measure is intended to supplement our GAAP results and should not be used as a substitute for financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP.
Our Adjusted Net Income (Loss) does not reflect our results of operations on a comparable basis between periods primarily because of the accounting consequences of the modifications of our agreements with Shenghe (see the “Recent Developments and Comparability of Results” section above). Accordingly, our Adjusted Net Income (Loss) trend for the years presented may not be indicative of future trends.
The following table presents a reconciliation of our Adjusted Net Income (Loss), which is a non-GAAP financial measure, to our net loss, which is determined in accordance with GAAP:
(1)Principally includes the depletion associated with the mineral rights for the rare earth ores contained in the Company’s mine, which were recorded in connection with the SNR Mineral Rights Acquisition at fair value as of the date of the Business Combination, resulting in a significant step-up of the carrying amount of the asset. See Note 3, “Business Combination and Reverse Recapitalization” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the accounting for the asset acquisition.
(2)Principally included in “General and administrative expenses” within our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(3)Includes mainly advisory, consulting, accounting, legal expenses, and one-time employee bonuses in connection with the Business Combination.
(4)Includes mainly non-recurring costs for SAP implementation for the year ended December 31, 2020, and one-time severance payments to certain former members of our executive team for the year ended December 31, 2019.
(5)Represents royalty expenses paid to SNR prior to the completion of the SNR Mineral Rights Acquisition. As mentioned above, the royalty expense to SNR eliminates in consolidation after the consummation of the Business Combination.
(6)As discussed in the “Recent Developments and Comparability of Results” section above, in connection with terminating the DMA, we recognized a one-time, non-cash settlement charge.
(7)Represents non-cash revenue recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020, in connection with the tariff credits received from Shenghe relating to product sales primarily from prior periods.
(8)Primarily represents gains or losses on disposals of equipment and interest income. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a gain on sales of idle mining equipment following the acquisition of the Mountain Pass mine and processing facilities.
(9)Tax impact of adjustments is calculated by applying the annual effective tax rate, excluding the impact of discrete tax costs and benefits, to each adjustment. The adjusted effective tax rates used were 25.0% and 27.3% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See Note 12, “Income Taxes,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the effective tax rate.
(10)Reflects the one-time impact of the release of the majority of our valuation allowance.
Free Cash Flow
We calculate Free Cash Flow as net cash provided by or used in operating activities less additions of property, plant and equipment. We believe Free Cash Flow is useful for comparing our ability to generate cash with that of our peers. The presentation of Free Cash Flow is not meant to be considered in isolation or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities and does not necessarily indicate whether cash flows will be sufficient to fund cash needs.
The following table presents a reconciliation of our Free Cash Flow, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, to our net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, which is determined in accordance with GAAP:
(1)Under the terms of the A&R Offtake Agreement and pursuant to the accounting treatment thereof, we recognized $21.3 million of non-cash revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was retained by Shenghe to reduce our outstanding debt obligation.
Quarterly Performance Trend
While our business is not seasonal in nature, we sometimes experience a timing lag between production and sales, which may result in volatility in our results of operations between periods. In addition, the efficiency improvements we made in the processing of our rare earth materials has resulted in significantly higher production of REO starting in the third quarter of 2019. Our realized price per REO MT was adversely impacted by the imposition of Chinese import duties in July 2018 as well as the subsequent increase of such tariffs in May 2019. The lifting of tariffs contributed to the improvement in realized price per REO MT in the second and third quarters of 2020.
The following table presents our REO production and sales volumes, as well as our realized price per REO MT, for the quarterly periods indicated:
(1)Realized price per REO MT for certain periods prior to May 2020 would have generally been higher if the tariff credits received from Shenghe were applied in the same periods the relevant sales occurred. See “Recent Developments and Comparability of Results.”
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity refers to our ability to generate sufficient cash flows to meet the cash requirements of our business operations, including working capital and capital expenditure needs, contractual obligations, debt service and other commitments. Historically, our principal sources of liquidity have been the Offtake Advances from Shenghe, issuances of notes or other debt, and cash from operating activities. Recently, we raised capital through the consummation of the Business Combination, which included the PIPE Financing that resulted in $200.0 million in gross proceeds.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $519.7 million of cash and cash equivalents and $71.8 million principal amount of related-party debt pertaining to our Offtake Advances with Shenghe. The promissory notes with JHL Capital Group and QVT Financial and their affiliates (described below) were repaid in full upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
We believe that our cash flows from operations and cash on hand is adequate to meet our liquidity requirements for the foreseeable future. Our current working capital needs relate mainly to our mining and beneficiation operations. Our principal capital expenditure requirements relate mainly to the periodic replacement of mining or processing equipment, as well as funding our Stage II optimization project to recommission and optimize our idled refining facilities. Our future capital requirements will depend on several factors, including future acquisitions and potential additional investments in further downstream production (for example, if we move forward with plans to develop our Stage III project for the production of rare-earth-based magnets and/or other finished components). If our available resources prove inadequate to fund our plans or commitments, we may be forced to revise our strategy and business plans or could be required, or elect, to seek additional funding through public or private equity or debt financings; however, such funding may not be available on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
Debt Obligations
Offtake Advances: As of December 31, 2020, we had debt recorded to Shenghe with a carrying amount of $66.4 million, of which $71.8 million was principal and $5.4 million was debt discount. The debt was recorded in connection with the accounting for the June 2020 Modification. The debt to Shenghe is to be satisfied primarily through product sales, as described above, where partial non-cash consideration is received by the Company in the form of debt reduction (generally equal to approximately 15% of the ultimate market value of the REO, excluding tariffs, duties and certain other charges). Additional cash payments will be required as a result of sales of offtake products to other parties, and under certain other conditions. See also “Recent Developments and Comparability of Results” section above.
We follow an imputed interest rate model to calculate the amortization of the embedded discount, which is recognized as non-cash interest expense, by estimating the timing of anticipated payments and reductions of the debt principal balance. The effective rate applicable from the June 5, 2020, inception to December 31, 2020, was between 4.41% and 5.27%. As of December 31, 2020, we estimated the timing of repayment to be within three years and an updated imputed interest rate of 6.59%. The relative increase in rates is primarily due to changes in expected market prices, which will result in earlier anticipated repayment of the outstanding balance through the various mechanisms, and result in a higher implicit interest rate in order to fully amortize the debt discount concurrent with the expected final repayment of the debt balance.
Promissory Note: In April 2017, we issued a 5% callable unsecured promissory note to certain investment funds managed by or affiliated with JHL Capital Group and QVT Financial, in exchange for loans extended by those entities. This note was repaid in full upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
Secured Promissory Note: In August 2017, we issued a 10% secured promissory note to certain investment funds managed by and/or affiliated with JHL Capital Group and QVT Financial, in exchange for a loan extended by those entities to enable us to purchase certain equipment. This promissory note was secured by a lien on certain equipment that was purchased by us with the proceeds of the note. In addition, the interest on this promissory note was payable in kind whereby the interest would be added to the principal balance. This note was repaid in full upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
Paycheck Protection Loan: In April 2020, we obtained a loan of $3.4 million pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under Division A, Title I of the CARES Act, which was enacted in March 2020 (the “Paycheck Protection Loan” or the “Loan”). The Paycheck Protection Loan, which was in the form of a note dated April 15, 2020, issued by CIBC Bank USA, matures on April 14, 2022, and bears interest at a rate of 1% per annum, payable monthly commencing on March 15, 2021. Under the terms of the PPP, the Loan may be forgiven if the funds are used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act, which include payroll costs, costs used to continue group health care benefits, rent and utilities. As we have used the entire Loan amount for qualifying expenses, in November 2020, we applied for forgiveness of the entire balance in accordance with the requirements and limitations under the CARES Act and Small Business Administration (“SBA”) regulations and requirements. However, no assurance can be provided that any portion of the Loan will be forgiven. Based on guidance from the U.S. Department of the Treasury, since the proceeds exceeded $2.0 million, our forgiveness application is subject to audit by the SBA. We are currently awaiting a determination on forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Loan.
Equipment Notes: We entered into several financing agreements for the purchase of equipment, including trucks, tractors, loaders, graders, and various other machinery. As of December 31, 2020, we had $2.1 million in principal (and accrued interest) outstanding under the equipment notes.
Public Warrants
Warrants to purchase 11,499,968 shares of the Company’s Common Stock at $11.50 per share were issued during FVAC’s IPO (the “Public Warrants”). The Public Warrants become exercisable 12 months from the closing of FVAC’s IPO, which was May 4, 2020. The Public Warrants expire five years after the completion of the Business Combination or earlier upon redemption or liquidation. Assuming the exercise of all of the outstanding Public Warrants for cash, we would receive gross proceeds of approximately $132 million. For more information on the Public Warrants, see Note 14, “Stockholders’ Equity,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows:
n.m. - Not meaningful.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities: Net cash provided by operating activities was $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $0.4 million in the prior year. The improvement mainly reflects the increase in product sales and increased efficiency in our production costs (as discussed above), offset by a reduction due to the timing of payment of working capital items, such as accounts payable, and a build in ore stockpiles per our mine plan. In addition, of our product sales, $21.3 million was excluded from cash provided by operating activities since that portion of the sales price was retained by Shenghe to reduce the debt obligation.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities: Our current, recurring capital expenditure needs consist mainly of purchases of property, plant and equipment, including mining equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities was $22.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $5.6 million in the prior year. The change was mainly attributable to an increase in capital expenditures relating primarily to initial expenditures related to our Stage II optimization project, as well as commissioning of our CHP and water treatment plants during the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we sold long-lived assets, from which we received $7.9 million.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities: Net cash provided by financing activities was $522.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $4.1 million in the prior year. The change primarily relates to the Business Combination, including the PIPE Financing. In addition, the change reflects the $35.5 million received from Shenghe relating to the Second Additional Advance, $40.3 million payments of underwriting and transaction costs, and a year-over-year increase of $8.9 million in principal payments on debt obligations and finance leases.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Includes future lease payments required under operating leases and finance leases that have initial or remaining non-cancellable lease terms in excess of one year.
(2)Includes scheduled or expected principal payments on our debt obligations as well as our equipment notes.
(3)Based on our expected repayments, considering expected production volumes, forecasted prices and cost projections. Actual amounts may differ from these estimates.
(4)Represents payments that we are expecting to make in the future based on our estimates of asset retirement and environmental obligations, on a discounted basis.
Off-Balance Sheet Commitments and Arrangements
We do not engage in any off-balance sheet financing activities, nor do we have any interest in entities referred to as variable interest entities.
Critical Accounting Policies
Preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with GAAP requires our management to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that impact the reported amount of product sales and operating expenses, assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We consider an accounting judgment, estimate or assumption to be critical when (1) the estimate or assumption is complex in nature or requires a high degree of judgment and (2) the use of different judgments, estimates and assumptions could have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Our critical accounting policies are described below.
Revenue
We recognize revenue from sales of rare earth products produced from our mine. Our principal customer, Shenghe, purchased substantially all of our production for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and is an affiliate of an equityholder of the Company. We recognize revenue at the point in time control of the products transfers to the customer and, under our offtake agreements with Shenghe, our performance obligation is typically satisfied when we deliver products to the agreed-upon shipping point. The transaction price with Shenghe is typically based on an agreed-upon price per MT but subject to certain quality adjustments based on REO content, with an adjustment for the ultimate market price of the product realized by Shenghe, further adjusted for certain contractually negotiated amounts. We typically negotiate with and bill an initial price to Shenghe; such prices are then updated based on final adjustments for REO content and/or actual sales prices realized by Shenghe. Sales to Shenghe under the Original Offtake Agreement also reflect an adjustment for the Shenghe Implied Discount, which did not apply to sales prior to July 1, 2019, or after June 5, 2020.
Debt Obligations and Imputed Interest Rate Applied to Debt Discount
In connection with the June 2020 Modification, we recorded a total principal amount of $94.0 million in debt due to the nature of our obligations, including a carrying amount upon issuance of $85.7 million based on the fair value of the instrument upon issuance, and offset by the resulting debt discount of $8.3 million. Since the A&R Offtake Agreement does not have a stated rate, and the timing and method of repayment is contingent on several factors, including our production and sales volumes, market prices realized by Shenghe, our sales to other parties, our asset sales and the amount of our annual net income, we estimated the timing of payments and other reductions to the outstanding balance to determine an imputed interest rate.
The debt discount represents the difference between the fair value of the debt liability issued and the total amount of the contractual obligation as a consequence of our entry into the A&R Offtake Agreement. The imputed interest rate is calculated by amortizing the debt discount over the time period that management expects to bring the total outstanding principal balance to zero and determining the annualized interest rate necessary to fully amortize the discount in the same period when final principal reduction is expected to occur. Actual repayments or reductions in the principal balance may differ in timing and amount from our estimates, and we therefore expect to update our estimates each reporting period. Accordingly, the imputed interest rate is likely to differ in future periods.
We have determined that we will recognize adjustments from these estimates using the prospective method. Under the prospective method, we will update our estimate of the effective imputed interest rate in future periods based on revised estimates of the timing of remaining principal reductions. This rate will then be used to recognize interest expense for subsequent reporting periods, until the estimates are updated again. Under this method, the effective interest rate is not constant, and changes are recognized prospectively as an adjustment to the effective yield. See Note 9, “Debt Obligations,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Asset Retirement Obligations
We recognize asset retirement obligations for estimated costs of legally and contractually required closure, dismantlement, and reclamation activities associated with the Mountain Pass mine and processing facility. Asset retirement obligations are initially recognized at their estimated fair value in the period in which the obligation is incurred. Fair value is based on the expected timing of reclamation activities, cash flows to perform activities, amount and uncertainty associated with the cash flows, including adjustments for a market risk premium, and discounted using a credit-adjusted risk-free rate. The liability is accreted over time through periodic charges to earnings and reduced as reclamation activities occur; differences between
estimated and actual amounts are recognized as an adjustment to operating expense. Subsequent increments in expected undiscounted cash flows are measured at their discounted values using updated estimates of our credit-adjusted risk-free rate applied to the increment only. Subsequent decrements are reduced based on the weighted-average discount rate associated with the obligation. As of December 31, 2020, the credit-adjusted risk-free rate ranged between 7.1% and 8.2%, depending on the timing of expected settlement and when the layer or increment was recognized. Associated asset retirement costs, including the effect of increments and decrements, are recognized as adjustments to the related asset’s carrying amount and depreciated or depleted over its remaining useful life.
Environmental Obligations
We have assumed certain environmental remediation obligations that primarily relate to groundwater monitoring activities. Estimated remediation costs are accrued based on management’s best estimate at the end of each period of the costs expected to be incurred at a site to settle the obligation when those amounts are probable and estimable. Such cost estimates may include ongoing care, maintenance and monitoring costs associated with remediation activities. Changes in remediation estimates are reflected in earnings in the period. Remediation costs included in environmental obligations are discounted to their present value as cash flows when payments are readily estimable, and are discounted using a risk-free rate, which we derive from U.S. Treasury yields.
Emerging Growth Company Accounting Election
Section 102(b)(1) of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”) exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can choose not to take advantage of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies, and any such election to not take advantage of the extended transition period is irrevocable. We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, and have irrevocably elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and has different application dates for public or private companies, we, for so long as we remain an emerging growth company, may adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies are required to adopt the new or revised standard.
Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Recently adopted and issued accounting pronouncements are described in Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.