ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes which appear under Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains, in addition to historical information, forward-looking statements that include risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Discussions of 2018 results and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are omitted in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
Overview
We are a leading semiconductor company that designs, develops and markets high-performance power solutions. Incorporated in 1997, our core strengths include deep system-level and applications knowledge, strong analog design expertise and innovative proprietary process technologies. These combined strengths enable us to deliver highly integrated monolithic products that offer energy-efficient, cost-effective, easy-to-use solutions for systems found in computing and storage, automotive, industrial, communications and consumer applications. Our mission is to reduce total energy consumption in our customers’ systems with green, practical and compact solutions. We believe that we differentiate ourselves by offering solutions that are more highly integrated, smaller in size, more energy-efficient, more accurate with respect to performance specifications and, consequently, more cost-effective than many competing solutions. We plan to continue to introduce new products within our existing product families, as well as in new innovative product categories.
We operate in the cyclical semiconductor industry where there is seasonal demand for certain products. We are not immune from current and future industry downturns, but we have targeted product and market areas that we believe have the ability to offer above average industry performance over the long term.
We work with third parties to manufacture and assemble our ICs. This has enabled us to limit our capital expenditures and fixed costs, while focusing our engineering and design resources on our core strengths.
Following the introduction of a product, our sales cycle generally takes a number of quarters after we receive an initial customer order for a new product to ramp up. Typical lead times for orders are generally 16 to 26 weeks. These factors, combined with the fact that orders in the semiconductor industry can typically be cancelled or rescheduled without significant penalty to the customer, make the forecasting of our orders and revenue difficult.
We derive most of our revenue from sales through distribution arrangements and direct sales to customers in Asia, where our products are incorporated into end-user products. Our revenue from direct or indirect sales to customers in Asia was 91%, 89% and 88% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We derive a majority of our revenue from the sales of our DC to DC converter products which serve the computing and storage, automotive, industrial, communications and consumer markets. We believe our ability to achieve revenue growth will depend, in part, on our ability to develop new products, enter new market segments, gain market share, manage litigation risk, diversify our customer base and continue to secure manufacturing capacity.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic, which continues to spread rapidly in the U.S. and globally. Governmental authorities have implemented numerous containment measures, including travel-related restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and business restrictions and shutdowns. These measures have significantly affected the global economy and are disrupting business operations worldwide for an unknown period of time until the disease is contained. Economic conditions remained uncertain as of the end of 2020.
Our primary focus is to continue to execute our business plan and mitigate the effect of the pandemic on our financial position and operations, while actively taking all necessary precautions to ensure the safety of our employees, our suppliers and our customers. The pandemic did not materially and adversely impact our overall operating results or business operations during 2020. Some of the key developments and initiatives we implemented since March 2020 include, but are not limited to, the following:
●
Employees:
Our top priority during the pandemic is protecting the health and safety of our employees. As governments continue to institute new restrictions on commercial operations, we continue to monitor new developments and work to ensure our compliance while also maintaining business continuity for essential operations. In the U.S. and certain international locations, we continue to implement work-from-home arrangements in accordance with local regulations. To date, we believe these arrangements have contributed to the health and safety of our employees and allowed us to successfully maintain business operations and customer relations.
●
Facilities and Supply Chain:
Our manufacturing facilities in China, Taiwan and South Korea are fully operational and have experienced minimal disruptions, as we continue to follow the proper guidance issued by governmental authorities. In addition, we have not experienced any major supply chain disruptions as a result of the pandemic.
●
Customers:
Overall, we did not experience an adverse impact on customer demand during 2020 as a result of the pandemic. Our revenue increased in all of our end markets compared to 2019. Furthermore, there were no significant delays in payments by our customers. However, we cannot provide assurance that we will not experience a material and adverse impact on customer demand during 2021 as a result of the pandemic.
Our automotive revenue was negatively affected by the pandemic in the second quarter of 2020 after a number of automotive OEMs temporarily shut down production. However, revenue has since returned to more normal ordering levels. We continue to receive significant interest from customers in our technology and design capabilities in applications including infotainment, smart lighting, advanced driver-assistance systems and autonomous driving. We believe we are well-positioned to accelerate growth as the automotive market conditions continue to improve.
●
Liquidity and Capital Resources:
Our cash and investment balances remain strong and we continue to generate positive operating cash flows. We believe we have sufficient liquidity to satisfy our cash needs as we manage through the current uncertain environment. However, we will continue to monitor, evaluate and take action, as necessary, to preserve adequate liquidity to support our business for 2021 and beyond.
We are actively working with our stakeholders, including customers, suppliers and employees, to address the impact of the pandemic. We will continue to monitor the situation, to assess further possible implications to our business, supply chain and customers, and to take actions in an effort to mitigate adverse consequences. However, we cannot reasonably estimate the duration and severity of the pandemic or its ultimate impact on the global economy, the semiconductor industry and our business. A prolonged economic slowdown as a result of the pandemic could materially and adversely impact our business, results of operations and financial condition for 2021 and beyond.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis, including those related to revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, inventories, income taxes and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making the judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements are, by their nature, uncertain and unpredictable, and depend upon, among other things, many factors outside of our control, including demand for our products, economic conditions and other current and future events, such as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Actual results could differ from these estimates and assumptions, and any such differences may be material to our consolidated financial statements.
As of the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements, we are not aware of any specific event or circumstance related to the pandemic that would require management to update the significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. As new events continue to evolve and additional information becomes available, any changes to these estimates and assumptions will be recognized in the consolidated financial statements as soon as they become known.
We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect our more significant judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily from product sales, which include assembled and tested ICs, as well as dies in wafer form. These product sales accounted for 97%, 99% and 98% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The remaining revenue primarily includes royalty revenue from licensing arrangements and revenue from wafer testing services performed for third parties, which have not been significant in all periods presented.
We recognize revenue when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control of the promised goods or services to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
Product sales consist of a single performance obligation that we satisfy at a point in time. We recognize product revenue from distributors and direct end customers when the following events have occurred: (a) we have transferred physical possession of the products, (b) we have a present right to payment, (c) the customer has legal title to the products, and (d) the customer bears significant risks and rewards of ownership of the products. In accordance with the shipping terms specified in the contracts, these criteria are generally met when the products are shipped from our facilities (such as the “Ex Works” shipping term) or delivered to the customers’ locations (such as the “Delivered Duty Paid” shipping term).
Under certain consignment agreements, revenue is not recognized when the products are shipped and delivered to be held at customers’ designated locations because we continue to control the products and retain ownership, and the customers do not have an unconditional obligation to pay. We recognize revenue when the customers consume the products from the consigned inventory locations or, in some cases, after a 60-day period from the delivery date has passed, at which time control transfers to the customers and we invoice them for payment.
We account for price adjustment and stock rotation rights as variable consideration that reduces the transaction price, and recognize that reduction in the same period the associated revenue is recognized. Four U.S.-based distributors have price adjustment rights when they sell our products to their end customers at a price that is lower than the distribution price invoiced by us. When we receive claims from the distributors that products have been sold to the end customers at the lower price, we issue the distributors credit memos for the price adjustments. We estimate the price adjustments using the expected value method based on an analysis of historical claims, at both the distributor and product level, as well as an assessment of any known trends of product sales mix. Other U.S. distributors and non-U.S. distributors, which make up the majority of our total sales to distributors, do not have price adjustment rights. We record a credit against accounts receivable for the estimated price adjustments, with a corresponding reduction to revenue.
Certain distributors have limited stock rotation rights that permit the return of a small percentage of the previous six months’ purchases in accordance with the contract terms. We estimate the stock rotation returns using the expected value method based on an analysis of historical returns, and the current level of inventory in the distribution channel. We record a liability for the stock rotation reserve, with a corresponding reduction to revenue. In addition, we recognize an asset for product returns which represents the right to recover products from the customers related to stock rotations, with a corresponding reduction to cost of revenue.
We pay sales commissions based on the achievement of pre-determined product sales targets. We have elected the practical expedient to expense sales commissions as incurred because the amortization period would have been one year or less.
Inventory Valuation
We value our inventories at the lower of the standard cost (which approximates actual cost on a first-in, first-out basis) or their current estimated net realizable value. We write down excess and obsolete inventories based on assumptions about future demand and market conditions. If actual demand or market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory write-downs may be required. Conversely, if actual demand or market conditions are more favorable, inventories may be sold that were previously written down.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We recognize federal, state and foreign current tax liabilities or assets based on our estimate of taxes payable or refundable in the current fiscal year by tax jurisdiction. We also recognize federal, state and foreign deferred tax assets or liabilities for our estimate of future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards. We record a valuation allowance to reduce any deferred tax assets by the amount of any tax benefits that, based on available evidence and judgment, are not expected to be realized.
Our calculation of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on certain estimates and judgments and involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. Our estimates of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities may change based, in part, on added certainty, finality or uncertainty to an anticipated outcome, changes in accounting or tax laws in the U.S. or foreign jurisdictions where we operate, or changes in other facts or circumstances. In addition, we recognize liabilities for potential U.S. and foreign income tax for uncertain income tax positions taken on our tax returns if it has less than a 50% likelihood of being sustained. If we determine that payment of these amounts is unnecessary or if the recorded tax liability is less than our current assessment, we may be required to recognize an income tax benefit or additional income tax expense in our financial statements in the period such determination is made. We have calculated our uncertain tax positions which were attributable to certain estimates and judgments.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had a valuation allowance of $18.2 million and $15.4 million, respectively, attributable to management’s determination that it is more likely than not that certain deferred tax assets will not be fully realized. In the event we determine that it is more likely than not that we would be able to realize the deferred tax assets in the future in excess of our net recorded amount, an adjustment to the valuation allowance for the deferred tax assets would increase income in the period such determination was made. Likewise, should it be determined that additional amounts of the net deferred tax assets will not be realized in the future, an adjustment to increase the deferred tax assets valuation allowance will be charged to income in the period such determination is made.
Contingencies
We are a party to actions and proceedings in the ordinary course of business, including potential litigation regarding our stockholders and our intellectual property, challenges to the enforceability or validity of our intellectual property, claims that our products infringe on the intellectual property rights of others, and employment matters. The pending proceedings involve complex questions of fact and law and will require the expenditure of significant funds and the diversion of other resources to prosecute and defend. In addition, from time to time, we become aware that we are subject to other contingent liabilities. When this occurs, we will evaluate the appropriate accounting for the potential contingent liabilities to determine whether a contingent liability should be recorded. In making this determination, management may, depending on the nature of the matter, consult with internal and external legal counsel and technical experts. Based on the facts and circumstances in each matter, we use our judgment to determine whether it is probable that a contingent loss has occurred and whether the amount of such loss can be estimated. If we determine a loss is probable and estimable, we record a contingent loss. In determining the amount of a contingent loss, we take into account advice received from experts for each specific matter regarding the status of legal proceedings, settlement negotiations, prior case history and other factors. Should the judgments and estimates made by management need to be adjusted as additional information becomes available, we may need to record additional contingent losses that could materially and adversely impact our results of operations. Alternatively, if the judgments and estimates made by management are adjusted, for example, if a particular contingent loss does not occur, the contingent loss recorded would be reversed which could result in a favorable impact on our results of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award. The fair value of RSUs with service conditions is based on the grant date share price. The fair value of shares issued under the employee stock purchase plan (“ESPP”) and RSUs with performance conditions is estimated using the Black-Scholes model. The fair value of RSUs with market conditions, as well as RSUs containing both market and performance conditions, is estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
Compensation expense related to awards with service conditions is recorded on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Compensation expense related to awards subject to market or performance conditions is recognized over the requisite service period for each separately vesting tranche. For awards with performance conditions, as well as awards containing both market and performance conditions, we recognize compensation expense when the performance goals are achieved, or when it becomes probable that the performance goals will be achieved. Management performs the probability assessment on a quarterly basis by reviewing external factors, such as macroeconomic conditions and the analog industry revenue forecasts, and internal factors, such as our business and operational objectives and revenue forecasts. Changes in the probability assessment of achievement of the performance conditions are accounted for in the period of change by recording a cumulative catch-up adjustment as if the new estimate had been applied since the service inception date. If the projected achievement was revised upward or if the actual results were higher than the projected achievement, additional compensation expense would be recorded for the awards due to the cumulative catch-up adjustment, which would have an adverse impact on our results of operations. Conversely, if the projected achievement was revised downward or if the actual results were lower than the projected achievement, previously accrued compensation expense would be reversed for the awards, which would have a favorable impact on our results of operations. As a result, our stock-based compensation expense is subject to volatility and may fluctuate significantly each quarter due to changes in our probability assessment of achievement of the performance conditions or actual results being different from projections made by management.
We account for forfeitures of equity awards when they occur.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements regarding recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recent accounting pronouncements not yet adopted as of December 31, 2020.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations:
Revenue
The following table summarizes our revenue by end market:
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $844.5 million, an increase of $216.6 million, or 34.5%, from $627.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven by higher sales in all of our end markets. Overall unit shipments increased by 7% and average sales prices increased by approximately 24% compared to the same period in 2019. The increase in average sales prices was primarily driven by favorable changes in product mix with more sales coming from products with higher unit prices.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue from the communications market increased $57.5 million, or 67.8%, from the same period in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by increased infrastructure sales. Revenue from the consumer market increased $56.2 million, or 34.2%, from the same period in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by increased sales for gaming and mobile products. Revenue from the computing and storage market increased $64.0 million, or 33.8%, from the same period in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by strength in cloud computing and storage. Revenue from the automotive market increased $18.7 million, or 20.7%, from the same period in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by higher sales of products for infotainment applications, despite temporary production shutdowns by certain OEMs during the second quarter due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenue from the industrial market increased $20.2 million, or 20.3%, from the same period in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by higher sales in power source products.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue primarily consists of costs incurred to manufacture, assemble and test our products, as well as warranty costs, inventory-related and other overhead costs, and stock-based compensation expenses.
Cost of revenue was $378.5 million, or 44.8% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020, and $281.6 million, or 44.8% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $96.9 million increase in cost of revenue was primarily due to a 7% increase in overall unit shipments and a 22% increase in the average direct cost of units shipped. The increase in cost of revenue was also driven by an increase in warranty expenses, inventory write-downs and manufacturing overhead costs.
Gross margin was 55.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with 55.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the impact of a more favorable product mix was primarily offset by higher warranty expenses and inventory write-downs as a percentage of revenue compared to the same period in 2019.
Research and Development (“R&D”)
R&D expenses primarily consist of salary and benefit expenses, bonuses, stock-based compensation and deferred compensation for design and product engineers, expenses related to new product development and supplies, and facility costs.
R&D expenses were $137.6 million, or 16.3% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020, and $107.8 million, or 17.2% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $29.8 million increase in R&D expenses was primarily due to an increase of $22.3 million in compensation expenses, which include salary, benefits and bonuses, an increase of $3.0 million in new product development expenses, and an increase of $1.7 million in depreciation. Our R&D headcount was 930 employees as of December 31, 2020, compared with 839 employees as of December 31, 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”)
SG&A expenses primarily include salary and benefit expenses, bonuses, stock-based compensation and deferred compensation for sales, marketing and administrative personnel, sales commissions, travel expenses, facilities costs, and professional service fees.
SG&A expenses were $161.7 million, or 19.1% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020, and $133.5 million, or 21.3% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $28.2 million increase in SG&A expenses was primarily due to an increase of $15.4 million in compensation expenses, which include salary, benefits and bonuses, an increase of $6.2 million in stock-based compensation expenses, which were mainly associated with performance-based equity awards, and an increase of $4.2 million in commission expenses driven by higher revenue. Our SG&A headcount was 564 employees as of December 31, 2020, compared with 503 employees as of December 31, 2019.
Litigation Expense
Litigation expense was $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to increased litigation activity related to ongoing patent infringement and other matters.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, was $10.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with other income, net, of $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to an increase of $2.3 million in amortization of the premium on available-for-sale securities and an increase of $1.1 million in foreign currency exchange losses. These unfavorable changes were partially offset by an increase of $2.0 million in interest income primarily as a result of higher investment balances, and an increase of $0.8 million in income related to changes in the value of the deferred compensation plan investments.
Income Tax Expense
The income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $5.0 million, or 2.9% of pre-tax income. The effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate primarily due to foreign income from our subsidiaries in Bermuda and China being taxed at lower statutory tax rates, and excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation. The decrease in the effective tax rate relative to the federal statutory rate was partially offset by the inclusion of the global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) tax.
The income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $4.3 million, or 3.8% of pre-tax income. The effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate primarily due to foreign income from our subsidiaries in Bermuda and China being taxed at lower statutory tax rates, the impact of certain tax credits and excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation. The decrease in the effective tax rate relative to the federal statutory rate was partially offset by the inclusion of the GILTI tax.
See Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $334.9 million and short-term investments of $260.2 million, compared with cash and cash equivalents of $173.0 million and short-term investments of $282.4 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, $252.1 million of cash and cash equivalents and $130.8 million of short-term investments were held by our international subsidiaries. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we repatriated $30 million of cash from our Bermuda subsidiary to the U.S. The proceeds will primarily be used to fund our ongoing business operations. We may repatriate additional cash from our Bermuda subsidiary to fund our expenditures in future periods. We anticipate that earnings from other foreign subsidiaries will continue to be indefinitely reinvested.
The significant components of our working capital are cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, accounts receivable, inventories and other current assets, reduced by accounts payable, accrued compensation and related benefits, and other accrued liabilities. As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $695.0 million, compared with working capital of $557.0 million as of December 31, 2019. The $138.0 million increase in working capital was due to a $186.8 million increase in current assets, which was partially offset by a $48.8 million increase in current liabilities. The increase in current assets was primarily due to an increase in cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable and inventories, which was partially offset by a decrease in short-term investments. The increase in current liabilities was due to an increase in accounts payable, accrued compensation and related benefits and other accrued liabilities.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flow activities:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $267.8 million, primarily due to our net income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization and stock-based compensation, and a net increase of $3.0 million from the changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The increase in accounts receivable was driven by increased sales during the three months ended December 31, 2020. The increase in inventories was primarily driven by an increase in wafer and die inventories to meet current demand and future growth. The increase in accounts payable was primarily driven by increased inventory purchases to meet future demand. The increase in accrued compensation was primarily due to an increase in accrued bonuses. The increase in other accrued liabilities was primarily driven by an increase in the deferred compensation plan liabilities and an increase in warranty expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $216.3 million, primarily due to our net income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization and stock-based compensation, and a net increase of $17.8 million from the changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The increase in other assets was primarily due to an increase in prepaid income taxes and an increase in certain tax withholding proceeds receivable related to RSUs that vested at the end of the year. The increase in other accrued liabilities was primarily driven by an increase in employee contributions to the deferred compensation plan. The decrease in inventories was primarily driven by a decrease in wafer and die purchases.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $39.2 million, primarily due to purchases of property and equipment of $55.6 million, partially offset by net sales and maturities of short-term investments of $22.1 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $167.1 million, primarily due to purchases of property and equipment of $95.8 million, net purchases of short-term investments of $76.8 million and net contributions to the deferred compensation plan of $3.1 million. These cash outflows were partially offset by proceeds from sales of property and equipment of $9.3 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we funded the purchases of properties in Kirkland, Washington and Livonia, Michigan for $57.4 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $71.6 million, primarily reflecting $88.8 million used to pay dividends to our stockholders and dividend equivalents to our employees who hold RSUs, which was partially offset by $22.6 million of cash proceeds from the vesting of RSUs and the issuance of shares through our ESPP. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in financing activities was $48.1 million, primarily reflecting $67.3 million used to pay dividends to our stockholders and dividend equivalents to our employees who hold RSUs, which was partially offset by $19.9 million of cash proceeds from the vesting of RSUs and the issuance of shares through our ESPP.
In February 2021, our Board of Directors approved an increase in our quarterly cash dividends from $0.50 per share to $0.60 per share.
We anticipate that cash used for future dividends and dividend equivalent payments, as well as payments for the one-time deemed repatriation transition tax and other expenditures, will come from our domestic cash, cash generated from ongoing U.S. operations, and cash repatriated from our Bermuda subsidiary. We also anticipate that earnings from other foreign subsidiaries will continue to be indefinitely reinvested.
Although consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting economic uncertainty could adversely affect our liquidity and capital resources in the future, and cash requirements may fluctuate based on the timing and extent of many factors such as those discussed above, we currently believe that cash generated from operations, together with the liquidity provided by existing cash balances and short-term investments, will be sufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements for the next 12 months.
In the future, in order to strengthen our financial position, respond to adverse developments such as the COVID-19 pandemic, changes in our circumstance or unforeseen events or conditions, or fund our growth, we may need to discontinue paying dividends and dividend equivalents, and may need to raise additional funds by any one or a combination of the following: issuing equity securities, issuing debt or convertible debt securities, incurring indebtedness secured by our assets, or selling certain product lines and/or portions of our business. Accordingly, we cannot ensure that we will continue to pay dividends and dividend equivalents in the future, and there can be no guarantee that we will be able to raise additional funds on terms acceptable to us, or at all.
From time to time, we have engaged in discussions with third parties concerning capital investments and potential acquisitions of product lines, technologies, businesses and companies, and we continue to consider potential investments and acquisition candidates. Any such transactions could involve the issuance of a significant number of new equity securities, assumptions of debt, and/or payment of cash consideration. We may also be required to raise additional funds to complete any such investments or acquisitions, through either the issuance of equity and debt securities or incurring indebtedness secured by our assets. If we raise additional funds or acquire businesses or technologies through the issuance of equity securities or convertible debt securities, our existing stockholders may experience significant dilution.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
(1)
Operating lease obligations represent the undiscounted remaining lease payments. The amount also includes commitments for additional leases that have not yet commenced as of December 31, 2020. See Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
(2)
Outstanding purchase commitments represent our obligations with our suppliers and other parties that require the future purchases of goods or services, which primarily consist of wafer and other inventory purchases, assembly and other manufacturing services, construction or purchases of property and equipment, and license arrangements.
(3)
The transition tax liability represents the one-time, mandatory deemed repatriation tax imposed on previously deferred foreign earnings under the 2017 Tax Act. As permitted by the 2017 Tax Act, we have elected to pay the tax liability in installments on an interest-free basis through 2025.
(4)
Other long-term obligations include long-term liabilities reflected on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, which primarily consist of the deferred compensation plan liabilities and accrued dividend equivalents. Because of the uncertainty as to the timing of payments related to our liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits, we have excluded estimated obligations of $20.3 million from the table above.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of the Securities and Exchange Commission’s Regulation S-K.