Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. This discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
For an overview of our business, see “Part I - Item 1. Business.”
Key Metrics
We monitor a variety of key financial metrics to help us evaluate trends, establish budgets, measure the effectiveness of our business strategies and assess operational efficiencies. These financial metrics include revenue, gross margin, operating expenses and operating income determined in accordance with GAAP. Additionally, we monitor and project cash flow to determine our sources and uses for working capital to fund our operations. We also monitor Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, and design wins. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss adjusted for interest expense, taxes, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, and restructuring costs.
Adjusted EBITDA. Our management and board of directors use Adjusted EBITDA to understand and evaluate our operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget and to develop short-term and long-term operating and financing plans. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information for investors in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and our board of directors. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and should be considered in addition to, not as superior to, or as a substitute for, net income (loss) reported in accordance with GAAP. The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods indicated:
Design wins. To continue to grow our revenue, we must continue to achieve design wins for our MRAM products. We consider a design win to occur when an OEM or contract manufacturer notifies us that it has qualified one of our products as a component in a product or system for production. Because the life cycles for our customers’ products can last for many years, if these products have successful commercial introductions, we expect to continue to generate revenues over an extended period of time for each successful design win. Any delay in the development of our products, or failure of our customers to adopt our products, could inhibit revenue growth or cause declines, which would significantly harm our business. New design wins in each successive quarter of 2020 were 37, 43, 52, and 43, respectively, compared to 14, 13, 22, and 34 in each successive quarter of 2019, respectively.
Effect of the COVID-19 Pandemic on our Business
The COVID-19 outbreak has resulted in government authorities around the world implementing numerous measures to try to reduce the spread of COVID-19, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, “shelter-in-place,” “stay-at-home,” total lock-down orders, business limitations or shutdowns and similar orders. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and workforce participation, and initially created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets.
Overall, our business remains operational in the midst of the pandemic. However, as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak and the related responses from government authorities, our business, results of operations and financial condition have been, and continue to be, adversely impacted. For example, we have experienced electronics supply chain and demand disruptions from extended factory shutdowns, particularly in some Asian countries, which created unusual order patterns, and subsequently slowed Toggle MRAM demand, particularly from our industrial customers. We continue to see an impact as reflected in reduced demand from some customers and distributors. While we are working closely with our manufacturing partners and suppliers to support demand for our products, the full impact on our demand from customers remains unknown. Management is thus planning for a broad range of possible demand outcomes in an effort to ensure the success of our business under a variety of end market conditions.
Further, in an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees, we transitioned most of our office and support employees and contractors to working from home; suspended all non-essential business travel; and implemented social distancing guidelines for our employees and contractors who must work in our manufacturing and laboratory locations. Consequently, the remote working environment we have implemented for our employees has adversely impacted manufacturing yield improvement projects given delays in data gathering, analysis and inefficiencies of teams solving technical problems via remote-only means, which has impacted, and continues to impact, our cost of sales.
We will continue to monitor the situation and take additional actions as warranted. These actions may include further altering our operations in order to protect the best interests of our employees, customers and suppliers, and to comply with government requirements, while also planning and executing our business to best support our customers, suppliers, and partners.
Results of Operations
Below are factors we want to highlight for understanding our 2020 annual results and year over year comparison with proper historical perspective:
● 2020 represented a year of broad semiconductor market demand challenges driven by factors that included challenges from the COVID-19 pandemic and international trade conflicts, which had a significant impact on our results;
● Our manufacturing yields improved throughout 2020 resulting in significantly higher product margins compared to 2019 before reserve charges for excess and obsolete inventory.
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
We generated 62% and 66% of our revenue from products sold through distributors for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We maintain a direct selling relationship, for strategic purposes, with several key customer accounts. We have organized our sales team and representatives into three primary regions: North America; Europe, Middle East and Africa (EMEA); and Asia-Pacific (APAC). We recognize revenue by geography based on the region in which our products are sold, and not to where the end products in which they are assembled are shipped. Our revenue by region for the periods indicated was as follows (in thousands):
Total revenue increased by $4.5 million, or 12.1%, from $37.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, to $42.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Product sales increased by $5.2 million or 15.2%, from $34.6 million to $39.8 million. The increase was primarily driven by a higher volume of new STT-MRAM product sales.
Licensing, royalty, and other revenue is a highly variable revenue item characterized by a small number of transactions annually with revenue based on size and terms of each transaction. Licensing, royalty, and other revenue decreased by $0.7 million, from $2.9 million in 2019 to $2.2 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a $0.7 million decrease in sales of our backend foundry services.
Cost of Sales and Gross Margin
Cost of sales increased by $4.8 million, or 24.9%, from $19.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, to $23.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to a higher volume of wafers produced and sold as well as a $1.9 million reserve charge for excess and obsolete inventory in 2020, partly offset by higher yields on our MRAM products.
Our gross margin decreased from 48.9% during the year ended December 31, 2019 to 43.0% during the year ended December 31, 2020. Our product margins decreased as a result of charges for excess and obsolete inventory offsetting improvement of manufacturing yields throughout 2020.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, general and administrative and sales and marketing expenses. Personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, are among the most significant component of each of our operating expense categories.
Research and Development Expenses. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses for the design and development of our products and technologies, development wafers required to validate and characterize our technology, and expenses associated with our joint development agreement with GLOBALFOUNDRIES. Research and development expenses also include consulting services, circuit design costs, materials and laboratory supplies, fabrication and new packaging technology, and an allocation of related facilities and equipment costs. We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred.
Research and development expenses decreased by $3.3 million, or 23.2%, from $14.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, to $10.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a $1.8 million decrease in expenses with GLOBALFOUNDRIES under our joint development agreement, as well as a decrease in employee and contract labor related costs from a reduction in headcount as a result of our corporate restructuring plan completed in January 2020 as discussed further below, a decrease in spending on direct materials and supplies used in research and development activities due to the timing of purchases, and a decrease in costs to repair equipment. The decreases were partly offset by an increase in software costs.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased by $1.6 million, or 13.2%, from $12.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, to $10.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a $0.9 million decrease in employee costs due to a reduction in headcount as a result of our corporate restructuring plan as discussed further below, as well as a decrease in professional services expense.
Sales and Marketing Expenses. Sales and marketing expenses decreased by $1.4 million, or 25.7%, from $5.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, to $4.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was partially due to a $0.9 million decrease in employee and contract labor related costs from reduction in headcount as a result of our corporate restructuring plan as discussed further below, as well as a decrease in travel costs due to COVID-19 related travel restrictions.
*
Not meaningful.
Restructuring expenses. There were no restructuring costs during the year ended December 31, 2020. There were $0.8 million of restructuring expenses during the year ended December 31, 2019. During 2019, we implemented a corporate restructuring to further align strategy and long-term sustainability, which was completed in January 2020. As part of the restructuring, we reduced our workforce by approximately 15 positions across all functions. Restructuring expenses are costs associated with a formal restructuring plan and are related primarily to employee severance and benefit arrangements.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $0.1 million, or 11.0%, from $0.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, to $0.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The slight decrease was due in part to a decrease in non-cash interest related to the amortization of debt discounts derived from the issuance of a warrant, no end of term fee paid in 2020, and a decrease in floor interest rates charged on our credit facilities.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net decreased by $0.5 million , or 104.9%, from income of $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 to expense of $24,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to lower interest earned on our investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, and as of March 4, 2021, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, coupled with the amount available under our credit facility and our anticipated growth and sales levels, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our growth rate, the timing and extent of our spending to support research and development activities, the timing and cost of establishing additional sales and marketing capabilities, and the introduction of new products.
We have generated significant losses since our inception and had an accumulated deficit of $157.2 million as of December 31, 2020. We have historically financed our operations primarily through the sale of our common stock in our initial public offering (IPO) and follow-on public offering, sales of our common stock under our at-the-market sales agreement, sales of our redeemable convertible preferred stock, debt financing and the sale of our products. As of December 31, 2020, we had $14.6 million of cash and cash equivalents, compared to $14.5 million as of December 31, 2019.
In February 2018, we completed a follow-on underwritten public offering of our common stock under our Registration Statement filed in November 2017 (File No. 333-221331), selling 3,772,447 shares of our common stock at an offering price of $7.00 per share for proceeds of $24.5 million, net of $1.9 million of underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering costs.
In August 2019, we entered into an open market sale agreement (2019 Sales Agreement) with Jefferies, LLC (Jefferies) for the offer and sale of shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering of up to $25.0 million from time to time through Jefferies, acting as sales agent. The issuance and sale of these shares by us pursuant to the 2019 Sales Agreement were deemed an “at-the-market” (ATM) offering under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. Under the 2019 Sales Agreement, we agreed to pay Jefferies a commission of up to 3% of the gross proceeds of any sales made
pursuant to the 2019 Sales Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received net proceeds of $2.1 million after deducting commissions and expenses payable by us, from the sale of 468,427 shares of common stock pursuant to the 2019 Sales Agreement. We suspended sales under the 2019 Sales Agreement in March 2020 and terminated the ATM program in November 2020.
Additionally, see “Credit Facilities” below for information regarding our debt financing.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $2.9 million, which consisted of a net loss of $8.5 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $6.3 million and a change of $0.7 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges consisted of stock-based compensation of $4.0 million, depreciation and amortization of $2.0 million, and non-cash interest expense of $0.3 million. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase of $1.8 million in accounts receivable due to increased sales volume and timing of cash receipts for outstanding balances, an increase of $2.1 million in inventory to meet demand of future sales and growing backlog, a decrease of $0.8 million in accounts payable due to the timing of payments, and a decrease of $0.3 million in accrued liabilities primarily due to timing of payments on inventory purchases.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $8.1 million, which consisted of a net loss of $14.7 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $5.6 million and a change of $1.0 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges consisted of stock-based compensation of $3.6 million, depreciation and amortization of $1.7 million, and non-cash interest expense of $0.3 million. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a decrease of $1.7 million in accounts receivable due to decreased sales volume and timing of cash receipts for outstanding balances, a decrease of $1.2 million in inventory due to adjusting purchasing practices to meet expected sales volumes, and an increase of $0.2 million in accounts payable due to the timing of payments. These were partially offset by a decrease of $2.2 million in accrued liabilities primarily due to timing of payments on inventory purchases.
Cash Flows From Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $0.3 million and $0.9 million, respectively, which consisted of capital expenditures primarily for the purchase of manufacturing equipment and purchased software.
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $3.4 million, which consisted of $2.1 million in net proceeds from the sale of our common stock in our at-the-market offering under our 2019 Sales Agreement with Jefferies, and $1.3 million in proceeds from stock option exercises and purchases of shares in our employee stock purchase plan.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $0.1 million, which consisted of $4.7 million in net proceeds from the sale of our common stock in our at-the-market offering under our 2019 Sales Agreement with Jefferies, and $0.3 million in proceeds from stock option exercises and purchases of shares in our employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by payments on long-term debt of $4.8 million and payment of debt issuance costs of $0.1 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements and do not have any holdings in variable interest entities.
Credit Facilities
In May 2017, we executed a Loan and Security Agreement (2017 Credit Facility) with Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) for a $12.0 million term loan, which we subsequently amended in January 2019 and June 2019. In August 2019, we executed an Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement (2019 Credit Facility), which amended and restated the 2017 Credit Facility, providing for a formula revolving line of credit (Line of Credit) and a term loan (2019 Term Loan) with SVB to refinance in full the outstanding principal balance of $8.0 million under the 2017 Credit Facility.
In July 2020, we executed the first amendment to the 2019 Credit Facility with SVB. The amendment, among other things, extended the initial 12-month interest-only period for the term loan to a 16-month interest-only period and lowered the floor interest rate. The floor interest rates for 2019 Term Loan and the Line of Credit Facility were reduced from 4.75% and 6.75% to 3.75% and 4.75%, respectively.
The amended Line of Credit allows for a maximum draw of $5.0 million, subject to a formula borrowing base, has a two-year term and bears interest at a floating rate equal to the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) prime rate plus 1.5%, per annum, subject to a floor of 4.75%. At execution, $2.0 million from the Line of Credit was used to refinance a portion of the outstanding balance of the 2017 Credit Facility, and $3.0 million remains available under the Line of Credit, subject to borrowing base availability. As of December 31, 2020, the effective interest rate under the Line of Credit was 10.18% and the outstanding balance was $2.0 million. The Line of Credit matures on August 5, 2021.
The amended 2019 Term Loan provides for a $6.0 million term loan, which was used to refinance the remaining balance of the 2017 Credit Facility. The amended 2019 Term Loan has a term of 46 months, and a 16-month interest-only period followed by 30 months of equal principal payments, plus accrued interest. The 2019 Term Loan bears interest at a floating rate equal to the WSJ prime rate minus 0.75%, subject to a floor of 3.75%. As of December 31, 2020, the effective interest rate under the 2019 Term Loan was 7.85% and the outstanding balance was $6.0 million. The 2019 Term Loan matures on June 1, 2023.
In conjunction with entering into the 2019 Credit Facility, on August 5, 2019, we and SVB amended and restated the warrant issued to SVB in connection with the first amendment to the 2017 Credit Facility, which was a warrant to purchase 9,375 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $8.91 per share, to add an option by SVB to put the warrant back to us for $50,000 upon expiration or a liquidity event, to be prorated if SVB exercises a portion of the warrant. The warrant expires on July 6, 2023. Additionally, in conjunction with entering into the first amendment to the 2019 Credit Facility, on July 15, 2020, we issued an additional warrant to SVB to purchase 21,500 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share which expires on July 15, 2025.
Collateral for the 2019 Credit Facility includes all of our assets except for intellectual property. We are required to comply with certain covenants under the 2019 Credit Facility, including requirements to maintain a minimum cash balance and availability under the Line of Credit, and restrictions on certain actions without the consent of the lender, such as limitations on our ability to engage in mergers or acquisitions, sell assets, incur indebtedness or grant liens or negative pledges on our assets, make loans or make other investments. Under these covenants, we are prohibited from paying cash dividends with respect to our capital stock. We were in compliance with all covenants at December 31, 2020. The 2019 Credit Facility contains a material adverse effect clause which provides that an event of default will occur if, among other triggers, an event occurs that could reasonably be expected to result in a material adverse effect on our business, operations or condition, or on our ability to perform our obligations under the 2019 Term Loan. As of December 31, 2020, we do not believe that it is probable that the clause will be triggered within the next 12 months.
For additional information about the 2019 Credit Facility, see Note 6 to our financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgements and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when a customer obtains control of the promised products or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. We recognize revenue net of allowances for returns and price concessions, and any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
Our billing practices approximate our performance as measured by an output method, where each output represents the completion of a performance obligation. We utilize the invoice practical expedient as defined in Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 606, resulting in recognition of revenue in the amount that we have the right to invoice.
We incur direct and incremental costs of obtaining contracts and expense such costs as incurred, as the life of the underlying contract is less than one year.
Nature of Products and Services
We derive our revenue from the sale of MRAM-based products in discrete unit form, licenses of and royalties on our MRAM and magnetic sensor technology, the sale of backend foundry services, and design services to third parties. We recognize sales of products in discrete unit form at a point in time, revenue related to licensing agreements when we have delivered control of the technology, revenue related to royalty agreements in the period in which sales generated from products sold using our technology occurs, sales of backend foundry services over time, and design services to third parties either at a point in time or over time, depending on the nature of the services.
Product Revenue
For products sold in their discrete form, we either sell our products directly to OEMs, ODMs, contract manufacturers (CMs), or through a network of distributors, who in turn sell to those customers. For sales directly to OEMs, ODMs and CMs, we recognize revenue when the OEM, ODM or CM obtains control of the product, which occurs at a point in time, generally upon shipment to the customer.
We sell a majority of our products to our distributors at a uniform list price. However, distributors may resell our products to end customers at a very broad range of individually negotiated price points. We provide distributors with price concessions subsequent to the delivery of product to them and such amounts are dependent on the end customer and product sales price. We base the price concessions on a variety of factors, including customer, product, quantity, geography and competitive differentiation. Price protection rights grant distributors the right to a credit in the event of declines in the price of our products. Under these circumstances, we remit back to the distributor a portion of their original purchase price after the resale transaction is completed in the form of a credit against the distributors’ outstanding accounts receivable balance. The credits are on a per unit basis and are not given to the distributor until the distributor provides information regarding the sale to their end customer. We estimate these credits and record such estimates in the same period the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and the establishment of an allowance for price concessions for amounts due to distributors. We estimate credits to distributors based on the historical rate of credits provided to distributors relative to sales. Revenue on shipments to distributors is recorded when control of the products has been transferred to the distributor.
We estimate the amount of our product sales that may be returned by our customers and record this estimate as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized. We estimate our product return liability by analyzing our historical returns, current economic trends and changes in customer demand and acceptance of products. We have received insignificant returns to date and believe that returns of our products will continue to be minimal.
At the time of shipment to distributors, we record a trade receivable for the selling price as there is a legally enforceable obligation of the distributor to pay for the product delivered. We establish an allowance for estimated price concessions related to our distributor agreements. We estimate credits to distributors based on the historical rate of credits provided to distributors relative to sales.
License Revenue
For licenses of technology, recognition of revenue is dependent upon whether we have delivered rights to the technology, and whether there are future performance obligations under the contract. In some instances, the license agreements call for future events or activities to occur in order for milestones amounts to become due from the customer. The terms of such agreements include payment to us of one or more of the following: non-refundable upfront fees; and royalties on net sales of licensed products. Historically, these license agreements have not included other future performance obligations once the license has been transferred to the customer.
We recognize revenue from non-refundable upfront payments when the license is transferred to the customer and we have no other performance obligations.
Royalties
We recognize revenue from sales-based royalties from licenses of our technology at the later of when (1) the sale occurs or (2) the performance obligation to which some or all of the sales-based royalty has been allocated is satisfied (in whole or in part). We record an unbilled receivable (within accounts receivable, net) for the portion of sales-based royalties that have been earned, but not invoiced at the end of each reporting period.
Other Revenue
For certain revenue streams, we recognize revenue based on the pattern of transfer of the services. We use the input method of measuring costs incurred to date compared to total estimated costs to be incurred under the contract as this method most faithfully depicts its performance. We record an unbilled receivable (within accounts receivable, net) for the portion of the work that has been completed but not invoiced at the end of each reporting period.
At the inception of each agreement that includes milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price by using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability or achievement of each such milestone and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Inventory
We record inventories at the lower of cost, determined on a first-in, first-out basis or specific identification method, or market. We write down inventory for estimated excess or obsolete inventory equal to the difference between cost and estimated net realizable value. Inventory write downs establish a new cost basis for inventory and charges are not subsequently reversed even if circumstances subsequently indicate that increased carrying amounts are recoverable. In estimating these reserves, our evaluation takes into consideration historical and expected future demand considering current market conditions and trends, the effect new products may have on the sale of existing products, technological obsolescence and other factors. We record inventory write-downs for the valuation of inventory when required based on our analyses and any write-downs result in a new cost basis for the affected item.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (the JOBS Act) and therefore we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various public company reporting requirements, including not being required to have our internal control over financial reporting audited by our independent registered public accounting firm pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, or the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and any golden parachute payments. We may take advantage of these exemptions until we are no longer an emerging growth company. We will cease to be an emerging growth company upon the earliest of: (1) December 31, 2021, (2) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our annual gross revenues are $1.07 billion or more, (3) the date on which we have, during the previous rolling three-year period, issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities, or (4) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in the Exchange Act. Even after we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company, we may still qualify as a “smaller reporting company,” which would allow us to take advantage of certain of the same exemptions from disclosure requirements discussed above.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our financial statements for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one yet, of their potential impact on our financial condition of results of operations.