ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those forward-looking statements below. Factors that could cause or contribute to those differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act. These statements are often identified by the use of words such as “believe,” “may,” “potentially,” “will,” “estimate,” “continue,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “could,” “should,” “would,” “project,” “plan,” “predict,” “expect,” “seek” and similar expressions or variations. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results and the timing of certain events to differ materially from future results expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified herein, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors”, set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Except as required by law, we disclaim any obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements. References to “2020” and “2019” refer to the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019, respectively.
Overview
We are a leading provider of digital marketing solutions for search, social, and eCommerce advertising channels, offered as a unified software-as-a-service, or SaaS, advertising management platform for performance-driven advertisers and agencies. Our platform is an analytics, workflow and optimization solution for marketing professionals, enabling them to effectively manage their digital advertising spend. We market and sell our solutions to advertisers directly and through leading advertising agencies, and our customers collectively manage billions of dollars in advertising spend on our platform globally across a wide range of industries. We believe this makes us one of the largest providers of independent advertising cloud solutions. Our software solution is designed to help our customers:
•
measure the effectiveness of their advertising campaigns through our proprietary reporting and analytics capabilities;
•
manage and execute campaigns through our intuitive user interface and underlying technology that streamlines and automates key functions, such as advertisement creation and bidding, across multiple publishers and channels; and
•
optimize campaigns across multiple publishers and channels based on market and business data to achieve desired revenue outcomes using our predictive bid management technology.
Our current product lineup consists of MarinOne and our two legacy products, Marin Search and Marin Social. We have been migrating customers, and we expect to continue to migrate customers in the first half of 2021, from Marin Search and Marin Social to MarinOne.
•
MarinOne. Our next-generation solution brings search, social and eCommerce advertising into a single-platform that helps advertisers maximize a customer journey that spans Google, Facebook, Twitter and Amazon by combining the power of Marin Search and Marin Social with new channels like LinkedIn, Apple Search Ads and YouTube.
•
Marin Search. Our original solution for large advertisers and agencies, Marin Search is designed to provide search advertisers with the power, scale and flexibility required to manage large-scale advertising campaigns.
•
Marin Social. Helps advertisers manage their Facebook, Instagram and Twitter advertising spend at scale.
Advertisers use our platform to create, target and convert precise audiences based on recent buying signals from users’ search, social and eCommerce interactions. Our platform is integrated with leading publishers such as Amazon, Apple, Baidu, Bing, Facebook, Google, Instagram, Pinterest, Twitter, Verizon Media, Yahoo! Japan and Yandex. Additionally, we have integrations with more than 50 leading web analytics and advertisement-serving solutions and key enterprise applications, enabling our customers to more accurately measure the return on investment of their marketing programs.
Our software platform serves as an integration point for advertising performance, sales and revenue data, allowing advertisers to connect the dots between advertising spend and revenue outcomes. Through an intuitive interface, we enable our customers to simultaneously run large-scale digital advertising campaigns across multiple publishers and channels, making it easy for marketers to create, publish, modify and optimize campaigns.
Our predictive bid management and optimization technology also allows advertisers to forecast outcomes and optimize campaigns across multiple publishers and channels to achieve their business goals. Our optimization technology can help advertisers increase advertisement spend on those campaigns, publishers and channels that are performing well while reducing investment in
those that are not. This category of solutions, which we refer to as cross-channel bid and campaign optimization, helps businesses intelligently and efficiently measure, manage, and optimize their digital advertising spend to achieve desired business results.
In December 2019, the novel coronavirus causing the disease COVID-19 was reported in China and in March 2020 the World Health Organization declared it a pandemic. We believe that the COVID-19 pandemic has had and continues to have an adverse impact on many of our customers and their businesses and their spending on digital advertising and has had an adverse impact on our recent results of operations and is likely to continue to affect our future results of operations. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including containment of COVID-19, the availability, deployment and efficacy of vaccines, impact on our customers and our sales cycles, and impact on our employees, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. At this time, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our financial condition or results of operations is uncertain. Since mid-March 2020, some of our customers have reduced the amount of digital advertising spend that they manage using our product which has had an adverse effect on our results of operations and some of our customers have requested extended payment terms, reduced fees or fee waivers, early contract terminations and other forms of contract relief. Also, since mid-March 2020 most of our employees have not been able to work from our offices and have been working from home, which could cause some disruptions or delays in our business activities, including our product development efforts.
During the third quarter of 2020, the Company commenced the implementation of a restructuring and reduction-in-force plan to reduce the Company’s operating costs and address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which is ultimately expected to result in the reduction of the Company’s global workforce by approximately 60 employees, approximately half of which are located outside of the United States (“2020 Restructuring Plan”). As of December 31, 2020, the majority of the planned workforce reductions were complete with the remainder expected to be completed over the next few quarters.
In November 2019, we divested the assets and liabilities related to our Perfect Audience business, which focused on display retargeting advertisements, to an unrelated third party for net proceeds of $4.3 million. We believe this transaction will allow us to focus on our enterprise brands across search, social and eCommerce advertising. This transaction is described more fully in Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues, Net
We generate revenues principally from subscription contracts under which we provide advertisers with access to our search, social and eCommerce advertising management platform, either directly or through the advertiser’s relationship with an agency with whom we have a contract. Our subscription contracts are generally one year or less in length. Under subscription contracts with most of our direct advertisers and some independent agencies, we generally charge fees based on the amount of advertising spend that these customers manage through our platform or a contractual minimum monthly platform fee, whichever is greater. Certain of these customers are charged only a fixed monthly platform fee. Most of our subscription contracts with our network agency customers do not include a committed minimum monthly platform fee, and we charge fees based upon the amount of advertising spend that these customers manage through our platform. Due to the nature of the platform and the services performed under the subscription agreements, revenues are typically recognized in the amount billable to the advertiser.
Our long-term strategic agreements have historically included multiple-year terms and are invoiced quarterly. Our largest agreement with Google was entered into in December 2018 with an effective date of October 1, 2018 (the “Google Revenue Share Agreement”) and includes both a fixed baseline amount and a variable portion based on a percentage of relevant advertising search spend above the baseline threshold that runs through our technology platform. The Google Revenue Share Agreement has a three-year term; however, until March 2020, when we and Google executed the first amendment to the original agreement (the “First Amendment”), Google could terminate the Google Revenue Share Agreement after two years, with no penalty if we did not meet certain financial metrics. Accordingly, the Company accounted for the Google Revenue Share Agreement as a two-year agreement with one optional renewal year. The revenue impact of the third year is being accounted for prospectively from the date of the First Amendment. Our other long-term strategic agreements are generally variable in nature, based on a percentage of relevant search advertising spend that runs through our technology platform.
The majority of our revenues are derived from advertisers based in the United States. Advertisers from outside of the United States represented 25% of total revenues for both 2020 and 2019. The Google Revenue Share Agreement accounted for approximately 31% of our revenues in 2020 and approximately 25% in 2019.
Refer to Note 3 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our revenue recognition considerations.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues primarily includes personnel costs, consisting of salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation expense for employees associated with our cloud infrastructure and global services for implementation and ongoing customer service. Other costs of revenues include fees paid to contractors who supplement our support and data center personnel, expenses related to third-party data centers, depreciation of data center equipment, amortization of internally developed software, amortization of intangible assets and allocated overhead. Incremental cost of revenues associated with our long-term strategic agreements, including our largest agreement with Google, are generally not significant.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation expense and bonuses, as well as sales commissions and other costs including travel and entertainment, marketing and promotional events, lead generation activities, public relations, marketing activities, professional fees, amortization of intangible assets and allocated overhead. All of these costs are expensed as incurred, except sales commissions and the related payroll taxes, which are capitalized and amortized over the expected period of benefit in accordance with the relevant authoritative accounting guidance (refer to Note 3 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements). Our commission plans provide that commission payments to our sales representatives are paid based on the key components of the applicable customer contract, including the minimum or fixed monthly platform fee during the initial contract term.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our product development and engineering employees and executives, including salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation expense and bonuses. Also included are non-personnel costs such as professional fees payable to third-party development resources, amortization of intangible assets and allocated overhead.
Our research and development efforts are focused on enhancing our software architecture, adding new features and functionality to our platform and improving the efficiency with which we deliver these services to our customers, including the development of MarinOne.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation expense and bonuses for our administrative, legal, human resources, finance and accounting employees and executives. Also included are non-personnel costs, such as audit fees, tax services and legal fees, as well as professional fees, insurance and other corporate expenses, including allocated overhead.
Impairment of Goodwill
In November 2019, we performed an impairment assessment of goodwill utilizing the simplified method which resulted in an impairment of goodwill of $1.9 million at that time, reducing the goodwill balance to zero
Gain on Divestiture
The gain on divestiture related to the divestiture of the assets and liabilities of our Perfect Audience business to unrelated third party SharpSpring, Inc. in November 2019. It represents the difference between net proceeds received and the net liabilities of Perfect Audience that were transferred to SharpSpring, Inc.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, primarily consists of sublease income and foreign currency transaction gains and losses, as well as interest income earned on our cash equivalents offset by the interest expense related to our outstanding note payable and finance lease liabilities.
Benefit from Income Taxes
The benefit from income taxes consists of federal, state and foreign income taxes. Due to recent losses, we maintain a valuation allowance against our U.S. deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, in assessing the extent to which a valuation allowance should be applied against our deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
The following table is a summary of our consolidated statements of operations for the specified periods and results of operations as a percentage of revenues for those periods. The period-to-period comparisons of results are not necessarily indicative of results for future periods. Percentage of revenues figures are rounded and therefore may not subtotal exactly.
A discussion regarding our consolidated statements of operations and results of operations as a percentage of revenue for 2020 compared to 2019 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018 can be found under Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 23, 2020, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
(1)
Stock-based compensation expense included in the consolidated statements of operations data above was as follows:
(2)
Amortization of intangible assets included in the consolidated statements of operations data above was as follows:
(3)
Restructuring-related expenses included in the consolidated statements of operations data above were as follows:
The following table sets forth our consolidated revenues by geographic area, as well as the related percentages of total revenues, for the specified periods.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a financial measure not calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss, adjusted for stock-based compensation expense, depreciation, the amortization of internally developed software, intangible assets, the capitalization of internally developed software, the impairment of goodwill and long-lived assets, interest expense, net, the benefit from or provision for income taxes, other income or expenses, net and the non-recurring costs or gains associated with acquisitions, divestitures and restructurings. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to net loss, operating loss or any other measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. We prepare Adjusted EBITDA to eliminate the impact of items that we do not consider indicative of our core operating performance. Investors are encouraged to evaluate these adjustments and the reasons we consider them appropriate.
We believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors in evaluating our operating performance for the following reasons:
•
Adjusted EBITDA is widely used by investors and securities analysts to measure a company’s operating performance without regard to items such as stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization, capitalized software development costs, interest expense, net, benefit from or provision for income taxes, other income or expenses, net and costs or gains associated with acquisitions, divestitures and restructurings, that can vary substantially from company to company depending upon their financing, capital structures and the method by which assets were acquired;
•
Our management uses Adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with GAAP financial measures for planning purposes, including the preparation of our annual operating budget, as a measure of operating performance and the effectiveness of our business strategies and in communications with our Board of Directors concerning our financial performance; and
•
Adjusted EBITDA provides consistency and comparability with our past financial performance, facilitates period-to-period comparisons of operations and also facilitates comparisons with other peer companies, many of which use similar non-GAAP financial measures to supplement their GAAP results.
We understand that although Adjusted EBITDA is widely used by investors and securities analysts in their evaluations of companies, it has limitations as an analytical tool, and investors should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results of operations as reported under GAAP. These limitations include:
•
Depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, and the assets being depreciated or amortized will often have to be replaced in the future; however, Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for these replacements;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs or contractual commitments;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash requirements for income taxes and the cash impact of other income or expense; and
•
Other companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss, the most comparable GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues, Net
Revenues, net in 2020 decreased by $19.1 million, or 39%, as compared to 2019. During 2020, we experienced ongoing customer turnover that was only partially offset by new customer bookings. Since mid-March 2020, some of our customers have reduced the amount of digital advertising spend that they manage using our product due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, in November 2019, we divested our Perfect Audience business which contributed $2.5 million of revenues, net in 2019. Revenues, net in 2020 and 2019 are inclusive of $9.1 million and $12.2 million, respectively, from the Google Revenue Share Agreement, as described in Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements.
Revenues, net in 2020 and 2019 from our customers located in the United States represented 75% of total revenues in both years. The Google Revenue Share Agreement accounted for 31% and 25% of total revenues, net for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of revenues in 2020 decreased by $4.9 million, or 21%, as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a reduction in the number of global services and cloud infrastructure personnel, which led to a decrease of $1.9 million in compensation and benefits expense, including stock-based compensation expense, as compared to 2019. This reduction in headcount also contributed to a decrease in allocated facilities and information technology costs of $0.5 million in 2020. We experienced a decrease of $0.9 million in hosting costs in 2020 due to a decline in usage of our hosting platform, and a decrease in the amortization of intangible assets of $0.8 million as our remaining intangible assets became fully amortized in the first quarter of 2020. Additionally, amortization of internally developed software costs decreased by $0.9 million in 2020, due primarily to the timing of the capitalization of certain internal projects as compared to 2019. Partially offsetting these decreases was an increase of $0.4 million in restructuring costs in 2020 related to our 2020 Restructuring Plan.
We expect cost of revenues to decrease in the near term in absolute dollars as savings from the 2020 Restructuring Plan are realized and we continue our efforts to realign our cost structure with our revenues.
Our gross margin decreased to 40% during 2020, as compared to 53% during 2019. This was primarily due to our revenues, net, declining at a faster rate than the corresponding decrease in costs, in part due to the timing of revenue recognition from the Google Revenue Share Agreement.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses in 2020 decreased by $8.9 million, or 56%, as compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a reduction in the global sales support and marketing headcount, including reductions that were part of our restructuring activities during 2020, contributing to net decreases of $5.9 million in personnel-related costs, and $1.5 million in allocated facilities and information technology costs as compared to 2019. Additionally, our marketing costs decreased by $1.1 million, as we eliminated or shifted the timing of certain of our marketing activities.
We expect sales and marketing expenses to decrease in the near term in absolute dollars as savings from the 2020 Restructuring Plan are realized and we continue our efforts to realign our cost structure with our revenues.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses in 2020 decreased by $5.0 million, or 28%, as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a reduction in the number of full-time research and development personnel, resulting in a decrease of $3.5 million in compensation expense and $0.6 million in allocated facilities and information technology costs as compared to 2019. Additionally, amortization of intangible assets decreased by $0.8 million as our remaining intangible assets became fully amortized in the first quarter of 2020.
We expect research and development expenses to decrease in the near term in absolute dollars as savings from the 2020 Restructuring Plan are realized and we continue our efforts to realign our cost structure with our revenues.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses in 2020 decreased by $1.9 million, or 18%, as compared to 2019. Compensation and benefits expense decreased by $1.7 million in 2020, primarily due to a reduction in headcount. Also contributing to the decrease were lower professional fees of $0.5 million as we reduced the number of contractors and the scope of our activities with consultants and other advisors.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to decrease in the near term in absolute dollars as savings from the 2020 Restructuring Plan are realized and we continue our efforts to realign our cost structure with our revenues.
Impairment of Goodwill
We recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $1.9 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, reducing the goodwill balance to zero at that time. Refer to Note 2 and Note 6 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information on this goodwill impairment charge.
Gain on Divestiture
In November 2019, we completed the divestiture of the assets and liabilities related to our Perfect Audience business to SharpSpring, Inc. an unrelated third party. As part of this transaction, we received net proceeds of approximately $4.3 million and transferred net liabilities of approximately $0.8 million to the acquirer, resulting in a gain of $5.1 million. Refer to Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information on this gain on divestiture.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, primarily consists of sublease income recorded under agreements for portions of our San Francisco and Portland office spaces, with terms through July 2022 and May 2020, respectively, as well as foreign currency transaction gains and losses and interest income and expense. In 2020, we generated sublease income of $1.7 million, as compared to $2.3 million in 2019. Foreign currency transaction losses and interest expense were each less than $0.1 million in both 2020 and 2019.
(Benefit from) Provision for Income Taxes
The benefit from income taxes in 2020 totaled $0.7 million, as compared to a benefit for income taxes of $0.1 million in 2019. The primary reason for this increase was the current foreign income tax provision which was driven by changes to the reserve for uncertain tax positions.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our unaudited quarterly consolidated statements of operations data for each of the eight quarters in the period ended December 31, 2020. We have prepared the quarterly data on a basis consistent with our audited annual financial statements, including, in the opinion of management, all normal recurring adjustments necessary for the fair statement of the financial information contained in these statements. The historical results are not necessarily indicative of future results and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(1)
Stock-based compensation expense included in the consolidated statements of operations data above was as follows:
(2)
Amortization of intangible assets included in the consolidated statements of operations data above was as follows:
(3)
Restructuring-related expenses included in the consolidated statements of operations data above were as follows:
The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations for the specified periods as a percentage of our revenues for those periods. Percentage of revenue figures are rounded and therefore may not subtotal exactly.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our incorporation in March 2006, we have relied primarily on sales of our capital stock to fund our operating activities. From incorporation until our initial public offering, or the IPO, we raised $105.7 million, net of related issuance costs, in funding through private placements of our preferred stock. In March and April 2013, we raised net proceeds of $109.3 million in our IPO. In 2019 and 2020 we raised total net proceeds of $9.4 million from an at-the-market offering program administered by JMP Securities and in 2020 we received proceeds of $3.3 million from a loan through the Paycheck Protection Program. From time to time, we have also utilized equipment lines and entered into finance lease arrangements to fund capital purchases. As of December 31, 2020, our principal source of liquidity was our unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $14.3 million. Our primary operating cash requirements include the payment of compensation and other employee-related expenses, as well as costs for our facilities and information technology infrastructure.
We maintain a $0.4 million irrevocable letter of credit to secure the non-cancelable lease for our corporate headquarters in San Francisco and a $0.1 million irrevocable letter of credit to secure the non-cancelable lease for our office in Paris. These balances are reflected as restricted cash on the consolidated balance sheets of the accompanying consolidated financial statements. We maintain cash balances in our foreign subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2020, we had $14.3 million of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents in aggregate, of which $1.2 million was held by our foreign subsidiaries. On December 22, 2017, the United States enacted the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, or the TCJA, which instituted fundamental changes to the taxation of multinational corporations. Among these changes is a mandatory one-time transition tax on the deemed repatriation of the accumulated earnings of certain of our foreign subsidiaries, and a tax on earnings of foreign subsidiaries in excess of a specified return on the subsidiaries' tangible assets, known as the Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income, or GILTI. We completed our analysis of the accounting for the transition tax in the fourth quarter of 2018 and there was no tax due as a result of significant accumulated losses in our foreign subsidiaries. We also determined that no GILTI inclusion would be required in 2019 or 2020 as our foreign subsidiaries have accumulated significant losses. If funds held by our foreign subsidiaries were needed for our U.S. operations, we would be required to accrue U.S. tax liabilities associated with the repatriation of these funds. However, given the amount of our net operating loss carryovers in the United States, such repatriation will most likely not result in material U.S. cash tax payments within the next year. Additionally, we do not believe that foreign withholding taxes associated with repatriating these funds would be material.
On March 14, 2019, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC, which was declared effective by the SEC on May 10, 2019, under which we may offer our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, subscription rights and
units having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. As part of the shelf registration statement, we entered into an equity distribution agreement with JMP Securities LLC under which we could offer and sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $13.0 million through an at-the-market offering program administered by JMP Securities. We were not required to sell any of our stock under this program. JMP Securities was entitled to compensation of up to 5.0% of the gross proceeds from sales of our common stock pursuant to the equity distribution agreement. We intend to use the net proceeds from the sale of securities under the equity distribution agreement primarily for working capital and general corporate purposes. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 2.7 million shares of our common stock under the equity distribution agreement, and received proceeds of $7.5 million, net of offering costs of $0.5 million, at a weighted average sales price of $2.92 per share. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we sold 0.7 million shares of our common stock under the equity distribution agreement, and received proceeds of $1.6 million, net of offering costs of $0.2 million, at a weighted average sales price of $2.82 per share. During February 2021 we sold an additional 1.2 million shares of our common stock under the equity distribution agreement and received proceeds of $3.1 million, net of offering costs of $0.1 million, at a weighted average sales price of $2.68 per share. There are currently no additional amounts available to be sold under this equity distribution agreement.
In May 2020, we entered into a loan agreement with a lender for the loan in an aggregate principal amount of $3.3 million (the “Loan”) pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act. We received the Loan proceeds on May 12, 2020. We expect to apply for forgiveness of approximately $2.9 million due under the Loan once the Lender opens the application process, but no assurances can be provided as to the amount or timing of any potential Loan forgiveness. See Note 9 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion of this loan.
We have incurred significant losses in each fiscal year since our incorporation in 2006, and we expect to continue to incur losses and negative cash flows in the future. Based on our current and anticipated level of operations, including our internal forecasts and projections, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. Our ability to achieve our business objectives and to continue to meet our obligations is dependent upon maintaining a certain level of liquidity, which could be impacted by several factors, including the extent of customer acceptance and adoption of our new MarinOne platform and other market conditions and the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted and continues to disrupt economic markets and the full economic impact, duration and spread of COVID-19 is uncertain at this time and difficult to predict considering the rapidly evolving landscape. Since mid-March 2020, some of our customers have reduced the amount of digital advertising spend that they manage using our products, which has had an adverse effect on our results of operations, and some of our customers have requested extended payment terms, reduced fees or fee waivers, early contract terminations and other forms of contract relief. Although we have pursued and expect to continue to pursue additional sources of liquidity, including additional equity and debt financing, there is no assurance that any additional financing will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. During the second half of 2020, we commenced a restructuring plan that included a global reduction-in-force and other cost saving actions to reduce our operating expenses and address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business (the “2020 Restructuring Plan”). The 2020 Restructuring Plan is expected to ultimately result in the reduction of our global workforce by approximately 60 employees, approximately half of which are located outside of the United States. We completed the majority of the workforce reductions during 2020 and recognized $1.2 million in restructuring charges. Our ability to continue as a going concern is substantially dependent upon our ability to improve customer retention rates, increase new bookings, and manage our cash flows. Other factors that may significantly affect our ability to continue as a going concern include one or more of the following; our ability to obtain partial forgiveness of our loan under the Paycheck Protection Program, our ability to renew our revenue sharing agreement with Google on acceptable terms, our ability to raise additional financing, and our ability to further reduce our expenses.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities is primarily influenced by the amount of cash we invest in personnel and infrastructure to support the operation of our business and the fluctuations in the number of advertisers using our platform. Cash used in operating activities has typically been affected by net losses and further increased by changes in our operating assets and liabilities, particularly in the areas of accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and other assets, accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities, adjusted for non-cash expense items such as depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation expense and deferred income tax benefits.
Cash used in operating activities in 2020 of $5.7 million was primarily the result of a net loss of $14.1 million, which was partially offset by non-cash expenses of $6.8 million, primarily consisting of depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation expense, provision for bad debts and net changes in operating leases, and a $1.6 million net change in working capital items. These items consisted most notably of (1) a decrease in accounts receivable of $4.1 million due to the decrease in revenues and the timing of related collections and (2) a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities (both current and non-current) of $2.5 million due to the timing of related disbursements and lower accrued payroll-related costs driven by lower headcount.
Cash used in operating activities in 2019 of $1.2 million was primarily the result of a net loss of $12.4 million, which was not fully offset by non-cash expenses of $7.6 million, primarily consisting of impairment of goodwill, depreciation, amortization, gain on divestiture of Perfect Audience, stock-based compensation expense, provision for bad debts and net changes in operating leases, and a $3.6 million net change in working capital items. These items consisted most notably of (1) a decrease in accounts receivable of $4.2 million due to the decrease in revenues and the timing of related collections; (2) a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets (both current and non-current) of $0.2 million due to the timing of related disbursements; and (3) a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities (both current and non-current) of $0.8 million due to the timing of related disbursements.
Investing Activities
In 2020, investing activities primarily consisted of $1.9 million of capitalized internally developed software costs. In 2019 investing activities primarily consisted of net proceeds from the divestiture of Perfect Audience. Capital expenditures may vary from period-to-period due to the timing of our operational requirements and the development cycles of our internally-developed hosted software platform. We expect to continue to invest in the development of our software platform for the foreseeable future.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $10.2 million. This primarily consisted of $7.7 million of net cash proceeds from the issuance of common shares pursuant to our equity distribution agreement with JMP Securities and $3.3 million net proceeds from our Loan pursuant to the PPP under the CARES Act, partially offset by $0.6 million of net repayments under our right-of-use finance lease liabilities and $0.2 million in employee taxes paid for withheld shares upon the settlement of equity awards.
Cash provided by financing activities in 2019 was $0.3 million. This was primarily due to $1.6 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common shares pursuant to our equity distribution agreement with JMP Securities and $0.1 million of proceeds from net contributions to the 2013 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, or 2013 ESPP, offset by $1.2 million of net repayments under our right-of-use finance lease liabilities and $0.3 million in employee taxes paid for withheld shares upon the settlement of equity awards.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our principal commitments consist of operating leases for office space, net of sublease income. As of December 31, 2020, the future minimum payments under these commitments, were as follows:
The amounts in the table above are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding, which specify significant terms including payment terms, related services and the approximate timing of the transaction. Purchase obligations under contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty are not included in the table.
The note payable relates to our loan pursuant to the PPP under the CARES Act. We expect to apply for forgiveness of approximately $2.9 million due under the loan once the Lender opens the application process, but no assurances can be provided as to the amount or timing of any potential loan forgiveness. See Note 9 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion of this loan.
During the ordinary course of business, we include indemnification provisions within certain of our contracts. Pursuant to these arrangements, we may be obligated to indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified party for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified party, generally parties with which we have commercial relations, in connection with certain intellectual
property infringement claims by any third party with respect to our software. To date, there have not been any costs incurred in connection with such indemnification arrangements and therefore, there is no accrual for such amounts as of December 31, 2020.
In addition to the obligations in the table above, we have approximately $1.4 million of uncertain tax positions that have been recorded as liabilities as of December 31, 2020. It is uncertain as to if or when such amounts may be settled.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented, we did not have, nor do we currently have, any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. We are therefore not exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in those types of relationships.
We have no obligations that meet the definition of an off-balance sheet arrangement as of December 31, 2020, other than operating leases and related subleases, as described in the Notes to the consolidated financial statements, and the irrevocable letter of credit described above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can have a significant impact on the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future.
Since March 2020, we have undertaken measures to protect our employees and customers in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. There can be no assurance that these measures will be effective, however, or that we can adopt them without adversely affecting our business operations. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has created and may continue to create significant uncertainty in global financial markets, which may decrease technology spending, depress demand for our platform and harm our business and results of operations.
Our estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. If actual results or events differ materially from those contemplated by us in making these estimates, our reported financial condition and results of operations for future periods could be materially affected. See “Risk Factors” for certain matters that may affect these estimates or our future financial condition or results of operations. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if the changes in estimate that are reasonably likely to occur could materially impact the financial statements.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and we believe that the accounting policies discussed below involve the greatest degree of complexity and exercise of judgment by our management. The methods, estimates and judgments that we use in applying our accounting policies have a significant impact on our results of operations and, accordingly, we believe the policies described below are the most critical for understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenues principally from subscriptions either directly with advertisers or with advertising agencies to our platform for the management of search, social and eCommerce advertising. Revenue is recognized when control of these advertising management services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•
Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•
Identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•
Determination of the transaction price;
•
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•
Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Our subscription contracts provide advertisers with access to the Company's advertising management platform. Advertisers do not have the right to take possession of the software supporting the services at any time. These contracts are generally one year or less in length. The subscription fee under most contracts consists of the greater of a minimum monthly platform fee or variable consideration based on the volume of advertising spend managed through our platform at the contractual percentage of spend. The variable portion generally includes tiered pricing, whereby the percentage of spend charged decreases as the value of advertising spend increases. The tiered pricing resets monthly and is consistent throughout the contract term. We have concluded that this volume-based pricing approach does not constitute a future material right since the pricing tiers are consistent throughout the contract term and similar pricing is typically offered to similar classes of customers within the same geographical areas and markets. Certain subscription contracts consist of only a flat monthly platform fee. Subscription fees are generally invoiced on a monthly basis in arrears based on the actual amount of advertising spend managed on the platform. In certain limited circumstances we will invoice an advertiser in advance for the contractual minimum monthly platform fee for a defined future period, which is typically three to 12 months.
Our subscription services comprise a single stand-ready performance obligation satisfied over time, as the advertiser simultaneously receives and consumes the benefit from our performance. This performance obligation constitutes a series of services that are substantially the same and provided over time using the same measure of progress. Revenues derived from these arrangements are recognized over time using an output method based upon the passage of time as this provides a faithful depiction of the pattern of transfer of control. Fixed minimum monthly platform fees are recognized ratably over the contract term as the single performance obligation is satisfied. Variable fees are allocated to the distinct month of the series in which they are earned because the terms of the variable payments relate specifically to the outcome from transferring the distinct time increment (month) of service and because such amounts reflect the fees to which we expect to be entitled for providing access to the advertising management platform for that period, consistent with the allocation objective of authoritative revenue recognition guidance.
We have also entered into long-term strategic agreements with certain leading search publishers. Under these strategic agreements, we receive consideration based on a percentage of the search advertising spend that our customers manage on our platform. These strategic agreements are generally billed on a quarterly basis. The majority of the strategic agreement revenue is concentrated to one revenue share agreement, executed with Google in December 2018, but with an effective date of October 1, 2018. Under this agreement, which constitutes a single performance obligation, we receive both fixed and variable revenue share payments based on a percentage of the search advertising spend that is managed through our platform. The agreement requires us to reinvest a specified percentage of these revenue share payments to drive our search technology platform innovation. The performance obligation is satisfied over time ratably over the contractual term of two years, since Google simultaneously receives and consumes the benefit from our performance, using an output method based upon the passage of time. We believe this provides a faithful depiction of the pattern of transfer of control. The agreement carries a three-year term; however, until March 2020, when we and Google executed the first amendment to the agreement, the term was cancellable by Google after two years with no penalty if we did not meet certain financial metrics, and, therefore, we historically evaluated the agreement as a two-year agreement with one optional renewal year. We are accounting for the impact of the third year prospectively as of the date of execution of the first amendment.
We evaluate the total amount of variable revenue share payments expected to be earned from this agreement by using the expected value method, as we believe this method represents the most appropriate estimate for this consideration, based on historical service trends, the individual contract considerations and our best judgment at the time. We include estimates of variable consideration in revenues only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. We expect that in the future, revenues from strategic agreements will continue to grow as a percentage of our total revenues, net.
We capitalize certain contract acquisition and fulfillment costs and amortize those costs based on the expected period of benefit, which we have determined to be 30 months. This period of benefit was determined by taking into consideration the duration of our customer contracts, historical contract renewal rates, the underlying platform technology and other factors.
At the inception of a customer contract, we make an assessment as to that customer's ability to pay for the services provided in order to determine whether collectability is probable and a contract exists for revenue recognition purposes. We assess collectability based on a number of factors, including credit worthiness of the customer along with past transaction history. In addition, we perform periodic evaluations of our customers' financial condition. Certain contracts with advertising agencies contain sequential liability provisions, where the agency does not have an obligation to pay until payment is received from the agency’s customers. In these circumstances, we evaluate the credit worthiness of the agency’s customers, in addition to the agency itself.
Income Taxes
As a result of our current net operating loss position in the United States, income tax expense consists primarily of corporate income taxes resulting from profits generated in foreign jurisdictions by wholly owned subsidiaries, along with state income taxes payable in the United States. As we have incurred operating losses in all periods to date and recorded a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets (except for deferred tax assets associated with certain of our foreign subsidiaries), we have not historically recorded a provision for U.S. federal income taxes. Realization of any of our deferred tax assets depends upon future earnings, the timing and amount of which are uncertain. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, in assessing the extent to which a valuation allowance should be applied against our deferred tax assets.
Utilization of our net operating losses may be subject to substantial annual limitation due to the ownership change limitations provided by the Code and similar state provisions. We last assessed the application of Internal Revenue Code Section 382 during the fourth quarter of 2017, and concluded no limitation applied. We have monitored equity transactions in the periods since the fourth quarter of 2017 and have found no circumstances which would result in a significant change in our stock ownership. In the event we have subsequent changes in ownership or profitability is delayed, net operating losses and research and development credit carryovers could be further limited and may expire unutilized.
Accounts Receivable and Related Reserves
We record accounts receivable at the invoiced amounts, and these receivables do not bear interest. We record reserves as a reduction of our accounts receivable balance for doubtful accounts and revenue credits. Estimates are required to determine both of these reserves.
Our allowance for doubtful accounts reflects our best estimate of probable losses inherent in our receivables portfolio determined on the basis of historical experience, specific allowances for known troubled accounts and other currently available evidence. When collection of an outstanding balance is no longer probable, we will either partially or fully write-off the balance against the allowance for doubtful accounts. The allowance for doubtful accounts charges are included as a component of general and administrative expenses. Our reserve for revenue credits relates to service credits that are expected to be issued to customers during the ordinary course of business. These credits typically relate to customer disputes and billing adjustments and are recorded as reductions to revenues, net. Reserves for revenue credits are accounted for as variable consideration under authoritative revenue recognition guidance and are estimated using the expected value method based on an analysis of credits issued in previous periods. These estimates could change significantly for various reasons, including changes in our customers' financial condition, interruptions to our platform or deterioration in the economy.
Other Long-Lived Assets -- Impairment Assessments
We periodically review the carrying amounts of other long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable. We measure the recoverability of these assets by comparing the carrying amount of such assets (or asset group) to the future undiscounted cash flow we expect the assets (or asset group) to generate. If we consider any of these assets to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized equals the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds its fair value. We make judgments about the recoverability of purchased intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an impairment may exist.
Each period we evaluate the estimated remaining useful lives of other long-lived assets to assess whether a revision to the remaining periods of amortization is required. Assumptions and estimates about remaining useful lives of our intangible and other long-lived assets are subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy. Although we believe the historical assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions and estimates could materially impact our reported financial results. We did not recognize any long-lived asset impairment charges to date.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, regarding the impact of certain recent accounting pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements.