ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Forward Looking Statements
When used in this form 10-K and in future filings by the Company with the Commission, words or phrases such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “would,” “should,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “predict,” “project,” “will” or similar expressions are intended to identify “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on any such forward looking statements, each of which speak only as of the date made. Such statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from historical earnings and those presently anticipated or projected. The Company has no obligation to publicly release the result of any revisions which may be made to any forward-looking statements to reflect anticipated or unanticipated events or circumstances occurring after the date of such statements.
These forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results to be materially different. These factors include, but are not limited to, changes that may occur to general economic and business conditions; changes in current pricing levels that we can charge for our services and products or which we pay to our suppliers and business partners; changes in political, social and economic conditions in the jurisdictions in which we operate; changes to regulations that pertain to our operations; changes in technology that render our technology relatively inferior, obsolete or more expensive compared to others; changes in the business prospects of our business partners and customers; increased competition, including from our business partners; and enforcement of federal cannabis related laws.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes which are included in this report under Item 8.
We do not undertake to update our forward-looking statements or risk factors to reflect future events or circumstances.
(18)
Overview
MariMed Inc. (the “Company”) is a multi-state operator in the United States cannabis industry. The Company develops, operates, manages, and optimizes over 300,000 square feet of state-of-the-art, regulatory-compliant facilities for the cultivation, production and dispensing of medicinal and recreational cannabis. The Company also licenses its proprietary brands of cannabis and hemp-infused products, along with other top brands, in several domestic markets and overseas.
Upon its entry into the cannabis industry in 2014, the Company was an advisory firm that procured state-issued cannabis licenses on behalf of its clients, developed cannabis facilities which it leased to these newly-licensed companies, and provided industry-leading expertise and oversight in all aspects of their cannabis operations. The Company also provided its clients with as ongoing regulatory, accounting, real estate, human resources, and administrative services.
In 2018, the Company made the strategic decision to transition from a consulting business to a direct owner of cannabis licenses and operator of seed-to-sale operations (hereinafter referred to as the “Consolidation Plan”). The Consolidation Plan calls for the acquisition of its cannabis-licensed clients located in Delaware, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, and Nevada. In addition, the Consolidation Plan includes the potential acquisition of a Rhode Island asset. All of these acquisition are subject to state approval, and once consolidated, the entities will operate under the MariMed banner.
To date, acquisitions of the licensed businesses in Massachusetts and Illinois have been completed and establish the Company as a fully integrated seed-to-sale multi-state operator, The acquisitions of the remaining entities located in Maryland, Nevada, and Delaware are at various stages of completion and subject to each state’s laws governing the ownership transfer of cannabis licenses, which in the case of Delaware requires a modification of current cannabis ownership laws to permit for-profit ownership. Meanwhile, the Company continues to expand these businesses and maximize the Company’s revenue from rental income, management fees, and licensing royalties.
A goal in completing this transition from a consulting business to a direct owner of cannabis licenses and operator of seed-to-sale operations is to present a simpler, more transparent financial picture of the full breadth of the Company’s efforts, with a clearer representation of the revenues, earnings, and other financial metrics the Company has generated for its clients. The Company has played a key role in the successes of these entities, from the securing of their cannabis licenses, to the development of facilities that are models of excellence, to providing operational and corporate guidance. Accordingly, the Company believes it is well suited to own these facilities and manage the continuing growth of their operations.
The Company has also created its own brands of cannabis flower, concentrates, and precision-dosed products utilizing proprietary strains and formulations. These products are developed by the Company in cooperation with state-licensed operators who meet the Company’s strict standards, including all natural-not artificial or synthetic-ingredients. The Company licenses its brands and product formulations only to certified manufacturing professionals who follow state cannabis laws and adhere to the Company’s precise scientific formulations and trademarked product recipes.
The Company’s proprietary cannabis genetics produce flowers and concentrates under the brand name Nature’s Heritage™, and cannabis-infused products under the brand names Kalm Fusion®, in the form of chewable tablets and drink powder mixes, and the award-winning1 Betty’s Eddies® brand of all natural fruit chews. Both cannabis-infused brands are top selling products in Maryland and Massachusetts2 and the Company intends to introduce additional products under these brands in 2021. The Company’s brand of hemp-infused cannabidiol (“CBD”) products, Florance™, is distributed in the US and abroad.
The Company also has exclusive sublicensing rights in certain states to distribute the Binske® line of cannabis products crafted from premium artisan ingredients, the Healer™ line of medical full-spectrum cannabis tinctures, and the clinically tested medicinal cannabis strains developed in Israel by global medical cannabis research pioneer Tikun Olam™. The Company intends to continue licensing and distributing its brands as well as other top brands in the Company’s current markets and in additional legal markets worldwide.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a global pandemic. The spread of the virus in the United States and the measures implemented to contain it-including business shutdowns, indoor capacity restrictions, social distancing, and diminished travel-have negatively impacted the economy and have created significant volatility and disruption in financial markets. Consequently, the Company’s implementation of its aforementioned Consolidation Plan has been delayed. Additionally, while the cannabis industry has been deemed an essential business, and is not expected to suffer severe declines in revenue, the Company’s business, operations, financial condition, and liquidity have been impacted, as further discussed in this report.
1 Awards won by the Company’s Betty’s Eddies® brand include LeafLink 2020 Industry Innovator, Explore Maryland Cannabis 2020 Edible of the Year, and LeafLink 2019 Best Selling Medical Product.
2 Source: LeafLink Insights 2020.
(19)
Revenues
The Company’s revenues are primarily comprised of the following categories:
● Product Sales - direct sales of cannabis and cannabis-infused products by the Company’s dispensary and wholesale operations in Massachusetts and Illinois, and sales of hemp and hemp-infused products. Future product sales are expected to include the Company’s planned cannabis-licensee acquisitions in Maryland, Nevada, and Delaware (upon this state’s amendment to permit for-profit ownership of cannabis entities).
● Real Estate - rental income and additional rental fees generated from leasing of the Company’s state-of-the-art, regulatory-compliant cannabis facilities to its cannabis-licensed clients.
● Management - fees for providing the Company’s cannabis clients with comprehensive oversight of their cannabis cultivation, production, and dispensary operations. Along with this oversight, the Company provides human resources, regulatory, marketing, and other corporate services.
● Supply Procurement - the Company maintains volume discounts with top national vendors of cultivation and production resources, supplies, and equipment, which the Company acquires and resells to its clients or third parties within the cannabis industry.
● Licensing - revenue from the sale of precision-dosed, cannabis-infused products-such as Kalm Fusion®, Nature’s Heritage™, and Betty’s Eddies®-to regulated dispensaries throughout the United States and Puerto Rico.
Expenses
The Company classifies its expenses into three general categories:
● Cost of Revenues - the direct costs associated with the generation of the Company’s revenues.
● Operating Expenses - comprised of the sub-categories of personnel, marketing and promotion, general and administrative, bad debts, and goodwill write-downs.
● Non-operating Income and Expenses - comprised of the sub-categories of interest expense, interest income, losses on debt settlements, earnings and losses on equity investments, changes in the fair value of non-consolidated investments, and other non-recurring gains or losses.
(20)
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company produced significant improvements to its liquidity in the reported periods:
● Cash and cash equivalents increased four-fold to approximately $3.0 million at December 31, 2020, from approximately $739,000 at December 31, 2019.
● In 2020, the Company’s operating activities provided positive cash flow of approximately $3.4 million, compared to approximately $24.1 million of negative cash flow used by such activities in 2019, a positive swing of approximately $27.5 million.
● The Company successfully restructured the terms of its short term promissory notes payable in 2020, whereby approximately $10.7 million of payments were deferred to 2021 and beyond. These amounts were repaid in full in March 2021 using a portion of the proceeds from the Hadron financing transaction referred to below.
● The Company refinanced a mortgage agreement and entered into a new mortgage agreement which generated approximately $13.9 million of proceeds which were used to pay down outstanding short-term debt.
The aforementioned improvements to cash and cash equivalents and operating cash flow, as well as a year-over-year improvement of working capital of approximately $27.2 million, were primarily the result of increases in revenues and profitability generated by the Company’s cannabis operations in the states of Illinois and Massachusetts. These operations were acquired as part of the Company’s aforementioned Consolidation Plan to transition from a consulting business to a direct owner of cannabis licenses and operator of seed-to-sale operations. In addition, the section below entitled Non-GAAP Measurements discusses two additional financial measurements that are not defined by GAAP which the Company’s management uses to evaluate liquidity.
To further improve the Company’s liquidity, in March 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with Hadron Healthcare Master Fund (“Hadron”) whereby Hadron will provide funding of up to $46.0 million to repay existing non-mortgage debt, to fund expansion plans of existing operations, and to finance planned acquisitions. In March 2021, Hadron funded $23.0 million under the facility. This transaction is further discussed in below under the section entitled Financing Transaction.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 approximated $3.4 million, compared to net cash used in operating activities of approximately $24.1 million in 2019. The year-over-year improvement was primarily attributable to the increase in cannabis-derived profits in 2020 generated by the acquisition of the KPGs in Illinois and ARL in Massachusetts, coupled with improved collections on trade accounts receivable, and offset primarily by the increase cannabis inventory due to expanded cannabis operations.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 approximated $4.5 million, compared to approximately $12.5 million in 2019. The year-over-year decrease in the use of cash was due to the investments in Healer, MHWC, MediTaurus and another cannabis entity in 2019. No similar investments were made in 2020. The year-over-year decrease is also due to reduced property and equipment purchases in 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 approximated $3.3 million, compared to approximately $33.3 million in 2019. The Company raised approximately $21.4 million from debt financings in 2020, offset by approximately $17.4 million of promissory note and mortgage repayments during the year. In 2019, the Company raise approximately $32.1 million in the aggregate with no repayments of debt.
The proceeds from the aforementioned financings were used to execute on the Company’s strategy to become a fully integrated multistate operator of seed-to-sale cannabis operations, to continue the development of its regulated facilities, to pay down its debt, to expand its branded licensing business, and for working capital purposes.
(21)
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Total revenues in 2020 approximated $50.9 million compared to approximately $45.6 million in 2019, an increase of approximately $5.3 million or 11.6%. As discussed in Note 20 - Related Party Transactions within the audited financial statements at December 31, 2020, the Company generated approximately $29.0 million of revenues in 2019 from the sale of large quantities of hemp seed inventory to GenCanna, a related party (the “Seed Transactions”). Such revenues were fully reserved at December 31, 2019, as a result of GenCanna’s filing under Chapter 11 as discussed in Note 21 - Commitments and Contingencies within the audited financial statements.
Excluding the Seed Transactions, core revenues in 2020 grew to approximately $50.9 million from approximately $16.6 million in 2019, an increase of approximately $34.3 million or 207.1%. The year-over-year increase was due to aggregate cannabis sales in 2020 of approximately $39.4 million generated by the Company’s cannabis-licensee acquisitions of the KPGs in Illinois and ARL in Massachusetts. The cannabis sales were offset by decreases in procurement revenue and management fees charged to Kind, the Company’s cannabis-licensed client in Maryland, and with whom the Company is currently engaged in litigation.
Cost of revenues in 2020 approximated $19.6 million compared to approximately $26.9 million in 2019, a decrease of approximately $7.3 million or 27.3%. The year-over-year variance was primarily attributable to the cost of seeds incurred by the Company in 2019 of approximately $20.8 million as part of the Seed Transactions. Excluding the Seed Transactions, cost of revenues in 2020 increased to approximately $19.6 million from approximately $6.2 million in 2019. As a percentage of revenue, these costs increased slightly to 38.5% in 2020 from 37.1% in 2019, primarily due a non-recurring cost increase of approximately $1.8 million due to the expansion of the Company’s cultivation capacity in Massachusetts.
As a result of the foregoing, gross profit approximated $31.3 million, or 61.5% of total revenues in 2020, from approximately $18.7 million, or 41.0% of total revenues in 2019. Excluding the Seed Transactions, gross profit increased to approximately $31.3 million in 2020 from approximately $10.4 million for the same period a year ago, an increase of approximately $20.9 million or 200.6%.
Personnel expenses increased to approximately $5.5 million in 2020 from approximately $3.8 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to the hiring of additional staff to support (i) higher levels of revenue, and (ii) the Company’s expansion into a direct owner and operator of seed-to-sale cannabis businesses. As a percentage of revenues excluding the Seed Transactions, personnel expenses dropped significantly to 10.8% in 2020 from to 23.2% in 2019.
Marketing and promotion costs increased slightly to approximately $411,000 in 2020 from approximately $370,000 in 2019. As a percentage of revenues excluding the Seed Transactions, these costs fell to 0.8% in 2020 from 2.2% in 2019.
General and administrative costs increased to approximately $9.9 million in 2020 from approximately $8.8 million in 2019. This increase is primarily due to taxes paid on the Company’s cannabis operations, and higher depreciation expenses and facility costs on additional properties owned and in service in 2020. As a percentage of revenues excluding the Seed Transactions, these costs fell significantly to 19.5% in 2020 from 53.2% in 2019.
Bad debt expense decreased to approximately $982,000 in 2020 from approximately $44.5 million in 2019. As discussed in Note 18 - Bad Debts within the audited financial statements, in 2019, the Company reserved receivables of approximately $29.0 associated with the Seed Transactions, and aggregate amounts due from (i) Kind of approximately $11.2 million, in light of the current litigation between the Company and Kind, and Harvest of approximately $2.1 million, based on the expected impact of the pandemic. In 2020, the Company increased the reserve against amounts owed from Kind and Harvest.
In 2019, the Company wrote off approximately $2.7 million of goodwill associated with its acquisitions of MediTaurus as discussed in Note 3 - Acquisitions within the audited financial statements. No goodwill was written off in 2020.
As a result of the foregoing, the Company generated operating income of approximately $14.5 million in 2020 compared to an operating loss of approximately $41.5 million in 2019. Excluding the Seed Transactions, the Company generated operating income of approximately $14.5 million in 2020 compared to an operating loss of approximately $20.8 million in 2019, a positive swing of approximately $35.3 million.
Net non-operating expenses decreased to approximately $10.0 million in 2020 from approximately $40.3 million in 2019. The decrease is primarily due to the approximate $30.2 million write-down in 2019 of the Company’s investment in GenCanna.
As a result of the foregoing, the Company generated income before income taxes of approximately $4.5 million in 2020, compared to a loss before income taxes of approximately $81.8 million in 2019. After a tax provision of approximately $2.1 million in 2020 and approximately $67,000 in 2019, net income was approximately $2.4 million in 2020, compared to a net loss of approximately $81.9 million in 2019, a positive swing of approximately $84.3 million.
(22)
Non-GAAP Measurements
In addition to the financial information reflected this report, which is prepared in accordance with GAAP, the Company is providing two additional financial measurements that are not defined by GAAP - EBITDA and EBITDA Excluding GenCanna (defined below). The Company is providing these non-GAAP financial measurements as a supplement to the preceding discussion of the Company’s financial results,
The Company’s management uses these non-GAAP measurements to understand and compare operating results across accounting periods, for financial and operational decision making, for planning and forecasting purposes, and to evaluate its financial performance and liquidity. The presentation of these non-GAAP measurements is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Management believes that investors and analysts benefit from considering these non-GAAP measurements in assessing the Company’s financial results and its ongoing business as it allows for meaningful comparisons and analysis of trends in the business. These non-GAAP measurements are used by many investors and analysts themselves, along with other metrics, to compare financial results across accounting periods and to those of peer companies.
Management believes EBITDA is a useful measure to assess the performance and liquidity of the Company as it provides meaningful operating results by excluding the effects of expenses that are not reflective of its operating business performance. Management defines EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest, income taxes, depreciation, and amortization.
Management believes EBITDA Excluding GenCanna is another useful measure to assess the performance of the Company as it provides more meaningful operating results by excluding the effects of the Company’s investment in GenCanna, the Seed Transactions, and GenCanna’s Chapter 11 filing. Management believes that it is appropriate to exclude these items as they are not indicative of the Company’s ongoing operating business performance.
As there are no standardized methods of calculating these non-GAAP measurements, the Company’s calculations may differ from those used by others, and accordingly, the use of these measurements may not be directly comparable to similarly titled measures used by others. Accordingly, these non-GAAP measurements are intended to provide additional information and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for measures of performance prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Reconciliation of EBITDA and EBITDA Excluding GenCanna (Non- GAAP Measurements) To Net Income (Loss)
The table below reconciles Net Income (Loss) to EBITDA and EBITDA Excluding GenCanna for year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The EBITDA Excluding GenCanna for the year ended December 31, 2020 approximated $16.3 million compared with an EBITDA Excluding GenCanna Loss of approximately $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an improvement of approximately $33.6 million. The primary contributors to this improvement were the completion of the consolidations of Illinois and Massachusetts core cannabis operations in 2020 as part of the Company’s Consolidation Plan. The Illinois acquisition was completed in the fall of 2019 and the Massachusetts operations opened in late 2019 and reached full production capacity in mid-2020. Other factors contributing to the improvement in performance include (i) the opening of a third cannabis dispensary in Illinois in September 2020, (ii) introduction of recreational cannabis sales in Massachusetts in January 2020, and (iii) opening of the Middleborough dispensary in Massachusetts in March 2020, and (iv) growth in the Company’s managed operations.
(23)
Plans
For 2021, the Company’s focus will to be on the following key areas:
1) Subject to the applicable state approvals, continue the execution of its Consolidation Plan.
2) Identify and open two new dispensary locations in Massachusetts that can service both the medical and adult-use marketplaces.
3) Open a fourth dispensary location in Illinois, to be located in the city of Metropolis.
4) Increase sales and profits in Delaware by expanding cultivation and processing facilities.
5) Complete the acquisition of Maryland and proceed with a plan to expand the cultivation and processing facilities as well as adding a dispensary location.
6) Drive licensing fees through the expansion of the Company’s Nature’s Heritage™ branded flower and popular infused-product brands Betty’s Eddies® and Kalm Fusion® into the Company’s owned and managed facilities, and with strategic partners into additional markets. Expand the exclusively licensed Tropizen® and Binske® brands.
7) Identify acquisition opportunities in other states.
No assurances can be given that any of these plans will come to fruition or that if implemented will necessarily yield positive results.
The following transactions occurred in early 2021:
Financing Transaction
In March 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with Hadron Healthcare Master Fund (“Hadron”) with respect to a financing facility of up to $46.0 million in exchange for newly-designated Series C convertible preferred stock of the Company and warrants to purchase the Company’s common stock.
At the closing of the transaction in March 2021, Hadron purchased $23.0 million of Units at a price of $3.70 per Unit. Each Unit is comprised of one share of Series C preferred stock and a four-year warrant to purchase two and one-half shares of common stock. Accordingly, the Company issued to Hadron 6,216,216 shares of Series C preferred stock and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 15,540,540 shares of common stock. Each share of Series C preferred stock is convertible, at Hadron’s option, into five shares of common stock, and each warrant is exercisable at an exercise price of $1.087 per share. The warrants shall be subject to early termination if certain milestones are attained and the market value of the Company’s common stock reaches certain predetermined levels.
In connection with the closing of the transaction, the Company filed a certificate of designation with respect to the rights and preferences of the Series C convertible preferred stock. Such stock is zero coupon, non-voting. and has a liquidation preference equal to its investment amount plus declared but unpaid dividends. Holders of Series C convertible preferred stock are entitled to receive dividends on an as-converted basis.
Of the $23.0 million of proceeds received by the Company in March 2021, approximately (i) $7.8 will fund construction and upgrades of certain of the Company’s owned and managed facilities, and (ii) $15.2 million was used to pay down debt and obligations, comprised of the $4.4M Notes, the $1M Note, the New $3M Note, the $5.8M Note, the Existing Notes, a portion of the Third Party Notes (all referred to in Note 11 - Debt), and a portion of the Due To Related Parties balance discussed in Note 20 - Related Party Transactions.
The balance of the committed facility of up to an additional $23.0 million is intended to fund the Company’s specific targeted acquisitions provided such acquisitions are contracted in 2021 and consummated, including obtaining the necessary regulatory approvals, no later than the end of 2022. Such funds shall be provided by Hadron on the same aforementioned terms as the initial proceeds.
Provided that as at least 50% of the shares of Series C convertible preferred stock remain outstanding, the holders shall have the right to appoint one observer to the Company’s board and to each of its board committees, and appoint a member to the Company’s board if and when a seat becomes available, at which time the observer roles shall terminate.
The transaction imposes certain covenants on the Company with respect to the incurrence of new indebtedness, the issuance of additional shares of any designation of preferred stock, and the payment of distributions.
Lease Agreement
In February 2021, the Company entered into a five-year lease agreement for a 12,000 square foot premises located in Wilmington, DE which the Company intends to develop into a cannabis production facility with offices, and sublease to its cannabis-licensed client in this state. The lease contains an option to negotiate an extension at the end of the lease term.
(24)
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues, or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Inflation
In the opinion of management, inflation has not had a material effect on the Company’s financial condition or results of its operations.
Seasonality
In the opinion of management, the Company’s financial condition and results of its operations are not materially impacted by seasonal sales.
(25)
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company has reviewed all other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, and does not believe the future adoption of any such pronouncements will have a material impact on its financial condition or the results of its operations.