Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical stage pharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing innovative therapeutics to treat patients suffering from rare seizure disorders. Our clinical stage product candidate, ganaxolone, is a positive allosteric modulator of GABAA that is being developed in formulations for two different routes of administration: intravenous (IV) and oral. Ganaxolone is a synthetic analog of allopregnanolone, an endogenous neurosteroid. The different formulations are intended to maximize potential therapeutic applications of ganaxolone for adult and pediatric patient populations, in both acute and chronic care, and for both in-patient and self-administered settings. Ganaxolone acts at both synaptic and extrasynaptic GABAA receptors, a target known for its anti-seizure, antidepressant and anxiolytic potential.
Our operations to date have consisted primarily of organizing and staffing our company, developing ganaxolone, including conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, and raising capital. We have funded our operations primarily through sales of equity and debt securities. At December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investment balances of $140.0 million. We have no products currently available for sale, have incurred operating losses since inception, have not generated any product sales revenue and have not achieved profitable operations. We incurred a net loss of $67.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2020 was $311.9 million, and we expect to continue to incur substantial losses in future periods. We anticipate that our operating expenses will increase substantially as we continue to advance our clinical-stage product candidate, ganaxolone.
We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we:
·
conduct later stage clinical trials in targeted indications, which could include SE, CDD, TSC, PCDH19-RE and possibly other indications;
● continue the research, development and scale-up manufacturing capabilities to optimize ganaxolone and dose forms for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
● conduct other preclinical studies and clinical trials to support the filing of NDAs with the FDA, MAAs with the EMA and other marketing authorization filings with regulatory agencies in other countries;
● acquire the rights to other product candidates and fund their development;
● maintain, expand and protect our global intellectual property portfolio;
● hire additional clinical, manufacturing and scientific personnel; and
● add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our drug development efforts.
We believe that our cash, cash equivalents and investment balances as of December 31, 2020 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second quarter of 2022. However, we will need to secure additional funding in the future, from one or more equity or debt financings, government funding, collaborations, licensing transactions, other commercial transactions or other sources, in order to carry out all of our planned research and development activities with respect to ganaxolone.
COVID-19
In December 2019, an outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) was identified in Wuhan, China. This virus was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020 and has spread to nearly every country in the world, including the U.S. Efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19 have intensified and many countries, including the U.S., have implemented severe travel restrictions, business shutdowns and social distancing measures that have impacted clinical development through supply chain shortages and clinical trial enrollment difficulties as hospitals reduce and redeploy staff, divert resources to patients suffering COVID-19 and limit hospital access for non-patients. The pandemic poses the risk that we, our contractors, suppliers, or other partners may be prevented from conducting normal business activities for an indefinite period of time, including those due to shutdowns that may be requested or mandated by governmental authorities.
The continued global spread of COVID-19 has affected our operations but did not had a material impact on our business, operating results, financial condition or cash flows as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020. For example, several of our Phase 1 trials of oral ganaxolone to support the CDD indication have continued enrollment and are expected to be completed by the end of the second quarter of 2021, despite experiencing delays in enrollment due to COVID-19. Further, in response to COVID-19, for our ongoing clinical trials, we have implemented multiple measures consistent with guidance of the FDA on the conduct of clinical trials of medical products during the COVID-19 pandemic, including implementing remote site monitoring and remote visits using telemedicine where needed. However, COVID-19 may still adversely impact our clinical trials. For example, our RAISE Trial in RSE is being conducted in hospitals, and resources related to the COVID-19 pandemic may divert staffing in hospitals, taking resources away from our clinical trial. Our ganaxolone clinical trials in the outpatient setting may be negatively impacted if patients and their caregivers do not want to participate in a clinical trial while the COVID-19 pandemic continues to severely affect the world. Although operations were not materially affected by the COVID-19 pandemic as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020, we are unable to predict the impact that COVID-19 will have in the future on our business, financial position, operating results and cash flows due to numerous uncertainties. The duration and severity of the pandemic and its long-term impact on our business are uncertain at this time, and our ability to raise sufficient additional financing depends on many factors beyond our control, including the current volatility in the capital markets as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Reverse stock split
On September 23, 2020, we effected a 1-for-4 reverse split of shares of our common stock (Reverse Split), as approved by our board of directors and stockholders. The par value per share of our common stock was not adjusted as a result of the Reverse Split, and our authorized shares of common stock was reduced to 150,000,000. All of the share and per share amounts included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been adjusted to reflect the Reverse Split.
Financial Overview
Federal Contract Revenue
In September 2020, we entered into a contract (the BARDA Contract) with the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA), a division of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response. Under the BARDA Contract, we received an award of up to an estimated $51 million for development of RSE. The BARDA Contract provides for funding to include support, on a cost-sharing basis, for completion of a Phase 3 clinical trial of IV-administered ganaxolone in patients with RSE (our Phase 3 clinical trial of IV-administered ganaxolone for the treatment of RSE (RAISE Trial)), funding of pre-clinical
studies to provide support that IV-administered ganaxolone could be an effective treatment for RSE due to chemical nerve gas agent exposure, and funding of certain manufacturing scale-up and regulatory activities.
The BARDA Contract consists of an approximately two-year base period-during which BARDA will provide approximately $21 million of funding for the RAISE Trial on a cost share basis and funding of additional preclinical studies of ganaxolone in nerve agent exposure models. Following successful completion of the RSE Trial and preclinical studies in the base period, the BARDA Contract provides for approximately $30 million of additional BARDA funding for three options in support of manufacturing, supply chain, clinical, regulatory and toxicology activities. Under the BARDA Contract, we will be responsible for cost sharing in the amount of approximately $33 million and BARDA will be responsible for approximately $51 million, if all development options are completed. The contract period-of-performance (base period plus option exercises) is up to approximately five years.
We recognize federal contract revenue from the BARDA Contract in the period in which the allowable research and development expenses are incurred. We expect federal contract revenue to increase as the costs associated with our RAISE Trial increase.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of ganaxolone, which include:
·
employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense;
·
expenses incurred under agreements with clinical research organizations (CROs) and investigative sites that conduct our clinical trials and preclinical studies;
·
the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical trial materials;
·
facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies; and
·
costs associated with preclinical activities and regulatory operations.
We expense research and development costs when we incur them. We record costs for some development activities, such as clinical trials, based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations and information our vendors provide to us.
We will incur substantial costs beyond our present and planned clinical trials in order to file an NDA and Supplemental New Drug Applications (sNDAs), or an MAA outside the US, for ganaxolone for various clinical indications, and in each case, the nature, design, size and cost of further clinical trials and other studies will depend in large part on the outcome of preceding studies and trials and discussions with regulators. It is difficult to determine with certainty the costs and duration of our current or future clinical trials and preclinical studies, or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of ganaxolone if we obtain regulatory approval. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for ganaxolone. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of ganaxolone will depend on a variety of factors, including the uncertainties of future clinical trials and preclinical studies, uncertainties in clinical trial enrollment rate and significant and changing government regulation.
In addition, the probability of success for our clinical programs will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. See “Risk Factors.” Our commercial success depends upon attaining significant market acceptance, if approved, among physicians, patients, healthcare payers and the medical community. We will determine which programs to pursue and how much to fund each program in response to the scientific and clinical success, as well as an assessment of commercial potential.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for executive and other administrative personnel and consultants, including stock-based compensation and travel expenses. Other general and administrative expenses include professional fees for legal, patent review, consulting and accounting services. General and administrative expenses are expensed when incurred. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as a result of employee hiring and our scaling-up of operations commensurate with supporting more advanced clinical trials and in preparation for commercial infrastructure. These increases will likely include increased costs for insurance, hiring of additional personnel, outside consultants, and legal counsel and accountants, among other expenses.
Interest Income
Interest income consists principally of interest income earned on cash and cash equivalent and investment balances.
Results of Operations
Federal contract revenue
We recognized $1.7 million in federal contract revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the BARDA contract we entered into in September 2020. No federal contract revenue was recognized in the year ending December 31, 2019.
Research and Development Expenses
We allocate direct research and development expenses, consisting principally of external costs, such as fees paid to investigators, consultants, central laboratories and CROs in connection with our clinical trials, and costs related to manufacturing or purchasing clinical trial materials, to specific product development programs. We do not allocate employee and contractor-related costs, costs associated with our facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product programs under research and development and, as such, are separately classified. The table below shows our research and development expenses incurred with respect to each active program, in thousands. The primary drivers of our research and development expenditures are currently in our product development programs in RSE, CDD, TSC and PCDH19-RE. We expect our research and development expenses for ganaxolone will continue to increase during subsequent periods. We did not allocate research and development expenses to any other specific product development programs during the periods presented (in thousands):
Note: Certain prior year expenses have been reclassified to conform to current year presentation.
(1) The increase in the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to continued enrollment in the Marigold Study in the first half of 2020 and analysis of data results after completion of the clinical trial.
(2) The increase was due primarily to enhanced drug development activity, including preclinical studies and manufacturing activities in preparation for a Phase 3 clinical trial in RSE, for which enrollment commenced in January 2021.
(3) The decrease was due to reducing the scope of the clinical trial in 2020 from a Phase 3 trial to a Phase 2 proof-of-concept trial.
(4) We began making preparations for a Phase 2 clinical trial in TSC during the first quarter of 2020.
(5) We completed our clinical trials in postpartum depression in 2019, and have placed further development on hold.
(6) Indirect research and development expenses in support of all our programs have increased due to the overall increase in preclinical, clinical, and manufacturing activities.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased to $18.6 million compared to $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The primary drivers of the increase were increased legal and consulting fees of $2.7 million and increased headcount costs of $1.5 million as we scale up our operations and prepare for potential commercialization, and noncash stock-based compensation of $1.6 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since inception, we have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from our operations. We incurred a net loss of $67.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our cash used in operating activities was $60.9 million for year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $48.6 million for the same period a year ago. Historically, we have financed our operations principally through the sale of common stock, notes payable, preferred stock and convertible debt. At December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investment balances of $140.0 million.
In September 2020, we entered into the BARDA Contract. Under the BARDA Contract, we received an award of up to an estimated $51 million for development of IV-administered ganaxolone for the treatment of RSE. The BARDA Contract provides for funding to support, on a cost-sharing basis, the completion of the RAISE Trial, funding of pre-clinical studies to provide support that IV-administered ganaxolone could be an effective treatment for RSE due to chemical nerve gas agent exposure, and funding of certain manufacturing scale-up and regulatory activities.
The BARDA Contract consists of an approximately two-year base period-during which BARDA will provide approximately $21 million of funding for the RAISE Trial on a cost share basis and funding of additional preclinical studies of ganaxolone in nerve agent exposure models. Following successful completion of the RAISE Trial and preclinical studies in the base period, the BARDA Contract provides for approximately $30 million of additional BARDA funding for three options in support of manufacturing, supply chain, clinical, regulatory and toxicology activities. Under the BARDA Contract, we will be responsible for cost sharing in the amount of approximately $33 million and BARDA will be responsible for approximately $51 million, if all development options are completed. The contract period-of-performance (base period plus option exercises) is up to approximately five years.
In connection with the closing of an equity financing in December 2020, we issued a total of 5,000,000 shares of common stock in an underwritten public offering resulting in aggregate net proceeds, after underwriting discounts and commissions in the public offering and other estimated offering expenses, of $64.9 million.
In connection with the closing of an equity financing in June 2020, we issued a total of 4,600,000 shares of common stock in an underwritten public offering resulting in aggregate net proceeds, after underwriting discounts and commissions in the public offering and other estimated offering expenses, of $42.9 million.
In connection with the closing of concurrent equity financings during the fourth quarter of 2019, we issued a total of 8,050,000 shares of common stock in an underwritten public offering and 30,000 shares of Series A convertible preferred stock in a private placement resulting in aggregate net proceeds, after underwriting discounts and commissions in the public offering and other estimated offering expenses, of $65.7 million.
In October 2017, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (Prior EDA) with JMP Securities LLC (JMP), under which JMP, as our exclusive agent, at our discretion and at such times that we may determine from time to time, may sell over a three-year period from the execution of the agreement up to a maximum of $50 million of shares of our common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued 78,807 shares of our common stock pursuant to the Prior EDA for aggregate net proceeds of $0.6 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we issued 423,072 shares of our common stock pursuant to the Prior EDA for aggregate net proceeds to us of $2.2 million. On July 9, 2020, we entered into a new Equity Distribution Agreement (New EDA) with JMP to create an at-the-market equity program under which we from time to time may offer and sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $60.0 million through or to JMP. Subject to the terms and conditions of the New EDA, JMP will use its commercially reasonable efforts to sell shares of our common stock from time to time, based upon our instructions. JMP will be entitled to a commission of up to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from each sale of shares of our common stock. The New EDA superseded and terminated the Prior EDA effective immediately upon effectiveness of our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-239780) filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on July 9, 2020 and declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission on July 27, 2020.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities. Cash used in operating activities increased to $60.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $48.6 million for the same period in 2019. The increase was driven primarily by a $13.4 million increase in net loss due to increased research and development activities as described above.
Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 represents the maturities of $8.2 million of short-term investments, offset by $8.9 million in in purchases of short-term investments. Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 represents $7.0 million in maturities of investments, offset by $2.7 million in short-term investment purchases and $0.4 million in capital expenditures.
Financing Activities. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 includes $108.4 million in net proceeds from follow-on public offerings, the sale of common stock in connection with an equity distribution agreement and $1.0 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 includes $67.9 million in net proceeds from a follow-on public offering and concurrent private placement, the sale of common stock in connection with an equity distribution agreement, and $0.1 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Funding Requirements
We have not achieved profitability since our inception, and we expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our cash expenditures to increase in the near term as we fund our continuing and planned clinical trials for ganaxolone, as well as scale up our operations and prepare for the potential commercialization of ganaxolone.
We believe that our cash, cash equivalents and investments as of December 31, 2020 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second quarter of 2022. However, we will need to raise substantial additional financing in the future to fund our operations. In order to meet these additional cash requirements, we may seek to sell additional equity or convertible debt securities that may result in dilution to our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of convertible debt securities, these securities could have rights senior to
those of our common stock and could contain covenants that restrict our operations. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional equity or debt financing on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Further, the continued spread of COVID-19 has also led to severe disruption and volatility in the global capital markets, which could increase our cost of capital and adversely affect our ability to access the capital markets in the future. Our failure to obtain sufficient funds on acceptable terms when needed could have a negative impact on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, the medical community and the global economy;
● the results of our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
● the development, formulation and commercialization activities related to ganaxolone;
● the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing ganaxolone or any other future product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials;
● the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for ganaxolone or any other future product candidates;
● the cost of commercialization activities if ganaxolone or any other future product candidates are approved for sale, including marketing, sales and distribution costs;
● the cost of manufacturing and formulating ganaxolone, or any other future product candidates, to internal and regulatory standards for use in preclinical studies, clinical trials and, if approved, commercial sale;
● our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
● our ability to receive funding under the BARDA Contract;
● any product liability, infringement or other lawsuits related to our product candidates and, if approved, products;
● capital needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
● the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation; and
● the timing, receipt and amount of sales of, or royalties on, future approved products, if any.
Please see “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Discussion of Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
We base this management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued clinical trial expenses on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. You should consider your evaluation of our financial condition and results of operations with these policies, judgments and estimates in mind.
While we describe our significant accounting policies in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies are the most critical to the judgments and estimates we use in the preparation of our financial statements.
Clinical Trial Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our clinical trial expenses. Our clinical trial accrual process seeks to account for expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors, consultants and CROs and clinical site agreements in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations, which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided to us under such contracts. Our objective is to reflect the appropriate clinical trial expenses in our financial statements by matching the appropriate expenses with the period in which services and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the trial as measured by subject progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial.
We determine accrual estimates based on estimates of the services received and efforts expended that take into account discussion with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of completion of trials. During the course of a clinical trial, we adjust our clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates. We make estimates of our accrued expenses and prepaid assets as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on the facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Our clinical trial accrual and prepaid assets are dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from CROs and other third-party vendors. Although we do not expect our estimates to differ materially from amounts we actually incur, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any particular period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. The ASU replaces the incurred loss impairment methodology in current GAAP with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. We adopted the ASU effective as of January 1, 2020.
Our cash equivalents and short-term investments are accounted for as available-for-sale debt instruments and certificates of deposit, recorded at fair value. Interest income on these instruments is recorded as “Interest income” on the statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We have never experienced a credit loss on the principal or interest receivable of our cash equivalents or short-term investments. Our available-for-sale debt securities represent (U.S.) treasury securities, and our certificates of deposit are each individually and fully insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Accordingly, we did not measure an allowance for credit losses on these securities and we did not record a cumulative-effect adjustment to accumulated deficit during the year ended December 31, 2020 upon adoption of ASU No. 2016-13.