Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the information under Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data and the other financial information found elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion includes forward-looking statements that involve certain risks and uncertainties. See “Disclosures Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” (immediately prior to Part I) and Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Each of our two reportable operating segments are organized by geographic location and managed according to the nature of the products and services offered.
•United States - explores for, produces and markets crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas in the United States;
•International - explores for, produces and markets crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas outside of the United States and produces and markets products manufactured from natural gas, such as LNG and methanol, in E.G.
Executive Overview
We are an independent exploration and production company based in Houston, Texas. Our strategy is to deliver competitive and improving corporate level returns and sustainable free cash flow through disciplined investment across our U.S. resource plays (the Eagle Ford in Texas, the Bakken in North Dakota, STACK and SCOOP in Oklahoma and Northern Delaware in New Mexico). Our reinvestment rate capital allocation framework prioritizes free cash flow generation across a wide range of commodity prices to make available significant cash flow for investor-friendly purposes, including return of capital to shareholders and balance sheet enhancement. Protecting our balance sheet, keeping our workforce safe, minimizing our environmental impact and strong corporate governance are foundational to the execution of our strategy.
The risks associated with COVID-19 impacted our workforce and the way we meet our business objectives. Due to concerns over health and safety, the vast majority of our corporate workforce works remotely for at least a portion of the time. We have begun a process for a phased return of employees to the office. Working remotely has not significantly impacted our ability to maintain operations, has allowed our field offices to operate without any disruption, and has not caused us to incur significant additional expenses; however, we are unable to predict the duration or ultimate impact of these measures.
Key 2020 highlights include:
Reducing and optimizing our Capital Budget
•In February 2020, we announced an approved 2020 Capital Budget of $2.4 billion, including $200 million to fund REx. Given the substantial decline in commodity prices and oversupply in the market, our Board of Directors approved two separate reductions, culminating in a revised Capital Budget of $1.2 billion. The revised budget contemplated a full suspension of our Oklahoma activity in 2020, a decrease in Northern Delaware and REx drilling programs, and optimization of our development plans in the Bakken and Eagle Ford.
Maintained focus on balance sheet and liquidity
•At the end of the fourth quarter 2020, we had approximately $3.7 billion of liquidity, comprised of an undrawn $3.0 billion Credit Facility and $0.7 billion in cash. We remain investment grade at all three primary rating agencies.
•In 2020, we generated $1.5 billion of cash provided by operating activities despite the lower commodity price realizations and decreased production volumes. This was sufficient to fund our capital expenditures, share repurchases and dividends.
◦In early July 2020, collected an $89 million cash refund related to alternative minimum tax credits and associated interest. This was an accelerated refund due to the passage of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act.
◦In the fourth quarter of 2020, we realized over $400 million of cash from operations. Our U.S. segment average realized prices for crude and NGLs for the quarter were $39.71 and $16.30, respectively.
•We reduced our gross debt by $100 million and reduced our next significant debt maturity.
◦We remarketed $400 million sub-series B (tax-exempt) bonds in August at a weighted average interest rate of 2.25%.
◦In October, we completed a cash tender for $500 million of our then-outstanding $1 billion 2.8% 2022 Notes, funded by cash on hand.
◦The next significant debt maturity is the remaining $500 million 2.8% Senior Notes due in November 2022.
•During the second quarter 2020, we temporarily suspended the quarterly dividend and share repurchases to maximize liquidity. On October 1, the Board of Directors approved and declared the reinstatement of the base quarterly dividend of $0.03 per share, effective in the fourth quarter of 2020. While our share repurchase program remains approved with $1.3 billion of repurchase authorization remaining at year-end, we decided to maintain the suspension as we continue to maximize liquidity.
Managed our cost structure
•Achieved lower production expense rates in the U.S. segment due to lower operational activity and cost management efforts
•Reduced our general and administrative expenses, primarily a result of broad-based cost saving measures, including temporary base salary reductions for CEO and other corporate officers through year-end, a reduction in Board of Director compensation through year-end, and U.S. employee and contractor workforce reductions.
Financial and operational results
•Total net sales volumes for the year were 383 mboed, including 306 mboed in the U.S. Our U.S. net sales volumes decreased 5% and our wells to sales decreased 51% compared to 2019 as a result of lower drilling activity and natural field decline. We drilled and completed fewer wells in direct response to lower market prices.
•Our net loss per share was $1.83 in 2020 as compared to a net income per share of $0.59 last year.
Items that contributed to the increase in our net loss in 2020, as compared to 2019, include:
◦A decrease in revenues of approximately 39% compared to 2019, as a result of decreased commodity price realizations and lower net sales volumes. The combination of lower prices and lower volumes was the single largest contributor to our net loss in 2020.
◦A loss from our equity method investments totaling $161 million, primarily due to $171 million of cumulative impairments in 2020 of an investment in an equity method investee; our 2019 income from equity method investments totaled $87 million.
◦An increase in exploration and impairment expenses of $152 million, primarily a result of non-cash impairment charges related to goodwill and certain proved and unproved properties in our REx portfolio. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail.
◦A lower income tax benefit of $74 million. The larger tax benefit in 2019 is primarily related to the settlement of the 2010-2011 IRS Audit in the first quarter of 2019. The tax benefit for 2020 was negligible due to no federal tax benefit on the U.S. loss due to the valuation allowance on our net federal deferred tax assets in the U.S. See Consolidated Results of Operations: 2020 compared to 2019 section below and Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail.
Items that partially offset the above include:
◦A gain on commodity derivatives of $116 million, compared to a net loss of $72 million in 2019.
◦A decline in production expense of $157 million and general and administrative expense of $82 million as discussed above.
Compensation and ESG Highlights and Initiatives
•CEO and Board of Director total compensation reduced by approximately 25% with Board compensation mix shifted more toward equity and CEO mix further aligned with broader industry norms, exclusive of temporary reductions announced in 2020.
•Achieved second consecutive year of record safety performance in 2020, as measured by total recordable incident rate (TRIR) for both employees and contractors.
•Short-term incentive scorecard for compensation updated to focus on safety, environmental performance, capital efficiency, capital discipline/free cash flow generation and financial/balance sheet strength.
•Added a 2021 GHG emissions intensity target to short-term incentive scorecard.
Outlook
In February 2021, we announced a 2021 Capital Budget of $1.0 billion, which is effectively a maintenance Capital Budget. We expect this maintenance-level Capital Budget will allow us to keep total company oil production in 2021 consistent with our fourth quarter 2020 exit rate. Our 2021 Capital Budget is consistent with our capital allocation framework that prioritizes corporate returns and free cash flow generation over production growth.
The 2021 Capital Budget is weighted towards the four U.S. resource plays with approximately 92% allocated to the Eagle Ford and Bakken. Our 2021 Capital Budget is disaggregated by reportable segment in the table below:
Operations
The following table presents a summary of our sales volumes for each of our segments. Refer to the Results of Operations section for a price-volume analysis for each of the segments.
(a) We closed on the sale of our Libya subsidiary in the first quarter of 2018, our interest in the Atrush block in Kurdistan in the second quarter of 2019 and our U.K. business in the third quarter of 2019. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information on dispositions.
United States
Net sales volumes in the segment were lower during the year ended December 31, 2020. In the second quarter of 2020, we began the process of transitioning to a significantly lower level of drilling and completion activity across our domestic portfolio, with our remaining resources allocated primarily to the Bakken and Eagle Ford. As a result of the decreased drilling and completion activity, fewer wells were brought to sales resulting in a decline in production in 2020. The following tables provide additional details regarding net sales volumes, sales mix and operational drilling activity for our significant operations within this segment:
•Eagle Ford - In 2020, our net sales volumes were 99 mboed including oil sales of 61 mbbld. We brought 87 gross company-operated wells to sales in 2020 across Karnes, Atascosa and Gonzales counties. New well production provided strong initial production rates that partially offset the lower wells to sales and natural field decline.
•Bakken - In 2020, our net sales volumes were 105 mboed, including oil sales of 79 mbbld. We brought 64 gross company-operated wells to sales in 2020. Improved gas capture efforts resulted in higher gas and NGL sales that offset the lower wells to sales.
•Oklahoma - In 2020, our net sales volumes were 66 mboed including oil sales of 17 mbbld. We brought 13 gross company-operated wells to sales in 2020. During the second quarter, we suspended all drilling and completions operations in Oklahoma.
•Northern Delaware - In 2020, our net sales volumes were 27 mboed including oil sales of 15 mbbld. We brought 19 gross company-operated wells to sales in 2020. During the second quarter, we suspended drilling and completions operations in Northern Delaware.
International
Net sales volumes in the segment were lower during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to timing of E.G. liftings and natural field decline, coupled with the disposition of our U.K. business. The following table provides details regarding net sales volumes for our operations within this segment:
(a) Includes natural gas acquired for injection and subsequent resale.
•Equatorial Guinea - Net sales volumes in 2020 were lower than 2019 primarily due to timing of liftings and natural field decline.
•United Kingdom - During 2019, we closed on the sale of our U.K. business. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
•Libya - During the first quarter of 2018, we closed on the sale of our subsidiary in Libya. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
•Equity Method Investees - Net sales volumes in 2020 are tied to the volumes in Equatorial Guinea which were lower in the current year as noted above.
Market Conditions
Crude oil and condensate and NGL benchmarks decreased in 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. As a result, we experienced decreased price realizations associated with those benchmarks. Commodity prices are the most significant factor impacting our revenues, profitability, operating cash flows, the amount of capital we invest in our business, payment of dividends and funding of share repurchases. Commodity prices declined substantially in the first half of 2020 resulting from demand contraction related to the global pandemic and increased supply following the OPEC decision to increase production. A revised OPEC deal to reduce production was agreed in the early second quarter of 2020 and prices partially recovered through the end of the year. However, worldwide demand remains below pre-pandemic levels and we continue to expect commodity prices to remain volatile, which will affect our price realizations during 2021. See Item 1A. Risk Factors and Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition - Critical Accounting Estimates for further discussion of how declines in these commodity prices could impact us.
United States
The following table presents our average price realizations and the related benchmarks for crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas for 2020, 2019 and 2018.
(a)Excludes gains or losses on commodity derivative instruments.
(b)Inclusion of realized gains (losses) on crude oil derivative instruments would have increased average price realizations by $2.14 per bbl and $0.67 per bbl for 2020 and 2019, and decreased average price realizations by $4.60 per bbl for 2018.
(c)Inclusion of realized gains (losses) on natural gas derivative instruments would have had a minimal impact on average price realizations for the periods presented.
(d)Benchmark change due to industry shift to MEH in the first quarter of 2019.
(e)Bloomberg Finance LLP: Y-grade Mix NGL of 55% ethane, 25% propane, 5% butane, 8% isobutane and 7% natural gasoline.
Crude oil and condensate - Price realizations may differ from benchmarks due to the quality and location of the product.
Natural gas liquids - The majority of our sales volumes are at reference to Mont Belvieu prices.
Natural gas - A significant portion of volumes are sold at bid-week prices, or first-of-month indices relative to our producing areas.
International
The following table presents our average price realizations and the related benchmark for crude oil for 2020, 2019 and 2018.
(a) Average of monthly prices obtained from the United States Energy Information Agency website.
United Kingdom
Crude oil and condensate - Generally sold in relation to the Brent crude benchmark. We closed on the sale of our U.K. business on July 1, 2019.
Equatorial Guinea
Crude oil and condensate - Alba field liquids production is primarily condensate and generally sold in relation to the Brent crude benchmark. Alba Plant LLC processes the rich hydrocarbon gas which is supplied by the Alba field under a
fixed-price long-term contract. Alba Plant LLC extracts NGLs and secondary condensate which is then sold by Alba Plant LLC at market prices, with our share of the revenue reflected in income from equity method investments on the consolidated statements of income. Alba Plant LLC delivers the processed dry natural gas to the Alba field for distribution and sale to AMPCO and EG LNG.
Natural gas liquids - Wet gas is sold to Alba Plant LLC at a fixed-price term contract resulting in realized prices not tracking market price. Alba Plant LLC extracts and keeps NGLs, which are sold at market price, with our share of income from Alba Plant LLC being reflected in the income from equity method investments on the consolidated statements of income.
Natural gas - Dry natural gas, processed by Alba Plant LLC on behalf of the Alba field, is sold by the Alba field to EG LNG and AMPCO at fixed-price, long-term contracts resulting in realized prices not tracking market price. We derive additional value from the equity investment in our downstream gas processing units EG LNG and AMPCO. EG LNG sells LNG on a market-based long-term contract and AMPCO markets methanol at market prices.
Consolidated Results of Operations: 2020 compared to 2019
Revenues from contracts with customers are presented by segment in the table below:
Below is a price/volume analysis for each segment. Refer to the preceding Operations and Market Conditions sections for additional detail related to our net sales volumes and average price realizations.
Net gain (loss) on commodity derivatives in 2020 was a net gain of $116 million, compared to a net loss of $72 million in 2019. We have multiple crude oil, natural gas and NGL derivative contracts that settle against various indices. We record commodity derivative gains/losses as the index pricing and forward curves change each period. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
Income (loss) from equity method investments decreased $248 million in 2020 from 2019 primarily due to impairments of $171 million to an investment in an equity method investee in 2020. In addition, lower price realizations and lower net sales volumes from equity method investments in E.G. contributed to the decrease, primarily due to AMPCO’s 2020 triennial turnaround, timing of liftings and natural field decline. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 24 to the consolidated financial statements for further information on the equity method investee impairment.
Net gain on disposal of assets decreased $41 million in 2020 from 2019, primarily as a result of the sale of our working interest in the Droshky field (Gulf of Mexico) and U.K. business in 2019. We had minimal disposal activity in 2020. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for information about these dispositions.
Other income decreased $37 million in 2020 from 2019 primarily due to income recognized in 2019 arising from indemnification payments received from Marathon Petroleum Corporation (“MPC”). Pursuant to the Tax Sharing Agreement we entered into with MPC in connection with the 2011 spin-off transaction, MPC agreed to indemnify us for certain liabilities. The indemnity relates to tax and interest allocable to MPC as a result of the closure of the 2010-2011 U.S. Federal Tax Audit in the first quarter of 2019.
Production expenses decreased $157 million during 2020 from 2019. Production expense in our United States segment decreased $94 million primarily due to lower operational activity and continued cost management, specifically staffing and contract labor. Production expense in our International segment decreased $67 million primarily as a result of the sale of our U.K. business and our non-operated interest in the Atrush block in Kurdistan in 2019.
The production expense rate (expense per boe) declined during 2020 in the United States and International segments due to the aforementioned reasons.
The following table provides production expense and production expense rates (expense per boe) for each segment:
Shipping, handling and other operating expenses decreased $9 million in 2020 from 2019 primarily as a result of lower net sales volumes in our United States segment, partially offset by higher marketing costs due to higher volumes purchased for resale in 2020.
Exploration expenses include unproved property impairments, dry well costs, geological and geophysical and other, which increased $32 million during 2020 versus 2019. We impaired $78 million of unproved property leases in Louisiana Austin Chalk in our United States segment in 2020 due to a combination of factors, including our geological assessment, seismic information, timing of lease expiration dates and decisions not to develop acreage deemed non-core. This was partially offset by impairments of REx unproved leases in 2019, albeit lower than 2020, driven by our decision not to drill certain leases. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for details of these items.
The following table summarizes the components of exploration expenses:
Depreciation, depletion and amortization decreased $81 million in 2020 from 2019, primarily due to lower net sales volumes in the United States and E.G. along with the sale of our U.K. business in 2019. Our segments apply the units-of-production method to the majority of their assets, including capitalized asset retirement costs; therefore, volumes have an impact on DD&A expense.
The DD&A rate (expense per boe) is impacted by field-level changes in reserves, capitalized costs and sales volume mix between fields. The DD&A rate for International decreased primarily as a result of dispositions in 2019. The following table provides DD&A expense and DD&A expense rates for each segment:
Impairments increased $120 million in 2020 from 2019, primarily as a result of a $95 million goodwill charge related to our International reporting unit and a $49 million long-lived asset impairment related to a damaged, unsalvageable well and related equipment in the Louisiana Austin Chalk. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 12 for discussion of impairments in further detail.
Taxes other than income include production, severance and ad valorem taxes, primarily in the U.S., which tend to increase or decrease in relation to revenue and sales volumes. Taxes other than income decreased $111 million in 2020 from 2019 period primarily due to lower price realizations and lower sales volumes in the U.S. segment.
General and administrative expenses decreased $82 million in 2020 compared to 2019, which reflects costs savings realized from workforce reductions.
Provision (benefit) for income taxes reflects an effective income tax rate of 1% for 2020, as compared to an effective income tax rate of (22)% for 2019. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the effective income tax rate.
Segment Results: 2020 compared to 2019
Segment Income
Segment income represents income which excludes certain items not allocated to our operating segments, net of income taxes. A portion of our corporate and operations general and administrative support costs are not allocated to the operating segments. These unallocated costs primarily consist of employment costs (including pension effects), professional services, facilities and other costs associated with corporate and operations support activities. Additionally, items which affect comparability such as: gains or losses on dispositions, impairments of proved and certain unproved properties, goodwill and equity method investments, certain exploration expenses relating to a strategic decision to exit conventional exploration, unrealized gains or losses on commodity and interest rate derivative instruments, effects of pension settlements and curtailments, or other items (as determined by the CODM) are not allocated to operating segments.
The following table reconciles segment income (loss) to net income (loss):
(a) See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail about items not allocated to segments.
United States segment income (loss) in 2020 was an after-tax loss of $553 million versus after-tax income of $675 million in 2019, primarily as a result of lower crude price realizations and lower net sales volumes, which was partially offset by higher gain realized on commodity derivatives, and lower production taxes and production expenses.
International segment income in 2020 was after-tax income of $30 million versus after-tax income of $233 million in 2019, primarily due to lower price realizations and sales volumes, partially offset by lower costs due to the sale of our U.K. business and our non-operated interest in the Atrush block in Kurdistan in 2019.
Consolidated Results of Operations: 2019 compared to 2018
A detailed discussion of the year-over-year changes from the year ended December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2018 can be found in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis section of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 and is available via the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and on our website at www.marathonoil.com.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition, Cash Flows and Liquidity
Commodity prices are the most significant factor impacting our operating cash flows and the amount of capital available to reinvest into the business. In 2020, we experienced a decrease in operating cash flows primarily as a result of lower commodity price realizations, with crude oil and condensate price realizations decreasing by 36% to $35.39 per barrel. In direct response to the lower commodity prices, we reduced our 2020 Capital Budget such that the Capital Budget did not exceed cash provided by operations.
At December 31, 2020, we had approximately $3.7 billion of liquidity consisting of $742 million in cash and cash equivalents and $3.0 billion available under our Credit Facility. As previously discussed in the Outlook section, our Capital Budget for 2021 is $1.0 billion. Our top priorities for using cash provided by operations are to fund our Capital Budget and base dividend while also enhancing liquidity. We believe our current liquidity level, cash flow from operations and ability to access the capital markets provides us with the flexibility to fund our initiatives across a wide range of commodity price environments.
Cash Flows
The following table presents sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for 2020 and 2019:
The following table shows capital expenditures by segment and reconciles to additions to property, plant and equipment as presented in the consolidated statements of cash flows:
During the third and fourth quarters of 2020, we completed two separate financing transactions resulting in a remarketing of $400 million of sub-series B bonds to investors and a separate debt repayment of $500 million, which is further discussed in the Capital Resources section below. Also see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements for details of these transactions.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Board of Directors approved a $0.05 per share dividend. The Board of Directors temporarily suspended our quarterly dividend payment in the second quarter as we prioritized liquidity and our balance sheet given the macro environment. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Board of Directors approved the reinstatement of the dividend and declared a base quarterly dividend of $0.03 per share. During 2019, the Board of Directors approved a $0.05 per share dividend each quarter.
Available Liquidity
Our main sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, internally generated cash flow from operations, sales of non-core assets, capital market transactions and our revolving Credit Facility. At December 31, 2020, we had approximately $3.7 billion of liquidity consisting of $742 million in cash and cash equivalents and $3.0 billion available under our revolving Credit Facility. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 26 to the consolidated financial statements for a further discussion of how our commitments and contingencies could affect our available liquidity.
Our working capital requirements are supported by our cash and cash equivalents and our Credit Facility. We may draw on our revolving Credit Facility to meet short-term cash requirements, or issue debt or equity securities through the shelf registration statement discussed below as part of our longer-term liquidity and capital management program. Because of the alternatives available to us as discussed above, we believe that our short-term and long-term liquidity are adequate to fund not only our current operations, but also our near-term and long-term funding requirements including our capital spending programs, dividend payments, defined benefit plan contributions, repayment of debt maturities and other amounts that may ultimately be paid in connection with contingencies. General economic conditions, commodity prices and financial, business and other factors, including the global pandemic, could affect our operations and our ability to access the capital markets.
During the first half of 2020, commodity prices significantly declined due to the combined impacts of global crude oil oversupply and lower demand for hydrocarbons due to the global pandemic. As a result, credit rating agencies reviewed many companies in the industry, including us. We continue to be rated investment grade at all three primary credit rating agencies. A downgrade in our credit ratings could increase our future cost of financing or limit our ability to access capital, and could result in additional credit support requirements. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for a discussion of how a downgrade in our credit ratings could affect us.
We may incur additional debt in order to fund our capital expenditures, acquisitions or development activities or for general corporate or other purposes. A higher level of indebtedness could increase the risk that our liquidity and financial flexibility deteriorates. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for a further discussion of how our level of indebtedness could affect us.
Capital Resources
Credit Arrangements and Borrowings
As of December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings on our $3.0 billion Credit Facility. At December 31, 2020, we had $5.4 billion of total debt outstanding. In October 2020, we completed a cash tender offer for an aggregate principal amount of $500 million of our then-outstanding $1 billion 2.8% senior notes due 2022. Our next significant debt maturity is the remaining $500 million 2.8% senior notes that are due in November 2022. We do not have any triggers on any of our corporate debt that would cause an event of default in the case of a downgrade of our credit ratings.
On August 18, 2020, we closed a $400 million remarketing to investors of sub-series B bonds which are part of the $1.0 billion St. John the Baptist, State of Louisiana revenue refunding bonds originally issued and purchased in December 2017. Information about these bonds are available on the website of the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board via its Electronic Municipal Market Access system at www.msrb.org. Information on that website is not incorporated by reference into this filing.
In 2018, we signed an agreement with an owner/lessor to construct and lease a new build-to-suit office building in Houston, Texas. The lessor and other participants are providing financing for up to $340 million to fund the estimated project costs, which was reduced effective August 2020 from $380 million to align with our revised estimate of the project costs. As of December 31, 2020, project costs incurred totaled approximately $144 million, including land acquisition and construction costs.
Shelf Registration
We have a universal shelf registration statement filed with the SEC under which we, as a “well-known seasoned issuer” for purposes of SEC rules, have the ability to issue and sell an indeterminate amount of various types of debt and equity securities.
Debt-To-Capital Ratio
The Credit Facility includes a single financial covenant requiring that our ratio of total debt to total capitalization not exceed 65% as of the last day of each fiscal quarter. This covenant calculation was modified in December 2020, when we executed the fifth amendment to our credit facility. The primary changes resulting from this amendment are (i) a modification to the debt to total capitalization covenant calculation that permits an add-back to shareholders’ equity for certain non-cash write-downs, (ii) the addition of certain customary events of default, including a cross payment event of default and (iii) certain restrictions on the incurrence of subsidiary indebtedness. Under the amended definition, our total debt to total capitalization ratio was 26% at December 31, 2020.
Capital Requirements
Capital Spending
Our approved Capital Budget for 2021 is $1.0 billion. Additional details were previously discussed in Outlook.
Share Repurchase Program
In 2020, we acquired approximately 9 million common shares at a cost of $85 million under our share repurchase program. While the share repurchase program remains approved and has $1.3 billion of remaining authorization, we elected to suspend additional share repurchases to preserve liquidity.
On January 27, 2021, our Board of Directors approved a dividend of $0.03 per share for the fourth quarter of 2020. The dividend is payable on March 10, 2021 to shareholders of record on February 17, 2021.
We plan to make contributions of up to $40 million to our funded pension plans during 2021. Cash contributions to be paid from our general assets for the unfunded pension and postretirement plans are expected to be approximately $3 million and $10 million in 2021.
Contractual Cash Obligations
The table below provides aggregated information on our consolidated obligations to make future payments under existing contracts as of December 31, 2020.
(a)Includes anticipated cash payments for interest of $247 million for 2021, $471 million for 2022-2023, $391 million for 2024-2025 and $1.4 billion for the remaining years for a total of $2.5 billion.
(b)Includes contracts to acquire property, plant and equipment and commitments for oil and gas drilling and completion activities.
(c)Includes contracts to purchase services such as utilities, supplies and various other maintenance and operating services.
(d)Includes any drilling rigs and fracturing crews that are not considered lease obligations.
(e)Primarily includes obligations for pension and other postretirement benefits including medical and life insurance. We have estimated projected funding requirements through 2027. Although unrecognized tax benefits are not a contractual obligation, they are presented in this table because they represent potential demands on our liquidity.
(f)This table does not include the estimated discounted liability for dismantlement, abandonment and restoration costs of oil and gas properties of $254 million. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements.
(g)Includes $144 million of project costs incurred as of December 31, 2020 for a new build-to-suit office building in Houston, Texas. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements section below.
Transactions with Related Parties
Offshore E.G, we own a 63% working interest in the Alba field. Onshore E.G., we own a 52% interest in an LPG processing plant, a 60% interest in an LNG production facility and a 45% interest in a methanol production plant, each through equity method investees. We sell our natural gas from the Alba field to these equity method investees as the feedstock for their production processes.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Off-balance sheet arrangements comprise those arrangements that may potentially impact our liquidity, capital resources and results of operations, even though such arrangements are not recorded as liabilities under accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. Although off-balance sheet arrangements serve a variety of our business purposes, we are not dependent on these arrangements to maintain our liquidity and capital resources, and we are not aware of any circumstances that are reasonably likely to cause the off-balance sheet arrangements to have a material adverse effect on liquidity and capital resources.
We will issue stand-alone letters of credit when required by a business partner. Such letters of credit outstanding at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 aggregated $14 million, $14 million and $52 million. Most of the letters of credit are in support of obligations recorded in the consolidated balance sheet. In 2019, our letters of credit outstanding decreased as a result of our upgraded credit rating and the sale of our U.K. business (we no longer have requirements to support firm transportation agreements and future abandonment liabilities).
In 2018, we signed an agreement with an owner/lessor to construct and lease a new build-to-suit office building in Houston, Texas. The lessor and other participants are providing financing for up to $340 million, to fund the estimated project costs, which was reduced effective August 2020, from $380 million to align with our revised estimate of the project costs. As of December 31, 2020 project costs incurred totaled $144 million, primarily for land acquisition and initial design costs. The initial lease term is five years and will commence once construction is substantially complete and the new Houston office is ready for occupancy. At the end of the initial lease term, we can extend the term of the lease for an additional five years, subject
to the approval of the participants; purchase the property subject to certain terms and conditions; or remarket the property to an unrelated third party. The lease contains a residual value guarantee of approximately 89% of the total acquisition and construction costs. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements for further information on leases.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Environmental Matters, Litigation and Contingencies
We have incurred and will continue to incur capital, operating and maintenance and remediation expenditures as a result of environmental laws and regulations. If these expenditures, as with all costs, are not ultimately offset by the prices of our products and services, our operating results will be adversely affected. We believe that substantially all of our competitors must comply with similar environmental laws and regulations. However, the specific impact on each competitor may vary depending on a number of factors, including the age and location of its operating facilities, marketing areas and production processes. These laws generally provide for control of pollutants released into the environment and require responsible parties to undertake remediation of hazardous waste disposal sites. Penalties may be imposed for noncompliance.
We accrue for environmental remediation activities when the responsibility to remediate is probable and the amount of associated costs can be reasonably estimated. As environmental remediation matters proceed toward ultimate resolution or as additional remediation obligations arise, charges in excess of those previously accrued may be required.
New or expanded environmental requirements, which could increase our environmental costs, may arise in the future on both state and federal levels. We strive to comply with all legal requirements regarding the environment, but as not all costs are fixed or presently determinable (even under existing legislation) and may be affected by future legislation or regulations, it is not possible to predict all of the ultimate costs of compliance, including remediation costs that may be incurred and penalties that may be imposed.
For more information on environmental regulations that impact us, or could impact us, see Item 1. Business - Environmental, Health and Safety Matters, Item 1A. Risk Factors and Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the respective reporting periods. Accounting estimates are considered to be critical if (1) the nature of the estimates and assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change, and (2) the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material. Actual results could differ from the estimates and assumptions used.
Estimated Quantities of Net Reserves
We use the successful efforts method of accounting for our oil and gas producing activities. The successful efforts method inherently relies on the estimation of proved crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas reserves. The amount of estimated proved reserve volumes affect, among other things, whether certain costs are capitalized or expensed, the amount and timing of costs depreciated, depleted or amortized into net income and the presentation of supplemental information on oil and gas producing activities. In addition, the expected future cash flows to be generated by producing properties are used for testing impairment and the expected future taxable income available to realize deferred tax assets, also in part, rely on estimates of quantities of net reserves. Refer to the applicable sections below for further discussion of these accounting estimates.
The estimation of quantities of net reserves is a highly technical process performed by our petroleum engineers and geoscientists for crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas, which is based upon several underlying assumptions. The reserve estimates may change as additional information becomes available and as contractual, operational, economic and political conditions change. We evaluate our reserves using drilling results, reservoir performance, subsurface interpretation and future plans to develop acreage. Technologies used in proved reserves estimation includes statistical analysis of production performance, decline curve analysis, pressure and rate transient analysis, pressure gradient analysis, reservoir simulation and volumetric analysis. The observed statistical nature of production performance coupled with highly certain reservoir continuity or quality within the reliable technology areas and sufficient proved developed locations establish the reasonable certainty criteria required for booking proved reserves. As per SEC requirements, proved undeveloped reserve volumes are limited to activity in the 5-year plan and wells that will be developed within 5 years of initial booking. The data for a given reservoir may also change over time as a result of numerous factors including, but not limited to, additional development activity and future development costs, production history and continual reassessment of the viability of future production volumes under varying economic conditions.
Reserve estimates are based on an unweighted arithmetic average of commodity prices during the 12-month period, using the closing prices on the first day of each month, as defined by the SEC. The table below provides the 2020 SEC pricing for certain benchmark prices:
When determining the December 31, 2020 proved reserves for each property, the benchmark prices listed above were adjusted using price differentials that account for property-specific quality and location differences.
If the future average crude oil prices are below the average prices used to determine proved reserves at December 31, 2020, it could have an adverse effect on our estimates of proved reserve volumes and the value of our business. Future reserve revisions could also result from changes in capital funding, drilling plans and governmental regulation, among other things. It is difficult to estimate the magnitude of any potential price change and the effect on proved reserves, due to numerous factors (including future crude oil price and performance revisions). For further discussion of risks associated with our estimation of proved reserves, see Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Depreciation and depletion of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas producing properties is determined by the units-of-production method and could change with revisions to estimated proved reserves. While revisions of previous reserve estimates have not historically been significant to the depreciation and depletion rates of our segments, any reduction in proved reserves, could result in an acceleration of future DD&A expense. The following table illustrates, on average, the sensitivity of each segment’s units-of-production DD&A per boe and pretax income to a hypothetical 10% change in 2020 proved reserves based on 2020 production.
Fair Value Estimates
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. There are three approaches for measuring the fair value of assets and liabilities: the market approach, the income approach and the cost approach, each of which includes multiple valuation techniques. The market approach uses prices and other relevant information generated by market transactions involving identical or comparable assets or liabilities. The income approach uses valuation techniques to measure fair value by converting future amounts, such as cash flows or earnings, into a single present value, or range of present values, using current market expectations about those future amounts. The cost approach is based on the amount that would currently be required to replace the service capacity of an asset. This is often referred to as current replacement cost. The cost approach assumes that the fair value would not exceed what it would cost a market participant to acquire or construct a substitute asset of comparable utility, adjusted for obsolescence.
The fair value accounting standards do not prescribe which valuation technique should be used when measuring fair value and do not prioritize among the techniques. These standards establish a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs used in applying the various valuation techniques. Inputs broadly refer to the assumptions that market participants use to make pricing decisions, including assumptions about risk. Level 1 inputs are given the highest priority in the fair value hierarchy while Level 3 inputs are given the lowest priority. The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows:
•Level 1 - Observable inputs that reflect unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets as of the measurement date. Active markets are those in which transactions for the asset or liability occur in sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis.
•Level 2 - Observable market-based inputs or unobservable inputs that are corroborated by market data. These are inputs other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1, which are either directly or indirectly observable as of the measurement date.
•Level 3 - Unobservable inputs that are not corroborated by market data and may be used with internally developed methodologies that result in management’s best estimate of fair value.
Valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs are favored. Assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest priority level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. The assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement requires judgment and may affect the placement of assets and liabilities within the levels of the fair value hierarchy. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements for disclosures regarding our fair value measurements.
Significant uses of fair value measurements include:
•assets and liabilities acquired in a business combination;
•assets acquired in an asset acquisition;
•impairment assessments of long-lived assets;
•impairment assessments of equity method investments;
•impairment assessments of goodwill;
•recorded value of derivative instruments; and
•recorded value of pension plan assets.
The need to test long-lived assets and goodwill for impairment can be based on several indicators, including a significant reduction in prices of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas, sustained declines in our common stock, reductions to our Capital Budget, unfavorable adjustments to reserves, significant changes in the expected timing of production, other changes to contracts or changes in the regulatory environment in which the property is located.
Impairment Assessments of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets in use are assessed for impairment whenever changes in facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. For purposes of an impairment evaluation, long-lived assets must be grouped at the lowest level for which independent cash flows can be identified, which generally is field-by-field or, in certain instances, by logical grouping of assets if there is significant shared infrastructure or contractual terms that cause economic interdependency amongst separate, discrete fields. If the sum of the undiscounted estimated cash flows from the use of the asset group and its eventual disposition is less than the carrying value of an asset group, the carrying value is written down to the estimated fair value.
Fair value calculated for the purpose of testing our long-lived assets for impairment is estimated using the present value of expected future cash flows method and comparative market prices when appropriate. Significant judgment is involved in performing these fair value estimates since the results are based on forecasted assumptions. Significant assumptions include:
•Future crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas prices. Our estimates of future prices are based on our analysis of market supply and demand and consideration of market price indicators. Although these commodity prices may experience extreme volatility in any given year, we believe long-term industry prices are driven by global market supply and demand. To estimate supply, we consider numerous factors, including the worldwide resource base, depletion rates and OPEC production policies. We believe demand is largely driven by global economic factors, such as population and income growth, governmental policies and vehicle stocks. The prices we use in our fair value estimates are consistent with those used in our planning and capital investment reviews. There has been significant volatility in crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas prices and estimates of such future prices are inherently imprecise. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion on commodity prices.
•Estimated quantities of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas. Such quantities are based on a combination of proved reserves and risk-weighted probable reserves and resources such that the combined volumes represent the most likely expectation of recovery. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion on reserves.
•Expected timing of production. Production forecasts are the outcome of engineering studies which estimate reserves, as well as expected capital programs. The actual timing of the production could be different than the projection. Cash flows realized later in the projection period are less valuable than those realized earlier due to the time value of money. The expected timing of production that we use in our fair value estimates is consistent with that used in our planning and capital investment reviews.
•Discount rate commensurate with the risks involved. We apply a discount rate to our expected cash flows based on a variety of factors, including market and economic conditions, operational risk, regulatory risk and political risk. A higher discount rate decreases the net present value of cash flows.
•Future capital requirements. Our estimates of future capital requirements are based upon a combination of authorized spending and internal forecasts.
We base our fair value estimates on projected financial information which we believe to be reasonably likely to occur. An estimate of the sensitivity to changes in assumptions in our undiscounted cash flow calculations is not practicable, given the numerous assumptions (e.g. reserves, pace and timing of development plans, commodity prices, capital expenditures, operating costs, drilling and development costs, inflation and discount rates) that can materially affect our estimates. Unfavorable adjustments to some of the above listed assumptions would likely be offset by favorable adjustments in other assumptions. For example, the impact of sustained reduced commodity prices on future undiscounted cash flows would likely be partially offset by lower costs. As of December 31, 2020 our estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to our remaining long-lived assets significantly exceeded their carrying values.
During 2020, we recorded impairment charges totaling $133 million related to proved and certain unproved properties. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 12 and Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of impairments recorded in 2020, 2019 and 2018 and the related fair value measurements.
Impairment Assessment of Equity Method Investments
During 2020, we recorded impairment charges totaling $171 million pertaining to an investment in an equity method investee, which was reflected in income (loss) from equity method investments in our consolidated statements of income. Equity method investments are assessed for impairment whenever changes in the facts and circumstances indicate a loss in value may have occurred. When a loss is deemed to have occurred that is other than temporary, the carrying value of the equity method investment is written down to fair value.
Fair value calculated for the purpose of testing our equity method investees for impairment is estimated using the present value of expected future cash flows method. Significant judgment is involved in performing these fair value estimates since the results are based on forecasted assumptions and the performance of entities that we do not control. Significant assumptions include:
•Future condensate, NGL, LNG, natural gas and methanol prices. Our estimates of future prices are based on our analysis of market supply and demand and consideration of market price indicators. Although these commodity prices may experience extreme volatility in any given year, we believe long-term industry prices are driven by global market supply and demand. To estimate supply, we consider numerous factors, including the worldwide resource base, depletion rates and OPEC production policies. We believe demand is largely driven by global economic factors, such as population and income growth, and governmental policies. The prices we use in our fair value estimates are consistent with those used in our planning and capital investment reviews. There has been significant volatility in commodity prices and estimates of such future prices are inherently imprecise.
•Estimated quantities of feedstock condensate, NGLs and natural gas processed by our investees. There are two primary sets of inputs used to estimate feedstock volumes processed by our investees. The first input involves hydrocarbons produced from our Alba Field. Our equity method investees currently process hydrocarbons from our Alba Field, which consists of condensate, NGLs and natural gas reserves. Estimated quantities of hydrocarbons processed from our Alba Field are based on a combination of proved reserves and risk-weighted probable reserves and resources such that the combined volumes represent the most likely expectation of recovery.
The second input involves our estimate of future third-party gas to be processed by our investees. Our investees have capacity to process hydrocarbons from sources other than our Alba field. During 2019, we executed agreements for processing natural gas produced from the third party-owned Alen Unit through the existing Alba Plant LLC LPG processing plant and the EGHoldings LNG production facility beginning in 2021. Estimated natural gas volumes processed from the Alen Unit were based on forecasts received from the operator of the Alen Unit.
•Expected timing of production. Production forecasts are the outcome of engineering studies which estimate reserves, as well as expected capital programs. The actual timing of the production could be different than the projection. Cash flows realized later in the projection period are less valuable than those realized earlier due to the time value of money. The expected timing of production from the Alba Field that we use in our fair value estimates is consistent with that used in our planning and capital investment reviews. The expected timing of production from the Alen Unit is consistent with forecasts received from the operator of that field.
•Discount rate commensurate with the risks involved. We apply a discount rate to our expected cash flows based on a variety of factors, including market and economic conditions, operational risk, regulatory risk and political risk. A higher discount rate decreases the net present value of cash flows.
We base our fair value estimates on projected financial information which we believe to be reasonably likely to occur. This includes the estimated dividends and/or return of capital we expect to be paid by our equity method investees, which are directly affected by the significant assumptions described in the preceding paragraphs. An estimate of the sensitivity to changes
in assumptions in our cash flow calculations is not practicable, given the numerous other assumptions (e.g. reserves, commodity prices, operating costs, inflation and discount rates) that can materially affect our estimates. Unfavorable adjustments to some of the above listed assumptions would likely be offset by favorable adjustments in other assumptions.
See Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding the impairment recognized during 2020.
Impairment Assessments of Goodwill
Goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis, or between annual tests when events or changes in circumstances indicate the fair value may have been reduced below its carrying value. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level. Our reporting units are the same as our reporting segments, of which historically only International included goodwill. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit requires judgment and the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Our policy is to first assess the qualitative factors in order to determine whether the fair value of our International reporting unit is more likely than not less than its carrying amount. Certain qualitative factors used in our evaluation include, among other things, the results of the most recent quantitative assessment of the goodwill impairment test; macroeconomic conditions; industry and market conditions (including commodity prices and cost factors); overall financial performance; and other relevant entity-specific events. If, after considering these events and circumstances we determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the International reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative goodwill test is performed. The quantitative goodwill test is performed using a combination of market and income approaches. The market approach references observable inputs specific to us and our industry, such as the price of our common equity, our enterprise value and valuation multiples of us and our peers from the investor analyst community. The income approach utilizes discounted cash flows, which are based on forecasted assumptions. Key assumptions to the income approach are the same as those described above regarding our impairment assessment of long-lived assets and are consistent with those that management uses to make business decisions.
In the first quarter of 2020, a triggering event (significant decline in market capitalization caused by worldwide declines in hydrocarbon demand and corresponding prices) required us to assess our goodwill in the International reporting unit for impairment as of March 31, 2020. We estimated the fair value of our International reporting unit using a combination of market and income approaches and concluded that a full impairment of $95 million was required. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for additional discussion of goodwill.
Derivatives
We record all derivative instruments at fair value. Fair value measurements for all our derivative instruments are based on observable market-based inputs that are corroborated by market data and are discussed in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements. Additional information about derivatives and their valuation may be found in