ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
Forward Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Rule 175 of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Rule 3b-6 of the Securities Act of 1934, as amended, that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. These forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates and projections about our industry, our beliefs, and our assumptions. Words such as “anticipate,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks” and “estimates” and variations of these words and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors, some of which are beyond our control and difficult to predict and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or forecasted in the forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this Form 10-K. Investors should carefully consider all of such risks before making an investment decision with respect to the Company’s stock. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and summary of selected financial data for Marizyme, Inc. Such discussion represents only the best present assessment from our Management.
These forward-looking statements, which reflect our management’s beliefs, objectives, and expectations as of the date hereof, are based on the best judgement of our management. All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made. Such forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions relating to factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in such statements, including, without limitation, the following: economic, social and political conditions, global economic downturns resulting from extraordinary events such as the COVID-19 pandemic and other securities industry risks; interest rate risks; liquidity risks; credit risk with clients and counterparties; risk of liability for errors in clearing functions; systemic risk; systems failures, delays and capacity constraints; network security risks; competition; reliance on external service providers; new laws and regulations affecting our business; net capital requirements; extensive regulation, regulatory uncertainties and legal matters; failure to maintain relationships with employees, customers, business partners or governmental entities; the inability to achieve synergies or to implement integration plans and other consequences associated with risks and uncertainties detailed in our filings with the SEC, including our most recent filings on Forms 10-K and 10-Q.
Company Overview
We are a Nevada corporation originally incorporated on March 20, 2007, under the name SWAV Enterprises, Ltd. On September 6, 2010, we changed our name to GBS Enterprises Incorporated and from 2010 to September 2018 we were in the software products and advisory services business for email and instant messaging applications. We divested that business between December 2016 and September 2018 and, since that time, we have begun to focus on the acquisition of life science technologies.
We changed our name to Marizyme, Inc. on March 21, 2018, to reflect our new life sciences focus. Our common stock is currently quoted on the OTC Markets’ QB tier under the symbol “MRZM.” We may also examine our options with respect to the listing of our common stock on the Nasdaq Stock market or the NYSE.
In the second half of 2018, we acquired the protease-based therapeutic platform called Krillase® from ACB Holding AB.
Recent Events
Somahlution Asset Acquisition
On July 31, 2020, we acquired all the assets and certain of the liabilities of Somahlution LLC, or Somahlution, and its related companies, referred to collectively as Somah. Somah was engaged in developing products to prevent ischemic injury to organs and tissues and its products, which we refer to as the “Somah Products,” include DuraGraft®, a one-time intraoperative vascular graft treatment for use in vascular and bypass surgeries that maintains endothelial function and structure, and other related properties. As part of this acquisition, we acquired Somahlution, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Somahlution and holder of the CE marks for manufacture and sale of the DuraGraft® products in the European Union.
Pursuant to the terms of the Acquisition, Somah is entitled to appoint two members to our board of directors, one of whom must be independent. In January 2021, Dr. Vithal Dhaduk was appointed to one of the board seats. Additionally, Dr. Satish Chandran, Somah’s co-founder and Chief Executive Officer, became our Chief Technical Officer and Dr. Catherine Pachuk, Somah’s Chief Science Officer, became our Chief Science Officer. Dr. Chandran, however, was no longer employed with us as of April 2, 2021.
Private Placement
On August 3, 2020, we conducted an initial closing of a private placement (the “Private Placement”) in which we sold to several accredited investors an aggregate of 4,609,984 shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, at a purchase price of $1.25 per share for an aggregate amount of $5,762,480. On September 25, 2020, we conducted a second closing of the Private Placement and sold an additional 990,208 shares of our common stock for an aggregate amount of $1,237,760, for a total Private Placement offering amount of $7,000,240. The offering costs were $725,176, leaving net proceeds of $6,275,064.
Our Products
DuraGraft®
On July 31, 2020, Marizyme closed the acquisition of Somahlution’s product, DuraGraft.
The DuraGraft Product
Somahlution has been engaged in developing products based on its DuraGraft platform technology, to prevent ischemic injury to organs and tissues in grafting and transplantation surgeries. Its products and product candidates, which are referred to as the Somah Products, include DuraGraft, a one-time intraoperative vascular graft treatment for use in vascular and bypass surgeries that maintains endothelial function and structure, thereby reducing the incidence and complications of graft failure and improving clinical outcomes post bypass surgery.
DuraGraft Indications
DuraGraft is an “endothelial damage inhibitor” indicated for cardiac bypass, peripheral bypass, and other vascular surgeries. It is CE marked and is approved for marketing in 33 countries worldwide on 4 continents including, but not limited to the European Union, Turkey, Singapore, Hong Kong, India, the Philippines, and Malaysia. Somahlution has also been focused on developing products to mitigate the effects of ischemia reperfusion injury in other grafting and transplantation surgeries and other indications in which ischemic injury can cause disease. Multiple products derived from the DuraGraft platform technology for several indications are under various stages of development.
● DuraGraft is a CE-marked endothelial damage inhibitor that protects free vascular grafts and endothelium against ischemic injury.
● DuraGraft is approved in Europe for graft protection and preservation during bypass (cardiac and peripheral) and other vascular surgeries.
● DuraGraft protects graft tissue from harvesting through anastomosis and is used during coronary artery bypass grafting, or CABG, (and other vascular surgeries) as a treatment to maintain the structural and functional integrity of the endothelium of isolated vascular grafts.
● The use of DuraGraft is associated with the reduction of post-CABG complications associated with graft disease and failure; myocardial infarction, repeat revascularization, and major adverse cardiovascular events, or MACE.
Unmet Clinical Needs
● CABG remains the standard treatment for multi-vessel coronary artery disease or left main artery disease.
● Benefits of CABG are, however, limited by high patient level of vein graft failure (VGF) rates (50%) that have not changed in decades.
● “The Early Promise of Coronary Bypass Grafting has not been fulfilled and an insidiously deadly variety of atherosclerosis progressively chokes vein grafts and extinguishes their benefits,” Fitzgibbons, 1996.
● “VGF remains one of the leading causes of poor in-hospital and long-term outcomes after CABG,” Harskamp, 2013.
● “The Issue of Low Patency Rates Owing to VGF Needs Urgent Attention,” de Vries, 2016.
● Vein graft failure is result of damage to graft endothelium that occurs during CABG surgery.
● Ischemic reperfusion injury is the primary cause of endothelial damage.
● Vein graft failure post-CABG is associated with poor clinical outcomes.
● DuraGraft minimizes endothelial damage, reduces graft disease, and improves clinical outcomes.
Current and Planned Operations
For the current fiscal year, the Company has the following goals:
● Sell More DuraGraft. DuraGraft is CE marked and is currently marketed in EU member countries and several countries around the world including, but not limited to Turkey, Singapore, Hong Kong, India, the Philippines, and Malaysia. The Company will pursue market expansions of sales within these countries by working with current product distributors to expand within its current base of customers found within the registry sites, support peer to peer promotion and will work aggressively identify, onboard, and train new distributors in other key targeted regions of the world (Far East, Middle East, and South America). This effort, if successful, would significantly expand DuraGraft’s market and would make the product available to a significantly greater number of CABG patients worldwide.
● Make Progress Towards Regulatory Clearance of DuraGraft in the U.S. This fiscal year, the Company plans to continue a dialog with the FDA regarding the clinical studies required to obtain regulatory clearance of DuraGraft for use in coronary bypass surgeries in the U.S. The Company has, and will continue, this formal dialog with the FDA in planned pre-submission filing(s) and discussions designed to gain consensus regarding the clinical data necessary to obtain clearance for use of the product in the U.S.
● Identify and Demonstrate Progress Towards a Second Clinical Indication for DuraGraft. The Company believes that DuraGraft, or a different formulation of the product, may have application in other clinical areas beyond coronary bypass surgery and cardiovascular disease. The Company has CE mark approval for vascular conduits used during the harvesting and grafting interval of vascular surgery as a treatment to maintain structural and functional integrity of vascular conduits. The Company will work aggressively to identify, capitalize, and triage these additional potential clinical platform opportunities for a DuraGraft-like product and make progress towards commercialization of a cyto-protective product in this secondary application.
● Explore Strategic Partners in the Cardiac and Vascular Arena and New Potential uses in Life Science and DX. The Company will identify and explore strategic partnerships where DuraGraft has a strategic fit with Companies in the cardiac bypass, vascular bypass, and organ preservation space where it adds strategic fit to marketing and strengthens their portfolio. Examples are companies who have a significate presence in the Endoscopic Vein Harvesting market and synthetic graphing products for leg and above the shoulder. The Company will also explore the use of DuraGraft platform or its derivatives for use in such areas as cancer cell preservation, life science research and veterinarian markets.
● Begin to Commercialize our Krillase Platform. The Company intends to pursue the commercialization of the Krillase platform through the development of (i) manufacturing and distribution in Europe and South America of a Krillase would healing product, and (ii) additional Krillase based applications.
COMPARISON OF THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 TO THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
Results of Operations
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had revenues of $197,136 compared to $0 for the same period in 2019. The increase in revenue is due to the acquisition of Somahlution, Inc. and the assets of Somahlution, LLC and Somaceutica, LLC (hereinafter, collectively referred to as “Somahlution”).
Cost of Revenues
The cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $58,292 compared to $0 for the same period in 2019. Cost of revenues for 2020 was 29.6% of revenue. The primary cause of the increase as a percentage of revenue was due to the acquisition of Somahlution.
General and Administrative Expenses
The general and administrative expenses were $5,938,447 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1,058,039 for the same period in 2019. The increase in 2020 in general and administrative expenses was approximately 461% primarily due to the acquisition of Somahlution. The increase was due to the increase in the following expenses from 2019 to 2020: professional fees (from $281,856 to $1,543,817), salary expense (from $0 to $1,153,978), stock-based compensation (from $698,587 to $1,833,292), depreciation and amortization (from $0 to $591,458) and other general and administrative expenses (from $77,596 to $815,903).
Net Income (Loss) From Operations
The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $5,845,053 compared to net loss of $1,058,039 for the same period in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
At December 31, 2020, we had cash of $2,902,762. We have historically met our cash needs through proceeds from financing. Our cash requirements are generally for general and administrative activities. We believe that our cash balance is not sufficient to finance our cash requirements for expected operational activities, capital improvements, and partial repayment of debt through the next 12 months.
Our operating activities used cash of $3,223,836 for the year ended December 31, 2020, and we had $112,014 of cash used by operations during the same period in 2019.
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was $148,656 compared to $13,000 during the same period in 2019.
Cash provided by our financing activities was $6,275,164 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cash generated of $125,000 during the comparable period in 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, current assets exceeded current liabilities by $2,384,682. Current assets increased from $90 at December 31, 2019 to $3,106,077 at December 31, 2020, whereas current liabilities increased from $270,218 at December 31, 2019 to $721,395 at December 31, 2020.
Going Concern
The Company has a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $5,845,053 and a working capital surplus as of December 31, 2020 of $2,384,682 and has cash used in operations of $3,223,836 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Without further funding, these conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP, which contemplate continuation of the Company as a going concern and the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The ability of the Company to continue its operations is dependent on the execution of management’s plans, which include the raising of capital through the debt and/or equity markets, until such time that funds provided by operations are sufficient to fund working capital requirements. If the Company were not to continue as a going concern, it would likely not be able to realize its assets at values comparable to the carrying value or the fair value estimates reflected in the balances set out in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
There can be no assurances that the Company will be successful in generating additional cash from the equity/debt markets or other sources to be used for operations. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability of assets and classification of assets and liabilities that might be necessary. Based on the Company’s current resources, the Company will not be able to continue to operate without additional immediate funding. Should the Company not be successful in obtaining the necessary financing to fund its operations, the Company would need to curtail certain or all operational activities and/or contemplate the sale of its assets, if necessary.
The Company has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and some of its earlier plans to further diversify its operations and expand its operating subsidiaries have been paused due to the economic uncertainty.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, the Company currently has no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires management to make use of certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported periods. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that management believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates are related to allowance for doubtful accounts, recoverability of long-term assets including intangible assets and goodwill, amortization expense, valuation of warrants, inventory valuation, stock-based compensation, and deferred tax valuations.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements
The Company measures its financial assets and liabilities in accordance with FASB ASC 820 (the “Fair Value Topic”). For certain of our financial instruments, including cash, accounts payable, and accrued expenses, the carrying amounts approximate fair value due to their short maturities.
We have adopted accounting guidance for financial and non-financial assets and liabilities. The adoption did not have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position or liquidity. This standard defines fair value, provides guidance for measuring fair value and requires certain disclosures. This standard does not require any new fair value measurements, but rather applies to all other accounting pronouncements that require or permit fair value measurements. This guidance does not apply to measurements related to share-based payments. This guidance discusses valuation techniques, such as the market approach (comparable market prices), the income approach (present value of future income or cash flow), and the cost approach (cost to replace the service capacity of an asset or replacement cost). The guidance utilizes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value into three broad levels. The following is a brief description of those three levels:
Level 1: Observable inputs such as quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Inputs other than quoted prices that are observable, either directly or indirectly. These include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets and quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore developed using estimates and assumptions developed by us, which reflect those that a market participant would use.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue for products sold and shipped to our distributors. As our products have an expiration date, if a product expires, we provide a replacement for the product at no charge.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based instruments issued to employees in accordance with ASC Topic 718. ASC Topic 718 requires companies to recognize in the statement of operations the grant-date fair value of stock options and other equity-based compensation issued to employees. The Company accounts for non-employee share-based awards in accordance with ASC Topic 505-50. The value of the portion of an award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense over the requisite service periods using the straight-line attribution method. The Company estimates the fair value of each stock option at the grant date by using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Company estimates the fair value of each stock option at the grant date by using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
We have decided to take advantage of the exemptions provided to emerging growth companies under the JOBS Act and as a result our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. We may take advantage of exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies, including not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, delay compliance with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until they are made applicable to private companies.
Company management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective accounting pronouncements, if adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
We are susceptible to general economic conditions, natural catastrophic events and public health crises, and a potential downturn in advertising and marketing spending by advertisers could adversely affect our operating results in the near future.
Our business is subject to the impact of natural catastrophic events, such as earthquakes, or floods, public health crisis, such as disease outbreaks, epidemics, or pandemics, and all these could result in a decrease or sharp downturn of economies, including our markets and business locations in the current and future periods. The outbreak of the coronavirus (COVID-19) resulted in increased travel restrictions, and shutdown of businesses, which may cause slower recovery of the economy. We may experience impact from quarantines, market downturns and changes in customer behavior related to pandemic fears and impact on our workforce if the virus continues to spread. In addition, one or more of our customers, partners, service providers or suppliers may experience financial distress, delayed or defaults on payment, file for bankruptcy protection, sharp diminishing of business, or suffer disruptions in their business due to the outbreak. The extent to which the coronavirus impacts our results will depend on future developments and reactions throughout the world, which are highly uncertain and will include emerging information concerning the severity of the coronavirus and the actions taken by governments and private businesses to attempt to contain the coronavirus. It is likely to result in a potential material adverse impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition. Wider-spread COVID-19 globally could prolong the deterioration in economic conditions and could cause decreases in or delays in advertising spending and reduce and/or negatively impact our short-term ability to grow our revenues. Any decreased collectability of accounts receivable, bankruptcy of small and medium businesses, or early termination of agreements due to deterioration in economic conditions could negatively impact our results of operations.