Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from November 26, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to consummate the initial public offering, described below. Following the initial public offering, we do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and marketable securities held after the initial public offering. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $6,068 which consists of operating and formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $2,000. Until the consummation of the initial public offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from our sale of the Founder Shares, and unsecured loans of $84,285 from our sponsor.
On February 18, 2021, the company consummated the initial public offering of 9,200,000 units, including 1,200,000 units sold pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional units to cover over-allotments, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $92,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, the company consummated the sale of 5,022,222 private placement warrants to the sponsor and Maxim (3,642,222 private placement warrants to the sponsor and 1,380,000 to Maxim) at a price of $0.90 per private placement warrant, generating total gross proceeds of $4,520,000.
Transaction costs amounted to $4,632,181 consisting of $1,840,000 of underwriting commissions, $2,300,000 of deferred underwriting commissions, the fair value of the representative shares of $920 and $491,261 of other cash offering costs.
Following the closing of the initial public offering and the sale of over-allotment units, an aggregate of $92,000,000 ($10.00 per unit) from the net proceeds and the sale of the private placement warrants was held in the trust account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less taxes payable) to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay franchise and income taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any other critical accounting policies.