Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In this MD&A, there are statements concerning the future operating and future financial performance of Madison Square Garden Sports Corp. and its direct and indirect subsidiaries (collectively, “we,” “us,” “our,” “MSG Sports,” or the “Company”) including the impact of COVID-19 on our future operations. See “Part I - Item 1. Business” for further discussion of the MSGE Distribution (defined below). Words such as “expects,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” “potential,” “continue,” “intends,” “plans,” and similar words and terms used in the discussion of future operating and future financial performance identify forward-looking statements. Investors are cautioned that such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, results or events and involve risks and uncertainties and that actual results or developments may differ materially from the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors. Factors that may cause such differences to occur include, but are not limited to:
•the duration and severity of the coronavirus pandemic and our ability to effectively manage the impacts, including the availability of the Madison Square Garden Arena (“The Garden”) with no or limited fans, league decisions regarding play, the cancellation of games and the impact of restrictions imposed by New York State, New York City, or otherwise;
•the level of our revenues, which depends in part on the popularity and competitiveness of our sports teams;
•costs associated with player injuries, waivers or contract terminations of players and other team personnel;
•changes in professional sports teams’ compensation, including the impact of signing free agents and trades, subject to league salary caps and the impact of luxury tax;
•general economic conditions, especially in the New York City metropolitan area;
•the demand for sponsorship arrangements and for advertising;
•competition, for example, from other teams, and other sports and entertainment options;
•changes in laws, National Basketball Association (“NBA“) or National Hockey League (“NHL“) rules, regulations, guidelines, bulletins, directives, policies and agreements, including the leagues’ respective collective bargaining agreements (each a “CBA”) with their players’ associations, salary caps, escrow requirements, revenue sharing, NBA luxury tax thresholds and media rights, or other regulations under which we operate;
•any NBA, NHL or other work stoppage in addition to those related to COVID-19 impacts;
•any economic, political or other actions, such as boycotts, protests, work stoppages or campaigns by labor organizations;
•seasonal fluctuations and other variation in our operating results and cash flow from period to period;
•the level of our expenses, including our corporate expenses;
•business, reputational and litigation risk if there is a security incident resulting in loss, disclosure or misappropriation of stored personal information or other breaches of our information security;
•activities or other developments that discourage or may discourage congregation at prominent places of public assembly, including The Garden where the home games of the New York Knickerbockers (the “Knicks”) and the New York Rangers (the “Rangers”) are played;
•a default by our subsidiaries under their respective credit facilities;
•the evolution of the esports industry and its potential impact on our esports businesses;
•the acquisition or disposition of assets or businesses and/or the impact of, and our ability to successfully pursue, acquisitions or other strategic transactions;
•our ability to successfully integrate acquisitions or new businesses into our operations;
•the operating and financial performance of our strategic acquisitions and investments, including those we may not control;
•the impact of governmental regulations or laws, including changes in how those regulations and laws are interpreted and the continued benefit of certain tax exemptions (including for The Garden) and the ability for us and Madison Square Garden Entertainment Corp. (“MSG Entertainment”) to maintain necessary permits or licenses;
•the impact of any government plans to redesign New York City’s Pennsylvania Station;
•business, economic, reputational and other risks associated with, and the outcome of, litigation and other proceedings;
•financial community and rating agency perceptions of our business, operations, financial condition and the industry in which we operate;
•our ownership of professional sports franchises in the NBA and NHL and certain related transfer restrictions on our common stock;
•the tax free treatment of the distribution of the outstanding common stock of the Company to the former shareholders of MSG Networks Inc. (“MSG Networks”) in fiscal year 2016 and the MSGE Distribution (as defined below);
•the performance by MSG Entertainment of its obligations under various agreements with the Company related to the MSGE Distribution and ongoing commercial arrangements; and
•the factors described under “Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We disclaim any obligation to update or revise the forward-looking statements contained herein, except as otherwise required by applicable federal securities laws.
All dollar amounts included in the following MD&A are presented in thousands, except as otherwise noted.
MSGE Distribution
On April 17, 2020 (the “MSGE Distribution Date”), the Company distributed all of the outstanding common stock of MSG Entertainment to its stockholders (the “MSGE Distribution”). MSG Entertainment owns, directly or indirectly, the entertainment business previously owned and operated by the Company through its MSG Entertainment business segment and the sports booking business previously owned and operated by the Company through its MSG Sports business segment. In the MSGE Distribution, (a) each holder of the Company’s Class A common stock, received one share of MSG Entertainment Class A common stock, par value $0.01 per share, for every share of the Company’s Class A common stock held of record as of the close of business, New York City time, on April 13, 2020 (the “Record Date”), and (b) each holder of the Company’s Class B common stock, received one share of MSG Entertainment Class B common stock, par value $0.01 per share, for every share of the Registrant’s Class B common stock held of record as of the close of business, New York City time, on the Record Date. Subsequent to the MSGE Distribution, the Company no longer consolidates the financial results of MSG Entertainment for purposes of its own financial reporting and the historical financial results of MSG Entertainment have been reflected in the Company’s consolidated financial statements as discontinued operations for all periods presented through the MSGE Distribution Date.
After giving effect to the MSGE Distribution, the Company operates and reports financial information in one segment.
Introduction
MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, the audited consolidated financial statements and footnotes thereto included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K to help provide an understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations.
Our MD&A is organized as follows:
Business Overview. This section provides a general description of our business, as well as other matters that we believe are important in understanding our results of operations and financial condition and in anticipating future trends.
Results of Operations. This section provides an analysis of our results of operations for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. The Company has applied the Securities and Exchange Commission’s recently adopted FAST Act Modernization and Simplification of Regulation S-K, which limits the discussion to the two most recent fiscal years. For the comparison of our results of operations for the years ended June 30, 2020 and 2019, see “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources. This section provides a discussion of our financial condition, as well as an analysis of our cash flows for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. The discussion of our financial condition and liquidity includes summaries of (i) our primary sources of liquidity and (ii) our contractual obligations and off balance sheet arrangements that existed at June 30, 2021.
Seasonality of Our Business. This section discusses the seasonal performance of our Company.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements and Critical Accounting Policies. This section includes a discussion of accounting policies considered to be important to our financial condition and results of operations and which require significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in their application. In addition, all of our significant accounting policies, including our critical accounting policies, are discussed in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Overview
The Company owns and operates a portfolio of assets featuring some of the most recognized teams in all of sports, including the Knicks of the NBA and the Rangers of the NHL. Both the Knicks and the Rangers play their home games at The Garden. The Company’s other professional franchises include two development league teams - the Hartford Wolf Pack of the American Hockey League (“AHL”) and the Westchester Knicks of the NBA G League (“NBAGL”). Our professional sports franchises are collectively referred to herein as “our sports teams.” In addition, the Company owns Knicks Gaming, an esports franchise that competes in the NBA 2K League, as well as a controlling interest in Counter Logic Gaming (“CLG”), a North American esports organization. The Company also operates two professional sports team performance centers - the Madison Square Garden Training Center in Greenburgh, NY and the CLG Performance Center in Los Angeles, CA. CLG and Knicks Gaming are collectively referred to herein as “our esports teams,” and together with the sports teams, the “teams.”
Revenue Sources
We earn revenue from several primary sources: ticket sales and a portion of suite rental fees at The Garden, our share of distributions from NHL and NBA league-wide national and international television contracts and other league-wide revenue sources, venue signage and other sponsorships, food and beverage sales at The Garden and merchandising. We also earn substantial fees from MSG Networks for the local media rights to telecast the games of our sports teams. The amount of revenue we earn is influenced by many factors, including the impacts of COVID-19, the popularity and on-court or on-ice performance of our sports teams and general economic conditions. In particular, when our sports teams have strong on-court and on-ice performance, we benefit from increased demand for tickets, potentially greater food and merchandise sales from increased attendance and increased sponsorship opportunities. When our sports teams qualify for the playoffs, we also benefit from the attendance and in-game spending at the playoff games. The year-to-year impact of team performance is somewhat moderated by the fact that a significant portion of our revenue derives from media rights fees, suite rental fees and sponsorship and signage revenue, all of which are generally contracted on a multi-year basis. Nevertheless, the long-term performance of our business is tied to the success and popularity of our sports teams. In addition, due to the NBA and NHL playing seasons, revenues from our business are typically concentrated in the second and third quarters of each fiscal year. The concentration of our revenues and expenses, however, was different in fiscal year 2021 due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Ticket Sales and Facility and Ticketing Fees
Ticket sales have historically constituted our largest single source of revenue. Tickets to our sports teams’ home games are sold through season tickets (full and partial plans), which are typically held by long-term season subscribers, through group sales, and through single-game tickets, which are purchased by fans either individually or in multi-game packages. We generally review and set the price of our tickets before the start of each team’s season. However, we dynamically price our individual tickets based on opponent, seat location, day of the week and other factors. We do not earn revenue from ticket sales for games played by our teams at their opponents’ arenas.
We also earn revenues in the form of certain fees added to ticket prices, which currently include a facility fee the Company charges on tickets it sells to our sports teams’ games, except for season tickets.
Media Rights
We earn revenue from the licensing of media rights for our sports teams’ home and away games and also through the receipt of our share of fees paid for league-wide media rights, which are awarded under contracts negotiated and administered by each league.
The Company and MSG Networks are parties to media rights agreements covering the local telecast rights for the Knicks and the Rangers. The financial success of the Company is significantly dependent on the rights fees we receive from MSG Networks in connection with the telecast of our Knicks and Rangers games.
National and international telecast arrangements differ by league. Fees paid by telecasters under these arrangements are pooled by each league and then generally shared equally among all teams.
Suites and Clubs
We earn revenue through the sale of suite and premium club licenses at The Garden, which are generally sold by MSG Entertainment to corporate customers pursuant to multi-year licenses. Under standard licenses, the licensees pay an annual license fee, which varies depending on the location and type of the suite or club. The license fee includes, for each seat in the suite or club, tickets for our home games and other events at The Garden that are presented by MSG Entertainment for which tickets are sold to the general public, subject to certain exceptions. In addition, suite holders separately pay for food and beverage service in their suites at The Garden. Food and non-alcoholic beverage service is included in the annual license fee paid by club members.
Because suite and club licenses cover both our games and events that MSG Entertainment presents at The Garden, suite and club rental revenue is shared between us and MSG Entertainment under the arena license agreements (the “Arena License Agreements”) we entered into in connection with the MSGE Distribution. Pursuant to the Arena Licenses Agreements, the Knicks and the Rangers are entitled to 35% and 32.5%, respectively, of the revenues received by MSG Entertainment in connection with suite and club licenses.
Venue Signage and Sponsorships
We earn revenues through the sale of sponsorships and signage specific to the teams. Sales of team specific signage generally involve the sale of advertising space within The Garden during our sports teams’ home games and include the sale of signage on the ice and on the boards of the hockey rink during Rangers games, courtside during Knicks games, and/or on the various scoreboards and display panels at The Garden. We offer both television camera-visible and non-camera-visible signage space. We also earn a portion of revenues through MSG Entertainment’s sale of venue indoor signage space and sponsorship rights at The Garden that are not specific to our teams pursuant to the Arena License Agreements.
Sponsorship rights generally require the use of the name, logos and other trademarks of a sponsor in the advertising and in promotions for The Garden in general or our teams specifically during our sports events. Sponsorship arrangements may be exclusive within a particular sponsorship category or non-exclusive and generally permit a sponsor to use the name, logos and other trademarks of our teams and, in the case of sponsorship arrangements shared with MSG Entertainment, MSG Entertainment’s venues and brands in connection with their own advertising and in promotions in The Garden or in the community.
Food, Beverage and Merchandise Sales
We earn revenues from the sale of food and beverages during our sports teams’ games at The Garden. In addition to concession-style sales of food and beverages, which represent the majority of food and beverage revenues, The Garden also provides higher-end dining at premium clubs as well as catering for suites. Pursuant to the Arena License Agreements, the Knicks and the Rangers receive 50% of net profits from the sales of food and beverages during their games at The Garden.
We also earn revenues from the sale of our sports teams’ merchandise both through the in-venue (and in some cases, online) sale of items bearing the logos or other marks of our teams and through our share of sports league distributions of royalties and other revenues from the sports leagues’ licensing of team and sports league trademarks, which are generally shared equally among the teams in the sports leagues. Pursuant to the Arena License Agreements, the Knicks and the Rangers pay MSG Entertainment a commission equal to 30% of revenues from the sales of their merchandise at The Garden.
Other
Amounts collected for ticket sales, suite licenses and clubs, sponsorships and venue signage in advance of an event are recorded as deferred revenue and are recognized as revenues when earned.
Expenses
The most significant expenses are player and other team personnel salaries and charges for transactions relating to players for career-ending and season-ending injuries, trades, and waivers and contract termination costs of players and other team personnel, including team executives. We also incur costs for travel, player insurance, league operating assessments (including a 6% NBA assessment on regular season ticket sales), NHL and NBA revenue sharing and, when applicable, NBA luxury tax.
In addition, in connection with the MSGE Distribution we entered into long term leases with MSG Entertainment that end June 30, 2055 and allow the Knicks and the Rangers to continue to play their home games at The Garden (the “Arena License Agreements”). The Arena License Agreements provide for fixed payments to be made from inception through June 30, 2055 in 12 equal installments during each year of the contractual term. Absent COVID-19, the stated license fee for the first full contract year ending June 30, 2021 would have been approximately $22,500 for the Knicks and approximately $16,700 for the Rangers, and then for each subsequent year, the license fees are 103% of the license fees for the immediately preceding contract year.
The Garden was not available for use between April 17, 2020 and the start of the NBA and NHL 2020-21 seasons in December 2020 and January 2021, respectively, due to the government-mandated suspension of events in response to COVID-19, and as a result, the Company was not required to pay license fees to MSG Entertainment under the Arena License Agreements.
On December 16, 2020 and January 14, 2021, respectively, the Knicks and the Rangers resumed playing their homes games at The Garden as part of their 2020-21 seasons. However, fans were initially prohibited from attending games due to government-mandated assembly restrictions. Effective February 23, 2021, New York venues with at least a 10,000-person capacity were permitted to operate at 10% capacity, and the Knicks and the Rangers began playing games at The Garden with a limited number of fans in attendance on February 23 and 26, respectively. When games were played at The Garden by the Knicks and the Rangers either without fans in attendance or with limited fans in attendance due to government mandated capacity constraints, the applicable license fees paid to MSG Entertainment under the Arena License Agreements were substantially reduced.
Effective May 19, 2021, event venues such as The Garden were permitted to host guests at full capacity, subject to certain restrictions, including, for example, restrictions for unvaccinated guests. As a result, the Knicks played three home playoff games with ticket sales of approximately 15,000-16,500 per game during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
As a result of New York City regulations effective August 17, 2021, subject to certain exceptions, all guests 12 years of age or older and employees (other than players who are not residents of New York City) at indoor entertainment venues such as The Garden must show proof that they have received at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine. Guests under the age of 12 must wear masks, provide proof of a negative COVID test and are permitted to enter only when accompanied by a vaccinated parent or guardian.
Player Salaries, Escrow System/Revenue Sharing and NBA Luxury Tax
The amount we pay an individual player is typically determined by negotiation between the player (typically represented by an agent) and us, and is generally influenced by the player’s past performance, the amounts paid to players with comparable past performance by other sports teams and restrictions in the CBAs, including the salary floors and caps and NBA luxury tax. The leagues’ CBAs typically contain restrictions on when players may move between league clubs following expiration of their contracts and what rights their current and former clubs have.
NBA CBA. The NBA CBA expires after the 2023-24 season (although each of the NBA and the National Basketball Players Association (“NBPA”) has the right to terminate the CBA effective following the 2022-23 season). The NBA CBA contains a salary floor (i.e., a floor on each team’s aggregate player salaries with a requirement that the team pay any deficiency to the players on its roster) and a “soft” salary cap (i.e., a cap on each team’s aggregate player salaries but with certain exceptions that enable teams to pay players more, sometimes substantially more, than the cap).
NBA Luxury Tax. Amounts in this paragraph are in thousands, except for luxury tax rates. The NBA CBA generally provides for a luxury tax that is applicable to all teams with aggregate player salaries exceeding a threshold that is set prior to each season based upon projected league-wide revenues (as defined under the NBA CBA). The luxury tax rates for teams with aggregate player salaries above such threshold start at $1.50 for each $1.00 of team salary above the threshold up to $5,000 and scale up to $3.25 for each $1.00 of team salary that is from $15,000 to $20,000 over the threshold, and an additional tax rate increment of $0.50 applies for each additional $5,000 (or part thereof) of team salary in excess of $20,000 over the threshold. In addition, for teams that are taxpayers in at least three of four previous seasons, the above tax rates are increased by $1.00 for each increment. Fifty percent of the aggregate luxury tax payments is a funding source for the revenue sharing plan (described below) and the remaining 50% of such payments is distributed in equal shares to non-taxpaying teams. For the 2020-21 and 2019-20 seasons, the Knicks were not a luxury tax payer and we recorded approximately $3,442, and $230, respectively, of luxury tax proceeds from tax-paying teams. Tax obligations for years beyond the 2020-21 season will be subject to contractual player payroll obligations and corresponding NBA luxury tax thresholds. The Company recognizes the estimated amount associated with luxury tax expense or the amount it expects to receive as a non-tax paying team, if applicable, on a straight-line basis over the NBA regular season as a component of direct operating expenses.
NBA Escrow System/Revenue Sharing. The NBA CBA also provides that players collectively receive a designated percentage of league-wide revenues (net of certain direct expenses) as compensation (approximately 49% to 51%), and the teams retain the remainder. The percentage of league-wide revenues paid as compensation and retained by the teams does not apply evenly across all teams and, accordingly, the Company may pay its players a higher or lower percentage of the Knicks’ revenues than other NBA teams. Throughout each season, NBA teams withhold 10% of each player’s salary. If the league’s aggregate player compensation exceeds the designated percentage of league-wide revenues, some or all of such escrowed amounts are distributed equally to all NBA teams. In the event that the league’s aggregate player compensation is below the designated percentage of league-wide revenues, the teams with the shortfall will remit the shortfall in equal shares to the NBPA for distribution to the players.
For the 2020-21 season and the remainder of the CBA, the escrow system above was eliminated and a new “Ten-and-Spread” system was put in place. Under the Ten-and-Spread system, based upon league-wide revenues, aggregate player compensation will be reduced by up to 10% of each player’s salary. If, for a particular season, compensation reductions in excess of 10% are needed, the excess will be divided by three and recouped via reductions to players’ compensation over the same season, and the subsequent two seasons. The reduction of players’ salary for any one season is capped at 20% and carried over to the subsequent season as additional compensation reductions. Each team is entitled to receive an equal one-thirtieth share of the compensation reductions up to 10% and the excess above 10% is allocated in proportion to each team’s player payroll.
The NBA also has a revenue sharing plan that generally requires the distribution of a pool of funds to teams with below-average net revenues (as defined in the plan), subject to reduction or elimination based on individual team market size and profitability. The plan is funded by a combination of disproportionate contributions from teams with above-average net revenues, subject to certain profit-based limits (each as defined in the plan); 50% of aggregate league-wide luxury tax proceeds (see above); and collective league sources, if necessary. Additional amounts may also be distributed on a discretionary basis, funded by assessments on playoff ticket revenues and through collective league sources.
We record our revenue sharing expense net of the amount we expect to receive from the escrow. Our net provision for these items for the year ended June 30, 2021 was approximately $3,575. The actual amounts for the 2020-21 season may vary significantly from the recorded provision based on actual operating results for the league and all NBA teams for the season and other factors.
NHL CBA. The current NHL CBA expires after the 2025-26 season (with the possibility of a one year extension in certain circumstances). The NHL CBA provides for a salary floor (i.e., a floor on each team’s aggregate player salaries) and a “hard” salary cap (i.e., teams may not exceed a stated maximum, which is adjusted each season based upon league-wide revenues).
NHL Escrow System/Revenue Sharing. The NHL CBA provides that each season the players receive as player compensation 50% of that season’s league-wide revenues. Because the aggregate amount to be paid to the players is based upon league-wide revenues and not on a team-by-team basis, the Company may pay its players a higher or lower percentage of the Rangers’ revenues than other NHL teams pay of their own revenues. In order to implement the escrow system, NHL teams withhold a portion of each player’s salary and contribute the withheld amounts to an escrow account. If the league’s aggregate player compensation for a season exceeds the designated percentage (50%) of that season’s league-wide revenues, the excess is retained by the league. Any such excess funds are distributed to all teams in equal shares. In addition, the NHL CBA limits the amount of deductions to be withheld from player salaries each year. If annual escrow deductions from player salaries are insufficient to limit league-wide player salaries to 50% of that season’s league-wide revenues, any shortfall will be carried forward to future seasons and remain due from the players to the league.
The NHL CBA also provides for a revenue sharing plan. The plan generally requires the distribution of a pool of funds approximating 6.055% of league-wide revenues to certain qualifying lower-revenue teams and is funded as follows: (a) 50% from contributions by the top ten revenue earning teams (based on preseason and regular season revenues, net of arena costs) in accordance with a formula; (b) then from payments by teams participating in the playoffs, with each team contributing 35% of its gate receipts for each home playoff game (although this provision was waived for the 2020-21 season); and (c) the remainder from centrally-generated NHL sources. We record our revenue sharing expense net of the amount we expect to receive from escrow recoveries. Our net provisions for these items for the year ended June 30, 2021 was a credit of approximately $35,396. The actual amounts for the 2020-21 season may vary significantly from the recorded provision based on actual operating results for the league and all NHL teams for the season and other factors.
Other Team Operating Expenses
Our teams also pay expenses associated with day-to-day operations, including for travel, equipment maintenance and player insurance. Direct variable day-of-event costs incurred at The Garden, such as the costs of front-of-house and back-of-house staff, including electricians, laborers, box office staff, ushers, security, and event production are charged to the Company.
In addition, our team operating expenses include operating costs of the Company’s training center in Greenburgh, NY. The operation of the Hartford Wolf Pack is reported as a net Rangers player development expense.
As members of the NBA and NHL, the Knicks and the Rangers, respectively, are also subject to league assessments. The governing bodies of each league determine the amount of each season’s league assessments that are required from each member team. The NBA imposed on each team a 6% assessment on regular season ticket revenue.
We also incur costs associated with VIP amenities provided to certain ticket holders.
Other Expenses
Other expenses primarily include Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses that consist of administrative costs, including compensation, professional fees, as well as sales and marketing costs, including non-event related advertising expenses.
SG&A expenses for periods prior to the MSGE Distribution include certain corporate overhead expenses that do not meet the criteria for inclusion in discontinued operations.
Factors Affecting Operating Results
General
Our operating results are largely dependent on the continued popularity and/or on-court or on-ice competitiveness of our Knicks and Rangers teams, which have a direct effect on ticket sales for the teams’ home games and are each team’s largest single source of revenue. As with other sports teams, the competitive positions of our sports teams depend primarily on our ability to develop, obtain and retain talented players, for which we compete with other professional sports teams. A significant factor in our ability to attract and retain talented players is player compensation. The Company’s operating results reflect the impact of high costs for player salaries (including NBA luxury tax, if any) and salaries of non-player team personnel. In addition, we have incurred significant charges for costs associated with transactions relating to players on our sports teams for season-ending and career-ending injuries and for trades, waivers and contract terminations of players and other team personnel, including team executives. Waiver and termination costs reflect our efforts to improve the competitiveness of our sports teams. These transactions can result in significant charges as the Company recognizes the estimated ultimate costs of these events in the period in which they occur, although amounts due to these individuals are generally paid over their remaining contract terms. For example, the expense for these items was $44,242, and $33,690 for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. These expenses add to the volatility of our operating results. We expect to continue to pursue opportunities to improve the overall quality of our sports teams and our efforts may result in continued significant expenses and charges. Such expenses and charges may result in future operating losses although it is not possible to predict their timing or amount. Our performance has been, and may in the future be, impacted by work stoppages. See “Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors - Organized Labor Matters May Have a Material Negative Effect on Our Business and Results of Operations.”
In addition to our future performance being dependent upon the continued popularity and/or on-court or on-ice competitiveness of our Knicks and Rangers teams, it is also dependent on general economic conditions, in particular those in the New York City metropolitan area, and the effect of these conditions on our customers. An economic downturn could adversely affect our business and results of operations as it may lead to lower demand for suite licenses and tickets to the games of our sports teams, which would also negatively affect merchandise and concession sales, as well as decrease levels of sponsorship and venue signage revenues.
MSGE Distribution
In connection with the MSGE Distribution, the Company and MSG Entertainment entered into a number of related party agreements under which both companies will continue sharing certain revenues and expenses. See Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussions of the Company’s related party transactions. The terms of certain related party agreements impact the comparability of the results of operations, primarily the following revenues and expenses.
Suite License Fee Revenue
Prior to the MSGE Distribution, suite license fee revenue was recognized based on the allocations between the Company’s MSG Sports and MSG Entertainment segments and was dependent on the total number of events held at The Garden. After the MSGE Distribution, the Company recognizes suite license fee revenue based on the Arena License Agreements and as games are played by the Knicks and the Rangers. In addition, pursuant to the Arena License Agreements, the Company’s aggregate share of suite license fee revenue is 67.5%, as compared to a higher percentage allocated to the Knicks and the Rangers prior to the MSGE Distribution.
Venue Sponsorship and Signage
Prior to the MSGE Distribution, revenues from the sale of venue interior and exterior signage and sponsorship rights at The Garden that were not specific to our teams or entertainment events were allocated between the Company’s MSG Sports and MSG Entertainment segments and recognized over a fiscal year. Subsequent to the MSGE Distribution, pursuant to the Arena License Agreements, the Company no longer recognizes revenue related to exterior signage at The Garden, but rather only from the sale of venue interior signage space and sponsorship rights, which is now recognized over the Knicks and the Rangers seasons. In addition, prior to the MSGE Distribution, costs associated with sponsorship and signage sales were allocated between the Company’s MSG Sports and MSG Entertainment segments. Subsequent to the MSGE Distribution, the Company
instead pays sales commission fees along with the fixed fee pursuant to the sponsorship sales and service and representation agreements.
Food, Beverage and Merchandise Sales
Prior to the MSGE Distribution, the Knicks and the Rangers reported revenues earned from food and beverage sales as gross revenue. The costs of food and beverage sales were reported in direct operating expenses. Pursuant to the Arena License Agreements, the Knicks and the Rangers receive 50% of net profits from the sales of food and beverage during their games at The Garden. As such, the Company no longer recognizes costs of sales during the periods after the MSGE Distribution, and reports revenues earned from food and beverage sales as net revenues. In addition, pursuant to the Arena License Agreements, the Knicks and the Rangers pay MSG Entertainment a 30% commission related to merchandise sales at The Garden.
Corporate Costs
Results from continuing operations for the periods prior to the MSGE Distribution include certain corporate overhead expenses that the Company did not incur in the period after the completion of the MSGE Distribution and does not expect to incur in future periods, but which do not meet the criteria for inclusion in discontinued operations. See “- Results of Operations - Comparison of the Year Ended June 30, 2021 versus the Year Ended June 30, 2020” and Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
COVID-19 disruptions have materially impacted the Company’s revenues and the Company recognized materially less revenues, or in some cases no revenues, across a number of areas. Those areas include: ticket sales; the Company’s share of suite licenses; sponsorships; signage and in-venue advertising at The Garden; and food, beverage and merchandise sales. In addition, the Knicks and the Rangers played fewer games during the 2020-21 regular seasons, with the NBA playing a 72-game regular season schedule and the NHL playing a 56-game regular season schedule. These compare to traditional 82-game regular season schedules for both the NBA and NHL. In addition, while games have resumed at The Garden, until May 2021, fan attendance was limited due to ongoing government-mandated assembly restrictions.
On March 11 and 12, 2020, the NBA and NHL, respectively, suspended their 2019-20 seasons due to COVID-19. At the time the seasons were suspended, the Knicks had 16 games remaining, including eight home games, and the Rangers had 12 games remaining, including five home games. On May 26, 2020, the NHL announced return-to-play plans for 24 teams which began August 1, 2020. The Rangers were among the teams that returned to play in a 24-team tournament. On June 4, 2020, the NBA announced plans to resume play on July 30, 2020 with 22 teams. The Knicks were not among the teams that returned to competition. As a result, during the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 the Company recognized certain revenues that otherwise would have been recognized during the third and fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020.
In connection with the MSGE Distribution, we entered into the Arena License Agreements with MSG Entertainment. The Garden was not available for use between April 17, 2020 and the start of the NBA and NHL 2020-21 seasons in December 2020 and January 2021, respectively, due to the government-mandated suspension of events in response to COVID-19, and as a result, the Company was not required to pay license fees to MSG Entertainment under the Arena License Agreements.
On December 16, 2020 and January 14, 2021, respectively, the Knicks and the Rangers resumed playing their homes games at The Garden as part of their 2020-21 seasons. However, fans were initially prohibited from attending games due to government-mandated assembly restrictions. Effective February 23, 2021, New York venues with at least a 10,000-person capacity were permitted to operate at 10% capacity, and the Knicks and the Rangers began playing games at The Garden with a limited number of fans in attendance on February 23 and 26, respectively. When games were played at The Garden by the Knicks and the Rangers either without fans in attendance or with limited fans in attendance due to government mandated capacity constraints, the applicable license fees paid to MSG Entertainment under the Arena License Agreements were substantially reduced.
Effective May 19, 2021, event venues such as The Garden were permitted to host guests at full capacity, subject to certain restrictions, including, for example, restrictions for unvaccinated guests. As a result, the Knicks played three home playoff games with ticket sales of approximately 15,000-16,500 per game during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
During the fiscal year 2021, as a result of COVID-19, the Company implemented cost-reduction measures that included workforce reductions and limits on discretionary spending. In addition, as a result of the disruptions caused by COVID-19, certain operating expenses were reduced including (i) payments to MSG Entertainment under the Arena License Agreements, (ii) NBA league assessments and day-of-game expenses for Knicks and Rangers games, and (iii) league revenue sharing, net of escrow and team personnel expense. These expense reductions did not fully offset revenue losses.
As a result of New York City regulations effective August 17, 2021, subject to certain exceptions, all guests 12 years of age or older and employees (other than players who are not residents of New York City) at indoor entertainment venues such as The
Garden must show proof that they have received at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine. Guests under the age of 12 must wear masks, provide proof of a negative COVID test and are permitted to enter only when accompanied by a vaccinated parent or guardian.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended June 30, 2021 versus the Year Ended June 30, 2020
The table below sets forth, for the periods presented, certain historical financial information.
NM - Percentage is not meaningful
(a) Operating results were materially impacted by the coronavirus pandemic. Please see “- Factors Affecting Operating Results - Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business” for more information.
For the period through the MSGE Distribution, the reported financial results of the Company reflect the results of the MSG Entertainment business segment and the sports booking business, previously owned and operated by the Company through its MSG Sports business segment, as discontinued operations. In addition, results from continuing operations for the period prior to the MSGE Distribution include certain corporate overhead expenses that the Company did not incur in the period after the completion of the MSGE Distribution and does not expect to incur in future periods, but which do not meet the criteria for inclusion in discontinued operations. The reported financial results of the Company for the period after the MSGE Distribution reflect the Company’s results on a standalone basis, including the Company’s actual corporate overhead.
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended June 30, 2021 decreased $187,598, or 31%, to $415,721 as compared to the prior year. The net decrease is attributable to the following:
The decrease in pre/regular season ticket-related revenues was a result of government-mandated assembly restrictions and the Knicks and the Rangers playing games at The Garden with no fans in attendance until February 23 and 26, 2021, respectively, and after that, playing games with attendance restricted to 10% capacity. The year ended June 30, 2020 was impacted by the suspension of the Knicks and the Rangers 2019-20 regular seasons in March 2020.
The decrease in suite license fee revenues was a result of government-mandated assembly restrictions at The Garden, as discussed above. For Knicks and Rangers games played with a limited number of fans in attendance, access to suites was primarily sold by way of individual tickets, thus minimal suite license fee revenue was recognized for the year ended June 30, 2021. In addition, the year ended June 30, 2021 includes the impact of the MSGE Distribution. See “- Factors Affecting Operating Results - MSGE Distribution - Suite License Fee Revenue” for more information.
The decrease in pre/regular season food and beverage sales was a result of government-mandated assembly restrictions at The Garden, as discussed above. In addition, the year ended June 30, 2021 includes the impact of the MSGE Distribution. See “- Factors Affecting Operating Results - MSGE Distribution - Food, Beverage and Merchandise Sales” for more information. The decrease in pre/regular season merchandise sales was a result of government-mandated assembly restrictions at The Garden, as discussed above.
The decrease in sponsorship and signage revenues was primarily due to the impact of the MSGE Distribution as well as lower recognition of existing sponsorship and signage inventory as a result of government-mandated assembly restrictions at The Garden, as discussed above, partially offset by sales of new sponsorship and signage inventory.
The increase in revenues from league distributions was primarily due to higher national media rights fees as a result of the lower recognition in the prior year period of national media rights fees related to the 2019-20 NBA and NHL seasons, which were recognized during the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 that otherwise would have been recognized during the third and fourth quarters of fiscal year 2020 and a $21,043 expansion fee from the NHL. The increase was partially offset by decreases in other league distributions.
The increase in local media rights fees from MSG Networks was primarily due to the impact of the suspended 2019-20 NBA and NHL seasons which reduced revenue recognized in the prior year period, contractual rate increases, and the recognition of local media rights fees associated with the Rangers’ participation in the Stanley Cup Qualifiers during the first quarter of fiscal year 2021. After suspending the 2019-20 seasons in March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the NHL and NBA subsequently resumed play and completed their seasons in September and October 2020, respectively. This increase was partially offset by the impact of the reduced NBA and NHL 2020-21 regular season schedules.
Direct operating expenses
Direct operating expenses generally include:
•compensation expense for our sports teams’ players and certain other team personnel;
•arena license fees recognized as operating lease costs associated with the Knicks and the Rangers playing home games at The Garden;
•cost of team personnel transactions for waivers/contract termination costs, trades, and season-ending player injuries (net of anticipated insurance recoveries) of players and other team personnel;
•NBA and NHL revenue sharing (net of escrow), league assessments and NBA luxury tax receipts; and
•the cost of merchandise and, prior to the MSGE Distribution, food and beverage sales.
Direct operating expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 decreased $78,080, or 22%, to $281,890 as compared to the prior year. The net decrease is attributable to the following:
Net provisions for league revenue sharing expense (net of escrow and excluding playoffs) and NBA luxury tax were as follows:
The decrease in net provisions for league revenue sharing expense (net of escrow and excluding playoffs) and NBA luxury tax primarily reflects lower provisions for league revenue sharing expense (net of escrow) of $40,953 primarily as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the year ended June 30, 2021 includes adjustments to revenue sharing expense (net of escrow) for the 2019-20 NBA and NHL seasons. Based on the completion of the 2019-20 NBA and NHL seasons during the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, the Company recognized a portion of revenue sharing expense (net of escrow) related to those seasons that otherwise would have been recognized during the third and fourth quarters of fiscal year 2020.
The actual amounts for the 2020-21 season may vary significantly from the recorded provisions based on actual operating results for each league and all teams within each league for the season and other factors.
The Knicks were not a luxury tax payer for the 2019-20 season and, therefore, received an equal share of the portion of luxury tax receipts that were distributed to non-tax paying teams. The Knicks’ roster as of June 30, 2021 did not result in the team being a luxury tax payer for the 2020-21 season and the company will receive an equal share of the portion of luxury tax receipts that are distributed to non-tax paying teams.
The decrease in other team operating expenses not discussed elsewhere in this table was primarily the result of government-mandated assembly restrictions at The Garden, as discussed above, and the shortened 2020-21 NBA and NHL regular seasons.
The decrease in pre/regular season expense associated with food and beverage sales was due to the impact of the MSGE Distribution. See “- Factors Affecting Operating Results - MSGE Distribution - Food, Beverage and Merchandise Sales” for more information. The decrease in pre/regular season expense associated with merchandise sales was a result of government-mandated assembly restrictions at The Garden, as discussed above.
The decrease in team personnel compensation was primarily due to lower player compensation and the net impact of the shortened 2020-21 NBA and NHL regular seasons, slightly offset by the recognition of player compensation expense during the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 that otherwise would have been recognized during the third and fourth quarters of fiscal year 2020 as a result of the NBA completing the 2019-20 season in October 2020.
Net provisions for certain team personnel transactions were as follows:
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily consist of administrative costs, including compensation, professional fees, costs under the Company’s transition services agreement with MSG Entertainment and sales and marketing costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 decreased $112,975, or 35%, to $206,700 as compared to the prior year primarily due to lower corporate overhead costs, which in the prior year included certain corporate expenses that the Company did not incur during the current year and does not expect to incur in future periods, but which did not meet the criteria for inclusion in discontinued operations. This decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses was partially offset by higher sports teams’ employee compensation and related benefits, including severance related to team executives, and fees related to the Company’s sponsorship sales and service representation agreements with MSG Entertainment.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization for the year ended June 30, 2021 decreased $11,966, or 68%, to $5,574 as compared to the prior year primarily due to depreciation in the prior year period that do not meet the criteria for inclusion in discontinued operations and, to a lesser extent, a certain asset being fully amortized.
Operating loss
Operating loss for the year ended June 30, 2021 decreased $15,423, or 16%, to $78,443 as compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to lower selling, general and administrative expenses, direct operating expenses and, to a lesser extent, lower depreciation and amortization, partially offset by lower revenues as discussed above.
Interest expense, net
Net interest expense increased $6,768 to $10,529 as compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to the Knicks and the Rangers revolving credit facilities, which were initially drawn on in March 2020, with subsequent additional drawings in November 2020.
Income taxes
Income tax benefit for the year ended June 30, 2021 of $73,421 differs from the income tax benefit derived from applying the statutory federal rate of 21% to pretax loss primarily due to a decrease in valuation allowance of $52,108 and state and local tax benefit of $7,331, partially offset by nondeductible officers’ compensation of $4,081. See Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details on the components of income tax and a reconciliation of the statutory federal rate to the effective tax rate.
Income tax expense for the year ended June 30, 2020 of $20,593 differs from the income tax benefit derived from applying the statutory federal rate of 21% to pretax loss primarily due to an increase in valuation allowance of $46,310, tax expense of $492 relating to noncontrolling interests, and tax expense of $762 relating to nondeductible expenses, partially offset by state and local tax benefit of $7,332.
Adjusted operating loss
The Company evaluates performance based on several factors, of which the key financial measure is operating income (loss) excluding (i) deferred rent expense under the Arena License Agreements with MSG Entertainment, (ii) depreciation, amortization and impairments of property and equipment, goodwill and other intangible assets, (iii) share-based compensation expense or benefit, (iv) restructuring charges or credits, (v) gains or losses on sales or dispositions of businesses, and (vi) the impact of purchase accounting adjustments related to business acquisitions, which is referred to as adjusted operating income (loss), a non-GAAP measure.
Management believes that the exclusion of share-based compensation expense or benefit allows investors to better track the performance of the Company’s business without regard to the settlement of an obligation that is not expected to be made in cash. In addition, management believes that given the length of the Arena License Agreements and resulting magnitude of the
difference in deferred rent expense and the cash rent payments, the exclusion of deferred rent expense provides investors with a clearer picture of the Company's operating performance.
The Company believes adjusted operating income (loss) is an appropriate measure for evaluating the operating performance of the Company. Adjusted operating income (loss) and similar measures with similar titles are common performance measures used by investors and analysts to analyze the Company’s performance. The Company uses revenues and adjusted operating income (loss) measures as the most important indicators of its business performance and evaluates management’s effectiveness with specific reference to these indicators.
Adjusted operating income (loss) should be viewed as a supplement to and not a substitute for operating income (loss), net income (loss), cash flows from operating activities, and other measures of performance and/or liquidity presented in accordance with GAAP. Since adjusted operating income (loss) is not a measure of performance calculated in accordance with GAAP, this measure may not be comparable to similar measures with similar titles used by other companies. The Company has presented the components that reconcile operating income (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, to adjusted operating income (loss).
The following is a reconciliation of operating loss to adjusted operating loss:
________________
(a)For the period through the MSGE Distribution, depreciation and amortization and share-based compensation includes expenses that the Company does not expect to incur in future periods, but which do not meet the criteria for inclusion in discontinued operations.
(b)Depreciation and amortization included purchase accounting adjustments of $1,059 and $1,070 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Adjusted operating loss for the year ended June 30, 2021 decreased $14,936, or 54%, to $12,530 as compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to lower direct operating expenses, lower selling, general and administrative expenses and lower depreciation and amortization partially offset by lower revenues.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our operations and operating results have been, and continue to be, materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and government and league actions taken in response. For more information about the impacts and risks to the Company as a result of COVID-19, see “- Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business” and “Item 1A. Risk Factors - Sports Business Risks - Our Operations and Operating Results Have Been, and May Continue to be, Materially Impacted by the COVID-19 Pandemic and Government and League Actions Taken in Response”. In addition, see also Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents and available borrowing capacity under our credit facilities as well as cash flow from our operations. There can be no assurance, however, that our expenses will not exceed our revenues, thereby presenting an ongoing use of liquidity. On November 6, 2020, the Company amended and extended the 2016 Knicks Credit Agreement and the 2017 Rangers Credit Agreement, and entered into the 2020 Knicks Holdings Credit Agreement (together with the 2020 Knicks Credit Agreement and the 2020 Rangers Credit Agreement, the “New Financing”), which provide for additional liquidity. In addition, the NHL advanced the Company $30,000, which the league made available to each team following the completion of the NHL’s approximately $1,000,000 private placement in January 2021 (the “2021 Rangers NHL Advance Agreement”).
Our principal uses of cash include the operation of our businesses, working capital-related items, the repayment of outstanding debt, and potential repurchases of shares of the Company’s Class A Common Stock.
As of June 30, 2021, we had approximately $64,900 in Cash and cash equivalents. In addition, as of June 30, 2021, the Company’s deferred revenue obligations were approximately $146,300, net of billed, but not yet collected deferred revenue. This balance is primarily comprised of obligations in connection with tickets and suites. In addition, the Company’s deferred revenue obligations included $30,000 from the NBA, which the league provided to each team following the completion of the NBA’s $900,000 private placement in December 2020. As a general matter, deferred revenue obligations relating to tickets and suites will be addressed through games played and, to the extent necessary, through credits, make-goods and/or refunds, as applicable.
We regularly monitor and assess our ability to meet our net funding and investing requirements. The decisions of the Company as to the use of its available liquidity will be based upon the ongoing review of the funding needs of the business, management’s view of a favorable allocation of cash resources, and the timing of cash flow generation. To the extent the Company desires to access alternative sources of funding through the capital and credit markets, restrictions imposed by the NBA and NHL and challenging U.S. and global economic and market conditions could adversely impact its ability to do so at that time.
We believe we have sufficient liquidity, including approximately $64,900 in Cash and cash equivalents as of June 30, 2021, along with $245,000 of additional available borrowing capacity under existing credit facilities, to fund our operations and satisfy any obligations, including with respect to the return or application of deferred revenue, over the next 12 months.
Financing Agreements and Stock Repurchases
2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility
On November 6, 2020, New York Knicks, LLC (“Knicks LLC”), a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, entered into the 2020 Knicks Credit Agreement with a syndicate of lenders providing for the 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility to fund working capital needs and for general corporate purposes. The 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility increased borrowing capacity from $200,000 to $275,000. Amounts borrowed may be distributed to the Company except during an event of default.
The 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility requires Knicks LLC to comply with a debt service ratio of 1.5:1.0 over a trailing four quarter period. As of June 30, 2021, Knicks LLC was in compliance with this financial covenant.
The 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility will mature and any unused commitments thereunder will expire on November 6, 2023. All borrowings under the 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility are subject to the satisfaction of certain customary conditions. Borrowings bear interest at a floating rate, which at the option of Knicks LLC may be either (i) a base rate plus a margin ranging from 0.50% to 0.75% per annum or (ii) LIBOR plus a margin ranging from 1.50% to 1.75% per annum. Knicks LLC is required to pay a commitment fee ranging from 0.25% to 0.30% per annum in respect of the average daily unused commitments under the 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility. The outstanding balance under the 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility was $220,000 as of June 30, 2021.
All obligations under the 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility are secured by a first lien security interest in certain of Knicks LLC’s assets, including, but not limited to, (i) the Knicks LLC’s membership rights in the NBA, (ii) revenues to be paid to the
Knicks LLC by the NBA pursuant to certain U.S. national broadcast agreements, and (iii) revenues to be paid to Knicks LLC pursuant to local media contracts.
Subject to customary notice and minimum amount conditions, Knicks LLC may voluntarily prepay outstanding loans under the 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility at any time, in whole or in part, without premium or penalty (except for customary breakage costs with respect to Eurocurrency loans). Knicks LLC is required to make mandatory prepayments in certain circumstances, including without limitation if the maximum available amount under the 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility is greater than 350% of qualified revenues.
In addition to the financial covenant described above, the 2020 Knicks Credit Agreement and related security agreements contain certain customary representations and warranties, affirmative covenants and events of default. The 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility contains certain restrictions on the ability of Knicks LLC to take certain actions as provided in (and subject to various exceptions and baskets set forth in) the 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility, including the following: (i) incurring additional indebtedness and contingent liabilities; (ii) creating liens on certain assets; (iii) making restricted payments during the continuance of an event of default under the 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility; (iv) engaging in sale and leaseback transactions; (v) merging or consolidating; and (vi) taking certain actions that would invalidate the secured lenders’ liens on any Knicks LLC’s collateral.
2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility
On November 6, 2020, Knicks Holdings, LLC (“Knicks Holdings”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, entered into the 2020 Knicks Holdings Credit Agreement with a syndicate of lenders providing for the 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility to fund working capital needs and for general corporate purposes. The 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility provides for $75,000 of borrowing capacity.
The 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility requires Knicks Holdings to comply with a debt service ratio of 1.1:1.0 over a trailing four quarter period. As of June 30, 2021, Knicks Holdings was in compliance with this financial covenant.
The 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility will mature and any unused commitments thereunder will expire on November 6, 2023. All borrowings under the 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility are subject to the satisfaction of certain customary conditions. Borrowings under the 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility bear interest at a floating rate, which at the option of Knicks Holdings may be either (i) a base rate plus a margin ranging from 1.00% to 1.25% per annum or (ii) LIBOR plus a margin ranging from 2.00% to 2.25% per annum. Knicks Holdings is required to pay a commitment fee ranging from 0.375% to 0.50% per annum in respect of the average daily unused commitments under the 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility. The 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility is currently undrawn as of June 30, 2021.
All obligations under the 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility are secured by debt service and distribution accounts maintained by Knicks Holdings, and includes a guarantee from MSG NYK Holdings, LLC, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company and the direct parent of Knicks Holdings.
Subject to customary notice and minimum amount conditions, Knicks Holdings may voluntarily prepay outstanding loans under the 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility at any time, in whole or in part, without premium or penalty (except for customary breakage costs with respect to Eurocurrency loans). Knicks Holdings is required to make mandatory prepayments in certain circumstances, including if the amount of commitments under the 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility increase above $350,000.
In addition to the financial covenant described above, the 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility and related security agreements contain certain customary representations and warranties, affirmative covenants and events of default. The 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility contains certain restrictions on the ability of Knicks Holdings to take certain actions as provided in (and subject to various exceptions and baskets set forth in) the 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility, including the following: (i) incurring additional indebtedness and contingent liabilities; (ii) creating liens on certain assets; (iii) making restricted payments during the continuance of an event of default under the 2020 Knicks Holdings Revolving Credit Facility; (iv) engaging in sale and leaseback transactions; (v) merging or consolidating; and (vi) taking certain actions that would invalidate the secured lenders’ liens on any Knicks Holdings’ collateral.
2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility
On November 6, 2020, New York Rangers, LLC (“Rangers LLC”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, entered into the 2020 Rangers Credit Agreement with a syndicate of lenders providing for the 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility to fund working capital needs and for general corporate purposes. The 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility increased borrowing capacity from $150,000 to $250,000. Amounts borrowed may be distributed to the Company except during an event of default.
The 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility requires Rangers LLC to comply with a debt service ratio of 1.5:1.0 over a trailing four quarter period. As of June 30, 2021, Rangers LLC was in compliance with this financial covenant.
The 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility will mature and any unused commitments thereunder will expire on November 6, 2023. All borrowings under the 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility are subject to the satisfaction of certain customary conditions. Borrowings bear interest at a floating rate, which at the option of Rangers LLC may be either (i) a base rate plus a margin ranging from 0.75% to 1.25% per annum or (ii) LIBOR plus a margin ranging from 1.75% to 2.25% per annum. Rangers LLC is required to pay a commitment fee ranging from 0.375% to 0.625% per annum in respect of the average daily unused commitments under the 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility. The outstanding balance under the 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility was $135,000 as of June 30, 2021. During the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company made principal repayments of $25,000.
All obligations under the 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility are, subject to the 2021 Rangers NHL Advance Agreement, secured by a first lien security interest in certain of Rangers LLC’s assets, including, but not limited to, (i) Rangers LLC’s membership rights in the NHL, (ii) revenues to be paid to Rangers LLC by the NHL pursuant to certain U.S. and Canadian national broadcast agreements, and (iii) revenues to be paid to Rangers LLC pursuant to local media contracts.
Subject to customary notice and minimum amount conditions, Rangers LLC may voluntarily prepay outstanding loans under the 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility at any time, in whole or in part, without premium or penalty (except for customary breakage costs with respect to Eurocurrency loans). Rangers LLC is required to make mandatory prepayments in certain circumstances, including without limitation if qualified revenues are less than 17% of the maximum available amount under the 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility.
In addition to the financial covenant described above, the 2020 Rangers Credit Agreement and related security agreements contain certain customary representations and warranties, affirmative covenants and events of default. The 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility contains certain restrictions on the ability of Rangers LLC to take certain actions as provided in (and subject to various exceptions and baskets set forth in) the 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility, including the following: (i) incurring additional indebtedness and contingent liabilities; (ii) creating liens on certain assets; (iii) making restricted payments during the continuance of an event of default under the 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility; (iv) engaging in sale and leaseback transactions; (v) merging or consolidating; and (vi) taking certain actions that would invalidate the secured lenders’ liens on any of Rangers LLC’s assets securing the obligations under the 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility.
2021 Rangers NHL Advance Agreement
On March 19, 2021, Rangers LLC, Rangers Holdings, LLC and MSG NYR Holdings LLC entered into the 2021 Rangers NHL Advance Agreement with the NHL, pursuant to which the NHL advanced $30,000 to Rangers LLC. The advance is to be utilized solely and exclusively to pay for Rangers LLC operating expenses.
All obligations under the 2021 Rangers NHL Advance Agreement are senior to and shall have priority over all secured and other indebtedness of Rangers LLC, Rangers Holdings, LLC, and MSG NYR Holdings LLC. All borrowings under the 2021 Rangers NHL Advance Agreement were made on a non-revolving basis and bear interest at 3.00% per annum, ending on the date any such advances are fully repaid. Advances received under the 2021 Rangers NHL Advance Agreement are payable upon demand by the NHL. It is expected that the advanced amount will be set off against funds that would otherwise be paid, distributed or transferred by the NHL to Rangers LLC. The outstanding balance under the 2021 Rangers NHL Advance Agreement was $30,000 as of June 30, 2021.
See Note 13 and Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussions of the Company’s debt obligations and various financing agreements, and the Company’s stock repurchases, respectively.
Cash Flow Discussion
The following table summarizes the Company’s cash flow activities for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $35,326 as compared to net cash provided by operating activities in the prior year of $3,568. This was primarily due to the decrease in net loss adjusted for non-cash items partially offset by changes in certain assets and liabilities. Net cash provided by operating activities for the prior year was not adjusted to exclude net cash provided by discontinued operations.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 decreased by $514,397 to $466 as compared to the prior year primarily driven by investing activities in discontinued operations in the prior year. Investing activities included in discontinued operations in the prior year primarily consisted of purchase of short-term investments and capital expenditures, of which substantially all are related to the MSG Entertainment planned MSG Spheres in Las Vegas and London, partially offset by proceeds from the maturity of short-term investments, a loan repayment received from a subordinated note, and proceeds received from the sale of interest in a nonconsolidated affiliate.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $17,155 as compared to net cash used in financing activities in the prior year of $520,588. This change is primarily due to the distribution of cash to MSG Entertainment in the prior year and proceeds received in the current year from the 2021 Rangers NHL Advance Agreement, partially offset by higher initial borrowings in the prior year compared to the additional borrowings in the current year under, the now, amended and extended 2020 Knicks Credit Agreement and 2020 Rangers Credit Agreement.
Contractual Obligations and Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Future cash payments required under contracts entered into by the Company in the normal course of business as of June 30, 2021 are summarized in the following table:
_________________
(a)Contractual obligations not reflected on the balance sheet consist principally of the Company’s obligations under employment agreements that the Company has with certain of its professional sports teams’ personnel that are to be performed in future periods and that are generally guaranteed regardless of employee injury or termination.
(b)Includes contractually obligated minimum license fees under the Arena License Agreement, which fees are characterized as lease payments for operating leases having an initial noncancelable term in excess of one year under GAAP. These commitments are presented exclusive of the imputed interest used to reflect the payment’s present value. See Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information on the contractual obligations related to future lease payments, which are reflected on the consolidated balance sheet as lease liabilities as of June 30, 2021.
(c)Consists of amounts drawn under the 2020 Knicks Revolving Credit Facility and 2020 Rangers Revolving Credit Facility. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
(d)Contractual obligations reflected on the balance sheet consist principally of the Company’s obligations under employment agreements that the Company has with certain of its professional sports teams’ personnel that have been fully performed and that are being paid on a deferred basis.
(e)Pension obligations have been excluded from the table above as the timing of the future cash payments is uncertain. See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on the future funding requirements under our pension obligations.
Seasonality of Our Business
The Company’s dependence on revenues from its NBA and NHL sports teams generally means that it earns a disproportionate share of its revenues in the second and third quarters of the Company’s fiscal year. On March 11 and 12, 2020, respectively, the NBA and NHL suspended their 2019-20 seasons due to COVID-19. In July and August 2020, the NBA and NHL, respectively, resumed their seasons and the NHL and NBA subsequently completed their seasons in September and October 2020, respectively. As a result, during the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 the Company recognized certain revenues that otherwise would have typically been recognized during the third and fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020. In addition, due to the delayed start of the 2020-21 NBA and NHL seasons in December 2020 and January 2021, respectively, the Company recognized certain revenues during the third and fourth quarters of fiscal year 2021, that otherwise would have typically been recognized during the second and third quarters of fiscal year 2021.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements and Critical Accounting Policies
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events. These estimates and the underlying assumptions affect the amounts of assets and liabilities reported, disclosures about contingent assets and liabilities, and reported amounts of revenues and expenses. Management believes its use of estimates in the consolidated financial statements to be reasonable. The significant accounting policies which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results include the following:
Arrangements with Multiple Performance Obligations
The Company has contracts with customers, including multi-year sponsorship agreements, that contain multiple performance obligations. Payment terms for such arrangements can vary by contract, but payments are generally due in installments throughout the contractual term. The performance obligations included in each sponsorship agreement vary and may include various advertising benefits such as, but not limited to, signage, digital advertising, and event or property specific advertising, as well as non-advertising benefits such as suite licenses and event tickets. To the extent the Company’s multi-year arrangements provide for performance obligations that are consistent over the multi-year contractual term, such performance obligations generally meet the definition of a series as provided for under the accounting guidance. If performance obligations meet the definition of a series, the contractual fees for all years during the contract term are aggregated and the related revenue is recognized proportionately as the underlying performance obligations are satisfied.
The timing of revenue recognition for each performance obligation is dependent upon the facts and circumstances surrounding the Company’s satisfaction of its respective performance obligation. The Company allocates the transaction price for such arrangements to each performance obligation within the arrangement based on the estimated relative standalone selling price of the performance obligation. The Company’s process for determining its estimated standalone selling prices involves management’s judgment and considers multiple factors including company specific and market specific factors that may vary depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each performance obligation. Key factors considered by the Company in developing an estimated standalone selling price for its performance obligations include, but are not limited to, prices charged for similar performance obligations, the Company’s ongoing pricing strategy and policies, and consideration of pricing of similar performance obligations sold in other arrangements with multiple performance obligations.
The Company may incur costs such as commissions to obtain its multi-year sponsorship agreements. The Company assesses such costs for capitalization on a contract by contract basis. To the extent costs are capitalized, the Company estimates the useful life of the related contract asset which may be the underlying contract term or the estimated customer life depending on the facts and circumstances surrounding the contract. The contract asset is amortized over the estimated useful life.
Impairment of Long-Lived and Indefinite-Lived Assets
The Company’s long-lived and indefinite-lived assets accounted for approximately 29% of the Company’s consolidated total assets as of June 30, 2021 and consisted of the following:
In assessing the recoverability of the Company’s long-lived and indefinite-lived assets, the Company must make estimates and assumptions regarding future cash flows and other factors to determine the fair value of the respective assets. These estimates and assumptions could have a significant impact on whether an impairment charge is recognized and also the magnitude of any such charge. Fair value estimates are made at a specific point in time, based on relevant information. These estimates are subjective in nature and involve significant uncertainties and judgments and therefore cannot be determined with precision. Changes in assumptions could significantly affect the estimates. If these estimates or material related assumptions change in the future, the Company may be required to record impairment charges related to its long-lived and/or indefinite-lived assets.
Goodwill
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment as of August 31st and at any time upon the occurrence of certain events or changes in circumstances. The Company performs its goodwill impairment test at the reporting unit level, which is the same as or one level below the operating segment level. The Company has one operating and reportable segment, and for the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company had one reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing purposes.
The Company has the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine if an impairment is more likely than not to have
occurred. If the Company can support the conclusion that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, the Company would not need to perform a quantitative impairment test for that reporting unit. If the Company cannot support such a conclusion or the Company does not elect to perform the qualitative assessment, the first step of the goodwill impairment test is used to identify potential impairment by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. The estimates of the fair value of the Company’s reporting units are primarily determined using discounted cash flows and comparable market transactions. These valuations are based on estimates and assumptions including projected future cash flows, discount rates, determination of appropriate market comparables and the determination of whether a premium or discount should be applied to comparables. Significant judgments inherent in a discounted cash flow analysis include the selection of the appropriate discount rate, the estimate of the amount and timing of projected future cash flows and identification of appropriate continuing growth rate assumptions. The discount rates used in the analysis are intended to reflect the risk inherent in the projected future cash flows. Subsequent to the adoption of ASU No. 2017-04 in the third quarter of fiscal year 2020, the amount of an impairment loss is measured as the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value determined in step one, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2017-04, if the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeded its fair value, the second step of the goodwill impairment test was performed to measure the amount of impairment loss, if any. The second step of the goodwill impairment test compared the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill with the carrying amount of that goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s goodwill exceeded the implied fair value of that goodwill, an impairment loss was recognized in an amount equal to that excess. The implied fair value of goodwill was determined in the same manner as the amount of goodwill that would be recognized in a business combination.
The Company elected to perform the qualitative assessment of impairment for the Company’s reporting unit for the fiscal year 2021 impairment test. These assessments considered factors such as:
•macroeconomic conditions;
•industry and market considerations;
•market capitalization;
•cost factors;
•overall financial performance of the reporting unit;
•other relevant company-specific factors such as changes in management, strategy or customers; and
•relevant reporting unit specific events such as changes in the carrying amount of net assets.
The Company performed its most recent annual impairment test of goodwill during the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, and there was no impairment of goodwill. Based on this impairment test, the Company’s reporting unit had sufficient safety margins, defined as the excess of the amount by which the estimated fair value of the reporting unit exceeded the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill. The most recent quantitative assessments were used in making this determination. The Company believes that if the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value by greater than 10%, a sufficient safety margin has been realized.
As a result of operating disruptions due to COVID-19, the Company’s projected cash flows were directly impacted. This disruption along with the macroeconomic industry and market conditions, resulted in the evaluation of whether there was a “triggering event”, which required the Company to assess the carrying value of its goodwill and intangible assets for impairment. Based on the assessment, management determined that it was not more likely than not that an impairment exists and there was no goodwill or intangible asset balance that was impaired as of June 30, 2021. However, the duration and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic may result in future impairment charges that management will evaluate as facts and circumstances evolve through time.
Identifiable Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Identifiable indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested annually for impairment as of August 31st and at any time upon the occurrence of certain events or substantive changes in circumstances. The following table sets forth the amount of identifiable indefinite-lived intangible assets reported in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet as of June 30, 2021:
The Company has the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine if an impairment is more likely than not to have occurred. In the qualitative assessment, the Company must evaluate the totality of qualitative factors, including any recent fair value measurements, that impact whether an indefinite-lived intangible asset other than goodwill has a carrying amount that more likely than not exceeds its fair value. The Company must proceed to conducting a quantitative analysis, if the Company
(i) determines that such an impairment is more likely than not to exist, or (ii) forgoes the qualitative assessment entirely. Under the quantitative assessment, the impairment test for identifiable indefinite-lived intangible assets consists of a comparison of the estimated fair value of the intangible asset with its carrying value. If the carrying value of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. For all periods presented, the Company elected to perform a qualitative assessment of impairment for the indefinite-lived intangible assets. These assessments considered the events and circumstances that could affect the significant inputs used to determine the fair value of the intangible asset. Examples of such events and circumstances include:
•cost factors;
•financial performance;
•legal, regulatory, contractual, business or other factors;
•other relevant company-specific factors such as changes in management, strategy or customers;
•industry and market considerations; and
•macroeconomic conditions.
The Company performed its most recent annual impairment test of identifiable indefinite-lived intangible assets during the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, and there were no impairments identified. Based on this impairment test, the Company’s indefinite-lived intangible assets had sufficient safety margins, representing the excess of each identifiable indefinite-lived intangible asset’s estimated fair value over its respective carrying value. The Company believes that if the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its carrying value by greater than 10%, a sufficient safety margin has been realized.
Lease Accounting
The Company’s leases primarily consist of the lease of the Company’s corporate offices under the Sublease Agreement with MSG Entertainment (the “Sublease Agreement”) for our principal executive offices at Two Pennsylvania Plaza in New York and the lease of CLG Performance Center. In, addition, the Company accounts for the rights of use of The Garden pursuant to the Arena License Agreements as leases under the Accounting Standards Codification Topic 842, Leases. The Company determines whether an arrangement contains a lease at the inception of the arrangement. If a lease is determined to exist, the lease term is assessed based on the date when the underlying asset is made available for the Company’s use by the lessor. The Company’s assessment of the lease term reflects the non-cancelable term of the lease, inclusive of any rent-free periods and/or periods covered by early-termination options which the Company is reasonably certain not to exercise, as well as periods covered by renewal options which the Company is reasonably certain of exercising. The Company also determines lease classification as either operating or finance at lease commencement, which governs the pattern of expense recognition and the presentation reflected in the consolidated statements of operations over the lease term.
For leases with a term exceeding 12 months, a lease liability is recorded on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet at lease commencement reflecting the present value of the fixed minimum payment obligations over the lease term. A corresponding right of use (“ROU”) asset equal to the initial lease liability is also recorded, adjusted for any prepaid rent and/or initial direct costs incurred in connection with execution of the lease and reduced by any lease incentives received.
The Company includes fixed payment obligations related to non-lease components in the measurement of ROU assets and lease liabilities, as the Company has elected to account for lease and non-lease components together as a single lease component. ROU assets associated with finance leases are presented separate from operating leases ROU assets and are included within Property and equipment, net on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet. For purposes of measuring the present value of the Company’s fixed payment obligations for a given lease, the Company uses its incremental borrowing rate, determined based on information available at lease commencement, as rates implicit in the underlying leasing arrangements are typically not readily determinable. The Company’s incremental borrowing rate reflects the rate it would pay to borrow on a secured basis and incorporates the term and economic environment surrounding the associated lease.
On April 17, 2020, in connection with the MSGE Distribution, we entered into a sublease agreement with MSG Entertainment (the “Sublease Agreement”) for our principal executive offices at Two Pennsylvania Plaza in New York. The Sublease Agreement right of use assets and liabilities are recorded on the balance sheet at lease commencement based on the present value of minimum base rent and other fixed payments over the reasonably certain lease term, which ends April 30, 2024.
In addition, in connection with the MSGE Distribution we entered into long term leases with MSG Entertainment that end June 30, 2055 and allow the Knicks and the Rangers to continue to play their home games at The Garden. The Arena License Agreements provide for fixed payments to be made from inception through June 30, 2055 in 12 equal installments during each year of the contractual term. Absent COVID-19, the stated license fee for the first full contract year ending June 30, 2021 would have been approximately $22,500 for the Knicks and approximately $16,700 for the Rangers, and then for each subsequent year, the license fees are 103% of the license fees for the immediately preceding contract year.
The Garden was not available for use between April 17, 2020 and the start of the NBA and NHL 2020-21 seasons in December 2020 and January 2021, respectively, due to the government-mandated suspension of events in response to COVID-19, and as a result, the Company was not required to pay license fees to MSG Entertainment under the Arena License Agreements.
On December 16, 2020 and January 14, 2021, respectively, the Knicks and the Rangers resumed playing their homes games at The Garden as part of their 2020-21 seasons. However, fans were initially prohibited from attending games due to government-mandated assembly restrictions. Effective February 23, 2021, New York venues with at least a 10,000-person capacity were permitted to operate at 10% capacity, and the Knicks and the Rangers began playing games at The Garden with a limited number of fans in attendance on February 23 and 26, respectively. When games were played at The Garden by the Knicks and the Rangers either without fans in attendance or with limited fans in attendance due to government mandated capacity constraints, the applicable license fees to MSG Entertainment under the Arena License Agreements were substantially reduced.
Effective May 19, 2021, event venues such as The Garden were permitted to host guests at full capacity, subject to certain restrictions, including, for example, restrictions for unvaccinated guests. As a result, the Knicks played three home playoff games with ticket sales of approximately 15,000-16,500 per game during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
As a result of New York City regulations effective August 17, 2021, subject to certain exceptions, all guests 12 years of age or older and employees (other than players who are not residents of New York City) at indoor entertainment venues such as The Garden must show proof that they have received at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine. Guests under the age of 12 must wear masks, provide proof of a negative COVID test and are permitted to enter only when accompanied by a vaccinated parent or guardian.
The Knicks and the Rangers are entitled to use The Garden on home game days, which are usually nonconsecutive, for a pre-defined period of time from before and after the game. In evaluating the Company’s lease cost, the Company considered the timing of payments throughout the lease terms and the nonconsecutive periods of use, provided for within each license. While payments are made throughout the contract year in twelve equal installments under each arrangement, the periods of use only span each of the individual team event days. As such, the Company concluded that the related straight-line operating lease costs should be recorded by each team equally over the home game days as each takes place. In the event a team were to qualify for the playoffs in a given season, a prospective adjustment may be recorded to adjust for the additional use days within that season, while the total expense for the team’s season would remain the same.
As part of Arena License Agreements, we recognized license fees which are characterized as operating lease liabilities and a right of use assets. We measured the lease liabilities at the present value of the future lease payments as of April 17, 2020 and remeasured the lease liabilities during the period that The Garden was not available for use as discussed above. We use our incremental borrowing rates based on the remaining lease term to determine the present value of future lease payments. Our incremental borrowing rate for a lease is the rate of interest we would have to pay on a collateralized basis to borrow an amount equal to the lease payments under similar terms. This rate is also used for the Sublease Agreement.
Our incremental borrowing rate is calculated as the weighted average risk-free rate plus a spread to reflect our current unsecured credit rating. We subsequently measure the lease liability at the present value of the future lease payments as of the reporting date with a corresponding adjustment to the right-to-use asset. Absent a lease modification we will continue to utilize the April 17, 2020 incremental borrowing rate.
Estimation of the incremental borrowing rate requires judgment by management and reflects an assessment of credit standing to derive an implied secured credit rating and corresponding yield curve. Changes in management’s estimates of discount rate assumptions could result in a significant overstatement or understatement of right of use assets or lease liabilities, resulting in an adverse impact to MSG Sports’ financial position. See Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on our leases.