ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. See “Forward Looking Statements” and “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” Except as otherwise indicated herein, the terms “MusclePharm,” “Company,” “we,” “our” and “us” refer to MusclePharm Corporation and its subsidiaries.
Overview
MusclePharm is a scientifically-driven, performance lifestyle company that develops, manufactures, markets and distributes branded sports nutrition products and nutritional supplements. We offer a broad range of performance powders, capsules, tablets, gels and on-the-go ready to eat snacks that satisfy the needs of enthusiasts and professionals alike. Our portfolio of recognized brands, MusclePharm® and FitMiss®, is marketed and sold in more than 100 countries globally. The Company is headquartered in Calabasas, California and, as of December 31, 2020, had the following wholly-owned subsidiaries which do not currently have operations: MusclePharm Canada Enterprises Corp., MusclePharm Ireland Limited and MusclePharm Australia Pty Limited.
Our offerings are clinically developed through a six-stage research process, and all of our manufactured products are rigorously vetted for banned substances by the leading quality assurance program, Informed-Choice. While we initially drove growth in the Specialty retail channel, in recent years we have expanded our focus to drive sales and retailer growth across leading e-commerce, Food Drug & Mass (“FDM”), and Club retail channels, including Amazon, Costco, Kroger, Walgreens, 7-Eleven, and many others. Our primary distribution channels are Specialty, International and FDM.
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared using the accrual method of accounting in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”) and have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, management implemented the following measures to improve gross profit:
1) reduced or eliminated sales to low or negative margin customers;
2) reduced product discounts and promotional activity;
3) implemented a more aggressive SKU reduction; and
4) negotiated and purchased certain raw materials directly from the manufacturers lowering the costs of goods sold
As a result of these measures, as well as a reduction in protein prices, the Company realized increased gross profit in the fourth quarter of 2019, a trend which continued throughout 2020. In April 2020, the Company experienced a slowdown in sales from its retail customers, including its largest customer. This decline was partially offset by a growth in sales to its largest online customers, although there can be no assurances that such growth will continue, or that the Company will have the financial resources to produce the additional quantities required by these customers. In 2020, the Company also negotiated lower costs of goods sold with our co-manufacturers. Management believes reductions in operating costs and continued focus on gross profit will allow us to ultimately achieve sustained profitability; however, the Company can give no assurances that this will occur. In particular, fluctuations in the cost of protein may have a material impact on the Company’s profitability, as well as the ability of our third-party manufacturers to meet our customer’s demands. To manage cash flow, the Company has entered into multiple financing arrangements. For additional information, see Note 8 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Our results of operations are affected by economic conditions, including macroeconomic conditions and levels of business confidence. There continues to be significant volatility and economic uncertainty in many markets and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has increased that level of volatility and uncertainty and has created economic disruption. We are actively managing our business to respond to the impact. There were no adjustments recorded in the financial statements that might result from the outcome of these uncertainties.
COVID-19
Our results of operations are affected by economic conditions, including macroeconomic conditions and levels of business confidence. There continues to be significant volatility and economic uncertainty in many markets and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has increased that level of volatility and uncertainty and has created economic disruption.
The COVID-19 pandemic has led federal and certain state and local governmental authorities to issue stay-at-home orders, proclamations and/or directives aimed at minimizing the spread of the infection. It is uncertain how long certain of these measures will last or whether additional proclamations and/or directives may be issued in the future.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operations is unknown and will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the COVID-19 outbreak, new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and any additional preventative and protective actions that governments, or the Company, may direct, which may result in an extended period of continued business disruption, reduced customer traffic and reduced operations. Any resulting financial impact cannot be reasonably estimated at this time but may have a material impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
While revenue, net is down for 2020 compared to 2019, there are multiple factors contributing to this decline. Our revenue for 2020 is down primarily as a result of a reduction in promotional discounts, resulting in lower sales volume with certain customers, and to a lesser degree, due to the impact of COVID-19, resulting in a decline in our Specialty, International, and Food, Drug, and Mass (“FDM”) sales. Management continues to monitor the business environment for any significant changes that could impact the Company’s operations. The Company has taken proactive steps to manage costs and discretionary spending, such as remote working and reducing facility related expense.
Outlook
As we continue to execute our growth strategy and focus on our core products, we believe that we can, over time, continue to improve our operating margins and expense structure. In addition, we have implemented plans focused on cost containment, customer profitability, product and pricing controls that we believe will improve our gross margin and reduce our losses.
We expect that our advertising and promotion expense will continue to decrease as we focus on reducing our expenses and shifting our promotional costs, in part, from general branding and product awareness to acquiring customers and driving sales from existing customers. We expect that our discounts and allowances will continue to decrease, both overall and as a percentage of revenue, as we further reduce certain discretionary promotional activity that does not result in a commensurate increase in revenues. In addition, we expect our gross margin to increase in future periods due to a decrease in protein prices which began in the fourth quarter of 2019, although protein prices will continue to fluctuate.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table presents our operating results as a percentage of revenue, net for the periods presented:
Revenue, net
We derive our revenue through the sales of our various branded sports nutrition products and nutritional supplements. Revenue is recognized when control of a promised good is transferred to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for the good. This usually occurs when finished goods are delivered to the Company’s customers or when finished goods are picked up by a customer or a customer’s carrier.
Net revenue reflects the transaction prices for contracts, which includes goods shipped at selling list prices reduced by variable consideration. We record sales incentives as a direct reduction of revenue for various discounts provided to our customers, consisting primarily of promotional related credits. We accrue for sales discounts over the period they are earned. Sales discounts are a significant part of our marketing plan to our customers as they help drive increased sales and brand awareness with end users through promotions that we support through our distributors and re-sellers.
MusclePharm brands are marketed across major global retail distribution channels - Specialty, International, and Food, Drug, and Mass (“FDM”). Below is a table of net revenue by our major distribution channel:
Net revenue decreased $15.2 million, or 19%, to $64.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $79.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net revenue from our international customers decreased by $4.8 million, or 21%, year over year, primarily due to a general shift to domestic and online marketing. Net revenue from FDM decreased $1.2 million, or 6%, and net revenue from Specialty lines decreased $9.2 million, or 26%, year over year. The decrease in Specialty was primarily due to lower sales volumes due to a reduction in discounts offered to these customers, including one of our largest e-commerce customers, whose revenues declined by 76% for 2020, as compared to 2019. During 2020, we increased our sales price to select customers, including certain large customers, reduced expenditures on partnership advertising, online impressions and click advertising with our online customers, while also reducing end-aisle and front of the store promotions with our retail customers, contributing to the revenue decline. Finally, we continue to monitor the profitability of each customer, and in the event that customers have negative or low margins, sales activities with such customers are reduced.
Discounts and sales allowances decreased to 22% of gross revenue, or $17.7 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 25% of gross revenue, or $26.9 million for 2019. Discounts and sales allowances fluctuate based on customer mix and changes in discretionary promotional activity. We will continue to monitor our discounts and reduce where practical in order to continue to meet our gross margin expectations.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our three largest customers accounted for approximately 70% of our net revenue. During the year ended December 31, 2019, our three largest customers accounted for approximately 63% of our net revenue.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue for MusclePharm products is directly related to the production, manufacturing, and freight-in of the related products purchased from third-party contract manufacturers. We use contract manufacturers to drop ship products directly to our customers, as well as ship product to our warehouse in Tennessee, which is operated by a third-party logistics provider.
Our gross profit fluctuates due to several factors, including sales incentives, new product introductions and upgrades to existing product lines, changes in customer and product mixes, the mix of product demand, shipment volumes, our product costs, pricing, and inventory write-downs. Cost of revenue will continue to fluctuate, primarily due to changes in protein prices, which prices are impacted, in part, by our ability to negotiate better pricing with our manufacturers. Protein prices increased for most of 2019, before declining at the end of the year.
Costs of revenue decreased 37% to $44.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $71.0 million for 2019. This decrease was due, in part, to lower revenues, with gross revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreasing 19% compared to the same period in 2019. In addition, during 2020 there was a significant decrease in protein prices compared to the prior year period, further contributing to lower costs of revenue. Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $10.9 million to $19.6 million compared to $8.7 million for the same period in 2019. Gross profit was 30% of revenue, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 11% for the same period in 2019. Positively impacting the gross profit percentage was a decrease of 3% in promotional discounts, as a percentage of revenue, net, and a decrease in protein prices for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, further contributing to the gross profit percentage increase.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $17.0 million, compared to $23.8 million in 2019. Our operating expenses were 26% and 30% of net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We continue to focus on reducing our operating expenses in response to our continued losses, including as discussed in “-Outlook.” Changes to operating expenses in 2020 were as follows:
Advertising and Promotion
Our advertising and promotion expenses consist primarily of digital, print and media advertising, promotional giveaways, in store product demonstrations, and in store product displays and trade show events.
Advertising and promotion expense decreased $2.0 million or 80% to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, or 1% of net revenue, compared to $2.5 million, or 3% of net revenue, for 2019. The decrease was primarily due to reduced club demonstrations and sports marketing, print and online advertising and reduced giveaways.
The reductions in 2020 were made in an effort to reduce overall spending as we shift our promotional costs, in part, from general branding and product awareness to acquiring customers and driving sales from existing customers.
Salaries and Benefits
Salaries and benefits consist primarily of salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation paid or provided to our employees.
Salaries and benefits continued to decrease primarily due to headcount reductions and terminations, including certain higher salaried employees. This decrease was offset, in part, by an increase in consulting fees to assist us in preparing our delinquent annual and quarterly Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings for 2018, 2019 and the first three quarters of 2020.
Salaries and benefits decreased by $1.5 million or 19% to $6.4 million, or 10% of net revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $7.9 million, or 10% of revenue, for 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative
Our selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of depreciation and amortization, information technology equipment and network costs, facilities related expenses, director’s fees, which include both cash and stock-based compensation, insurance, rental expenses related to equipment leases, supplies, legal settlement costs, broker fees and other corporate expenses.
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by 27% to $7.1 million, or 11% of net revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $9.8 million, or 12% of net revenue, for the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower freight costs, due in part to a reduction in shipping rates for most of 2020, together with reduced travel expenses, depreciation, research and development, office expenses and other general expenses. These reductions are in line with the Company’s cost reduction strategy.
Professional Fees
Professional fees consist primarily of legal fees, accounting and audit fees, consulting fees and investor relations costs. Professional fees decreased 23% to $2.8 million, or 4% of net revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.6 million, or 5% of net revenue, for the same period in 2019.
The decrease was primarily due to reduced legal fees of $1.6 million as the Company has made progress on winding down various legal matters. These reduced legal fees have been offset in part by increased accounting fees, resulting from the additional audit work performed which relate to the restated financial statements filed with the SEC on August 25, 2020, and the filing of the first three quarters of 2020 on November 24, 2020.
To the extent our ongoing legal matters are reduced, we expect to see a further decline in legal costs for specific settlement activities. We intend to continue to invest in strengthening our governance, internal controls, and process improvements, which is expected to require support from third-party service providers.
Settlement of obligations
We recorded settlement expenses of $0.1 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Gain on settlement of payables
On September 25, 2020, we entered into a settlement agreement with Nutrablend, a manufacturer of MusclePharm products, pursuant to which we agreed to pay approximately $3.1 million in monthly payments from September 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023.
On December 16, 2020, we entered into a settlement agreement with Excelsior Nutrition, a manufacturer of MusclePharm products, pursuant to which we agreed to pay approximately $4.8 million in monthly payments beginning January 5, 2020 and thereafter until the settlement amount is paid in full.
We recorded $1.7 million as a gain on the settlement of these liabilities, the result of the imputation of interest due to the long-term nature of the payouts.
Interest and other expense, net
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, “Interest and other expense, net” consisted of the following (in thousands):
“Other” includes sublease income and gain on disposal of fixed assets.
Interest and other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 72% to $1.0 million, compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the Refinanced Convertible Note (as defined below), of which the principal balance of $18.0 million was converted to common stock in September 2019, and the reversal in 2020 of interest recorded in 2019 on past due balances with Excelsior Nutrition and Nutrablend, which were both settled in 2020, with no interest due.
Provision for income taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of federal and state income taxes in the U.S. and income taxes in foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. Due to uncertainty, as to the realization of benefits from our deferred tax assets, including net operating loss carryforwards, research and development and other tax credits, we have a full valuation allowance reserved against such assets. We expect to maintain this full valuation allowance at least in the near term.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company has historically incurred significant losses and experienced negative cash flows since inception. However, the Company generated net income of $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had cash of $2.0 million, an increase of $0.5 million from the December 31, 2019 balance of $1.5 million. This increase is due to cash provided by investing activities of $0.2 million and cash provided by financing activities of $1.1 million, offset by cash used in operating activities of $0.9 million.
The ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon us maintaining profitable operations in the future and/or obtaining the necessary financing to meet our obligations and repay our liabilities when they come due. Management is on an ongoing basis evaluating strategies to obtain financing to fund our expenses and achieve a level of revenue adequate to support our current cost structure. Financing strategies may include, but are not limited to, private placements of capital stock, debt borrowings, partnerships and/or collaborations. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional financing on acceptable terms or at all or to generate an adequate level of revenues.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, management implemented the following measures to improve gross margin:
1) reduced or eliminated sales to low or negative margin customers;
2) reduced product discounts and promotional activity;
3) implemented a more aggressive SKU reduction; and
4) negotiated and purchased certain raw materials directly from the manufacturers lowering the costs of goods sold
As a result of these measures, as well as a reduction in protein prices, the Company realized increased gross margins in the fourth quarter of 2019, a trend which continued throughout 2020. In April 2020, the Company experienced a slowdown in sales from its retail customers, including its largest customer. This decline was partially offset by a growth in sales to its largest online customers, although there can be no assurances that such growth will continue, or that the Company will have the financial resources to produce the additional quantities required by these customers.
Management believes reductions in operating costs, and continued focus on gross margin, primarily pricing controls and a reduction in product discounts and promotional activity with the Company’s customers, will allow us to ultimately achieve sustained profitability, however, we can give no assurances that this will occur. In particular, fluctuations in the cost of protein may have a material impact on the Company’s profitability, as well as the ability of our third-party manufacturers to meet our customer’s demands.
Cash Flows
Our net consolidated cash flows are as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Our cash used in operating activities is driven primarily by inventory purchases, personnel-related expenditures, manufacturing costs, professional fees (including legal and accounting fees), and other general expenses such as rent and maintenance expenses. Our cash flows from operating activities is expected to continue to be affected principally by results of operations and the extent to which we increase spending on personnel expenditures, sales and marketing activities, and our working capital requirements.
Our operating cash outflows improved $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to a decrease in net cash used in operating activities to $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net cash used of $6.5 million for 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities of $0.9 million primarily relates to net income of $3.2 million, adjusted for non-cash charges, which resulted in a source of cash of $2.4 million. This was offset, in part, by a net change in net operating assets and liabilities, which resulted in a use of cash of $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Included in the change in net operating assets and liabilities was a decrease in our accounts payable and accrued liabilities balance of $4.7 million and an increase in our accounts receivable balance of $2.9 million, partially offset by a decrease in our inventory balance of $3.8 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the net cash used in operating activities of $6.5 million primarily relates to net loss of $18.9 million, adjusted for non-cash charges, which resulted in a use of cash of $16.9 million, and a net change in net operating assets and liabilities, which resulted in a source of cash of $10.4 million. Included in the change in net operating assets and liabilities was a decrease in our inventory balance of $8.9 million and a decrease in our accounts receivable balance of $1.4 million.
Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which relates primarily to proceeds from disposal of property and equipment of $0.2 million.
Cash used in investing activities was $13,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019 for the purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to net borrowings from our secured borrowing arrangement of $2.7 million, receipt of the Paycheck Protection Program loan of $1.0 million, net payments on our line of credit of $2.2 million.
Cash provided by financing activities was $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to net borrowings from our line of credit of $2.7 million and net borrowings from our secured borrowing arrangement of $3.2 million.
To manage cash flow, we have entered into numerous financing arrangement outlined below.
Indebtedness Agreements
Related-Party Refinanced Convertible Note
On November 3, 2017, the Company entered into the refinancing with Mr. Ryan Drexler, the Company’s Chairman of the Board of Directors, Chief Executive Officer and President (the “Refinancing”). As part of the Refinancing, the Company issued to Mr. Drexler an amended and restated convertible secured promissory note (the “Refinanced Convertible Note”) in the original principal amount of $18.0 million, which amended and restated (i) a convertible secured promissory note dated as of December 7, 2015, amended as of January 14, 2017, in the original principal amount of $6.0 million with an interest rate of 8% prior to the amendment and 10% following the amendment (the “2015 Convertible Note”), (ii) a convertible secured promissory note dated as of November 8, 2016, in the original principal amount of $11.0 million with an interest rate of 10% (the “2016 Convertible Note”) , and (iii) a secured demand promissory note dated as of July 27, 2017, in the original principal amount of $1.0 million with an interest rate of 15% (the “2017 Note” and, together with the 2015 Convertible Note and the 2016 Convertible Note, collectively, the “Prior Notes”). The due date of the 2015 Convertible Note and the 2016 Convertible Note was November 8, 2017. The 2017 Note was due on demand.
Interest rate on the $18.0 million Refinanced Convertible Note was 12% per annum, and interest payments were due on the last day of each quarter. At the Company’s option (as determined by its independent directors), the Company could repay up to one-sixth of any interest payment by either adding such amount to the principal amount of the note or by converting such interest amount into an equivalent amount of the Company’s common stock. Any interest not paid when due would be capitalized and added to the principal amount of the Refinanced Convertible Note and bear interest on the applicable interest payment date along with all other unpaid principal, capitalized interest, and other capitalized obligations. Both the principal and the interest under the Refinanced Convertible Note were due on December 31, 2019, unless converted earlier. Mr. Drexler could convert the outstanding principal and accrued interest into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price of $1.11 per share at any time. The Company could prepay the Refinanced Convertible Note by giving Mr. Drexler between 15- and 60-days’ notice depending upon the specific circumstances, subject to Mr. Drexler’s conversion right.
The Refinanced Convertible Note contained customary events of default, including, among others, the failure by the Company to make a payment of principal or interest when due. Following an event of default, interest would accrue at the rate of 14% per annum. In addition, following an event of default, any conversion, redemption, payment or prepayment of the Refinanced Convertible Note would be at a premium of 105%. The Refinanced Convertible Note also contained customary restrictions on the ability of the Company to, among other things, grant liens or incur indebtedness other than certain obligations incurred in the ordinary course of business. The restrictions are also subject to certain additional qualifications and carveouts, as set forth in the Refinanced Convertible Note.
As part of the Refinancing, the Company and Mr. Drexler entered into a restructuring agreement (the “Restructuring Agreement”) pursuant to which the parties agreed to amend and restate the security agreement resulting in a Third Amended and Restated Security Agreement (the “Amended Security Agreement”) in which the Prior Notes were secured by all of the assets and properties of the Company and its subsidiaries whether tangible or intangible. Pursuant to the Restructuring Agreement, the Company agreed to pay, on the effective date of the Refinancing, all outstanding interest on the Prior Notes through November 8, 2017 and certain fees and expenses incurred by Mr. Drexler in connection with the Restructuring.
On September 16, 2019, Mr. Ryan Drexler delivered a notice to the Company and its independent directors of his election to convert, effective as of September 16, 2019 (the “Notice Date”), $18.0 million of the amount outstanding under that certain Amended and Restated Convertible Secured Promissory Note, dated as of November 8, 2017 (the “Note”), issued by the Company to Mr. Drexler, into shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (the “Common Stock”), at a conversion price of $1.11 per share, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Note (the “Partial Conversion”). As of the Notice Date, the total amount outstanding under the Note (including principal and accrued and unpaid interest) was equal to $19.3 million. Pursuant to the terms of the Note, the Company instructed the transfer agent to issue to Mr. Drexler 16,216,216 shares (the “Shares”) of its Common Stock in respect of the Partial Conversion.
On October 4, 2019, the Company entered into a secured revolving promissory note (the “Revolving Note”) with Mr. Drexler. Under the terms of the Revolving Note, the Company can borrow up to $3.0 million. The Revolving Note bears interest at the rate of 12% annually. The use of funds will be solely for the purchase of whey protein to be used in the manufacturing of MusclePharm products. The Company may prepay the Revolving Note by giving Mr. Drexler one days’ written notice. The Revolving Note contains customary events of default, including, among others, the failure by the Company to make a payment of principal or interest when due. Following an event of default, Mr. Drexler is entitled to accelerate the entire indebtedness under the Revolving Note. The Revolving Note also contains customary restrictions on the ability of the Company to, among other things, grant liens or incur indebtedness other than certain obligations incurred in the ordinary course of business. The restrictions are also subject to certain additional qualifications and carveouts. In connection with the Revolving Note, the Company and Mr. Drexler entered into a security agreement dated October 4, 2019, pursuant to which the Revolving Note is secured by all of the assets and properties of the Company and its subsidiaries whether tangible or intangible.
On December 27, 2019, the Company entered into a collateral receipt and security agreement with Mr. Drexler, pursuant to which Mr. Drexler agreed to post bond relating to the judgment ruled against the Company in connection with the litigation between the Company and ThermoLife International LLC (“ThermoLife”), pending the appeal. The amount paid by Mr. Drexler on behalf of the Company, including fees, was $0.3 million.
On August 21, 2020, the Company entered into a refinancing agreement with Mr. Ryan Drexler, the Company’s Chairman of the Board of Directors, Chief Executive Officer and President (the “2020 Refinancing”), with an effective date of July 1, 2020. As part of the 2020 Refinancing, the Company issued to Mr. Drexler an amended and restated convertible secured promissory note (the 2020 “Refinanced Convertible Note”) in the original principal amount of $2,735,199, which amended and restated (i) a convertible secured promissory note dated as of November 8, 2017, $1,134,483 of which was outstanding as of July 1, 2020 (ii) a collateral receipt and security agreement with Mr. Drexler dated as of December 27, 2019, $252,500 of which was outstanding as of July 1, 2020, and (iii) a secured revolving promissory note dated as of October 4, 2019, $1,348,216 of which was outstanding as of July 1, 2020. The $2.7 million 2020 Refinanced Convertible Note bears interest at the rate of 12% per annum.
The 2020 Refinanced Convertible Note contains customary restrictions on the ability of the Company to, among other things, grant liens or incur indebtedness other than certain obligations incurred in the ordinary course of business. The restrictions are also subject to certain additional qualifications and carveouts, as set forth in the 2020 Refinanced Convertible Note. The 2020 Refinanced Convertible Note is subordinated to certain other indebtedness of the Company held by Prestige Capital Corporation (“Prestige”) and Crossroads Financial Group, LLC (“Crossroads”). The Company may prepay the 2020 Refinanced Convertible Note by giving Mr. Drexler between 15- and 60-days’ notice depending upon the specific circumstances, subject to Mr. Drexler’s conversion right. Mr. Drexler may convert the outstanding principal and accrued interest into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price equal to or greater than (i) the closing price per share of the common stock on the last business day immediately preceding November 1, 2020 or (ii) $0.17.
All outstanding principal and accrued but unpaid interest under the 2020 Refinanced Convertible Note were due and payable on November 1, 2020. The Note was in default on that date and the Company agreed with Mr. Drexler to amend the 2020 Refinancing by the end of November 2020. Interest accrued but unpaid, totaling $26,000 was capitalized on the due date and added to the principal amount of the 2020 Refinanced Convertible Note.
On November 29, 2020, the Company entered into a refinancing agreement with Mr. Ryan Drexler, (the “November 2020 Refinancing”), in which the Company issued to Mr. Drexler an amended and restated convertible secured promissory note (the November 2020 “Convertible Note”) in the original principal amount of $2,871,967, which amended and restated a convertible secured promissory note dated as of August 21, 2020. The $2.9 million November 2020 Convertible Note bears interest at the rate of 12% per annum. Unless earlier converted or repaid, all outstanding principal and any accrued but unpaid interest under the November 2020 Convertible Note shall be due and payable on July 1, 2021. Any interest not paid when due shall be capitalized and added to the principal amount of the November 2020 Convertible Note and bear interest on the applicable interest payment date along with all other unpaid principal, capitalized interest, and other capitalized obligations.
Mr. Drexler may, at any time, and from time to time, upon written notice to the Company, convert the outstanding principal and accrued interest into shares of Common Stock, at a conversion price of $0.23 per share. At the election of the Company, one-sixth of the interest may be paid in kind (“PIK Interest”) by adding such amount to the principal amount of the note, or through the issuance of shares of the Company’s common stock to Mr. Drexler. The PIK Interest is convertible to common stock at the closing price per share on the last business day of each calendar quarter. In no event will the conversion price of such PIK Interest be less than $0.10. The Company may prepay the Note by giving Mr. Drexler between 15- and 60-days’ notice depending upon the specific circumstances, subject to Mr. Drexler’s conversion right. The Company intends to pay all interest due on the Convertible Note to Mr. Drexler at the end of each calendar quarter.
The November 2020 Convertible Note contains customary restrictions on the ability of the Company to, among other things, grant liens or incur indebtedness other than certain obligations incurred in the ordinary course of business. The restrictions are also subject to certain additional qualifications and carveouts, as set forth in the November 2020 Refinanced Convertible Note. The November 2020 Convertible Note is subordinated to certain other indebtedness of the Company held by Prestige Capital Corporation (“Prestige”) and Crossroads Financial Group, LLC (“Crossroads”).
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, interest expense related to the related party convertible secured promissory notes was $0.3 million and $1.7 million, respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, interest paid in cash to Mr. Drexler was $31,000 and $0.8 million, respectively.
Related Party Secured Revolving Promissory Note
On October 15, 2020, the Company entered into a secured revolving promissory note (the “Revolving Note”) with Mr. Drexler. Under the terms of the Revolving Note, the Company can borrow up to $3.0 million. The Revolving Note bears interest at the rate of 12% per annum. The use of funds will be used for the purchase of whey protein and other general corporate purposes. Both the outstanding principal, if any, and all accrued interest under the Revolving Note are due on March 31, 2021. The Company may prepay the Revolving Note by giving Mr. Drexler one days’ advance written notice. The Revolving Note contains customary events of default, including, among others, the failure by the Company to make a payment of principal or interest when due. Following an event of default, Mr. Drexler is entitled to accelerate the entire indebtedness under the Revolving Note. The Revolving Note also contains customary restrictions on the ability of the Company to, among other things, grant liens or incur indebtedness other than certain obligations incurred in the ordinary course of business. The restrictions are also subject to certain additional qualifications and carveouts, as set forth in the Revolving Note. The Revolving Note is subordinated to certain other indebtedness of the Company held by Prestige and Crossroads. In connection with the Revolving Note, the Company and Mr. Drexler entered into a fifth amended and restated security agreement dated October 15, 2020 (the “Security Agreement”) pursuant to which the Revolving Note is secured by all of the assets and properties of the Company and its subsidiaries whether tangible or intangible.
As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance on the revolving note was $0.7 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, interest paid in cash to Mr. Drexler was $24,000.
Line of Credit - Inventory Financing
On October 6, 2017, the Company entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (“Security Agreement”) with Crossroads. Pursuant to the Security Agreement, the Company may borrow up to 70% of its Inventory Cost or up to 75% of Net Orderly Liquidation Value (each as defined in the Security Agreement), up to a maximum amount of $3.0 million at an interest rate of 1.5% per month, subject to a minimum monthly fee of $22,500. Subsequent to the end of 2017, the maximum amount was increased to $4.0 million. The term of the Security Agreement automatically extends in one-year increments, unless earlier terminated pursuant to the terms of the Security Agreement. The Security Agreement contains customary events of default, including, among others, the failure to make payments on amounts owed when due, default under any other material agreement or the departure of Mr. Drexler. The Security Agreement also contains customary restrictions on the ability of the Company to, among other things, grant liens, incur debt, and transfer assets. Under the Security Agreement, the Company agreed to grant Crossroads a security interest in all of the Company’s present and future accounts, chattel paper, goods (including inventory and equipment), instruments, investment property, documents, general intangibles, intangibles, letter of credit rights, commercial tort claims, deposit accounts, supporting obligations, documents, records and the proceeds thereof. The Security Agreement has second priority lien on the Company’s assets and is subordinated to the Company’s indebtedness held by Prestige.
During the year, the Company made payments of $3 million to Crossroads and had no outstanding liability as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2019, we owed Crossroads $3.0 million, and the amount is included in “Line of credit” in the consolidated balance sheets.
On April 1, 2019, the Company and Crossroads amended the terms of the agreement. The agreement was extended until March 31, 2020, the rate was modified to 1.33% per month, and the amount the Company can borrow was increased from $3.0 million to $4.0 million.
On February 26, 2020, the Company and Crossroads further amended the terms of the agreement. The agreement was extended until April 1, 2021 and the amount the Company can borrow was decreased from $4.0 million to $3.0 million.
On October 30, 2020, the Company paid off the loan, including an early termination fee of $0.1 million.
Secured Borrowing Arrangement
In January 2016, the Company entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement (the “Purchase and Sale Agreement”) with Prestige, pursuant to which the Company agreed to sell and assign and Prestige agreed to buy and accept, certain accounts receivable owed to the Company (“Accounts”). Under the terms of the Purchase and Sale Agreement, upon the receipt and acceptance of each assignment of Accounts, Prestige will pay the Company 80% of the net face amount of the assigned Accounts, up to a maximum total borrowing of $12.5 million subject to sufficient amounts of accounts receivable to secure the loan. The remaining 20% will be paid to the Company upon collection of the assigned Accounts, less any chargebacks (including chargebacks for any customer amounts that remain outstanding for over 90 days), disputes, or other amounts due to Prestige. Prestige’s purchase of the assigned Accounts from the Company will be at a discount fee which varies from 0.7% to 4%, based on the number of days outstanding from the assignment of Accounts to collection of the assigned Accounts. In addition, the Company granted Prestige a continuing security interest in and first priority lien upon all accounts receivable, inventory, fixed assets, general intangibles, and other assets. Prestige will have no recourse against the Company if payments are not made due to the insolvency of an account debtor within 90 days of invoice date, with the exception of international and certain domestic customers.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had outstanding borrowings of approximately $7.1 million and $4.4 million, respectively.
On April 10, 2019, the Company and Prestige amended the terms of the agreement. The agreement was extended until April 1, 2020. Thereafter the agreement shall renew itself automatically for one (1) year periods unless either party receives written notice of cancellation from the other, at minimum, thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company assigned to Prestige, accounts with an aggregate face amount of approximately $58.0 million and $55.1 million, respectively, for which Prestige paid to the Company approximately $46.4 million and $44.1 million, respectively, in cash. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, $43.7 million and $40.9 million, respectively, was repaid to Prestige, including fees and interest.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
Due to economic uncertainty as a result of the ongoing pandemic (COVID-19), on May 14, 2020, the Company received an aggregate principal amount of $964,910 pursuant to the borrowing arrangement (“Note”) with Harvest Small Business Finance, LLC (“HSBF”) and agreed to pay the principal amount plus interest at a 1% fixed interest rate per year, on the unpaid principal balance. The Note includes forgiveness provisions in accordance with the requirements of the Paycheck Protection Program, Section 1106 of the CARES Act.
The Note is expected to mature on May 16, 2022. Payments were due by November 16, 2020 (the “Deferment Period”) and interest was accrued during the Deferment Period. However, the Flexibility Act, which was signed into law on June 5, 2020, extended the Deferment Period to the date that the forgiven amount is remitted by the United States Small Business Administration (“SBA”) to HSBF. The Company is in the process of filling out the forgiveness application form. As of December 31, 2020, the Company owed approximately $1.0 million (principal plus accrued interest), and the amount is recorded in “Other long-term liabilities” in the consolidated balance sheets.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA
In addition to disclosing financial results calculated in accordance with GAAP, this Form 10-K discloses Adjusted EBITDA, which is net loss adjusted for stock-based compensation, gain on settlement of accounts payable, (gain) loss on disposal of property and equipment, amortization of prepaid sponsorship fees, interest and other expense, net, depreciation of property and equipment, amortization of intangible assets, provision for doubtful accounts, and (benefit) provision for income taxes.
Management uses Adjusted EBITDA as a supplement to GAAP measures to further evaluate period-to-period operating performance, as well as the Company’s ability to meet future working capital requirements. The exclusion of non-cash charges, including stock-based compensation and depreciation and amortization, gain on settlement of payables and impairment of assets, is useful in measuring the Company’s cash available for operations and performance of the Company. Management believes these non-GAAP measures will provide investors with important additional perspectives in evaluating the Company’s ongoing business performance.
The GAAP measure most directly comparable to Adjusted EBITDA is net income (loss). The non-GAAP financial measure of Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to net income (loss). Adjusted EBITDA is not a presentation made in accordance with GAAP and has important limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because Adjusted EBITDA excludes some, but not all, items that affect net income (loss) and is defined differently by different companies, our definition of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
Set forth below are reconciliations of our reported GAAP net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP and form the basis for the following discussion and analysis on critical accounting policies and estimates. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on a regular basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates and those differences could have a material effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue represents sales of finished goods inventory and is recognized when control of the promised goods is transferred to the Company’s customers in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. The reserves for trade promotions and product discounts, including sales incentives, are established based on our best estimate of the amounts necessary to settle future and existing credits for product sold as of the balance sheet date.
All such costs are netted against sales. These costs include end-aisle or other in-store displays, contractual advertising fees and product discounts, and other customer specific promotional activity. We provide reimbursement to our customers for such amounts as credits against amounts owed. To determine the appropriate timing of recognition of consideration payable to a customer, all consideration payable to our customers is reflected in the transaction price at inception and reassessed routinely.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our revenue is recorded net of discounts, and to a lesser degree, sales returns, where discounts for each year totaled $17.4 million and $26.9 million, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, total discounts accounted for 21% and 25% of gross revenue, respectively.
Leases
A lease is defined as a contract, or part of a contract, that conveys the right to control the use of identified assets for a period of time in exchange for consideration. An entity controls the use when it has a right to obtain substantially all of the benefits from the use of the identified asset and has the right to direct the use of the asset. The Company determines if an arrangement is a lease at contract inception. For all classes of underlying assets, the Company includes both the lease and non-lease components as a single component and accounts for it as a lease. Lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the lease payments over the lease term at the commencement date.
MusclePharm calculates and uses the rate implicit in the lease if the information is readily available, or if not available, the Company uses its incremental borrowing rate in determining the present value of lease payments. Lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets are based on the lease liability, subject to adjustments, such as lease incentives. The ROU assets also include any lease payments made at or before the commencement date. MusclePharm excludes variable lease payments in measuring lease assets and lease liabilities, other than those that depend on an index or a rate or are in substance fixed payments.
MusclePharm’s lease terms include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that such options will be exercised. Operating leases are included in “Operating lease right-of-use assets,” “Operating lease liability, current” and “Operating lease liability, long-term” on the consolidated balance sheets. Finance leases are included in “Property and equipment, net,” “Accrued and other liabilities” and “Other long-term liabilities” on the consolidated balance sheets.
Advertising and Promotion
Our advertising and promotion expenses consist primarily of digital, print and media advertising, athletic endorsements and sponsorships, promotional giveaways, trade show events and various partnering activities with our trading partners, and are expensed as incurred. For major trade shows, the expenses are recognized within a calendar year over the period in which we recognize revenue associated with sales generated at the trade show. Some of the contracts provide for contingent payments to endorsers or athletes based upon specific achievement in their sports, such as winning a championship. We record expense for these payments if and when the endorser achieves the specific achievement.
Contingencies
The Company records loss contingencies when management determines that the outcome of future events is probable of occurring and when the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Gain contingencies are recognized in the consolidated financial statements when they are realized. The determination of an accrual for a loss contingency is based on management’s judgment and estimates with respect to the likely outcome of the matter. Liabilities are recorded or adjusted when events or circumstances cause these judgments or estimates to change.
The Company provides disclosures for material contingencies when there is a reasonable possibility that a loss or an additional loss may be incurred. In assessing whether a loss is a reasonable possibility, the Company may consider the following factors, among others: the nature of the litigation, claim or assessment, available information, opinions or views of legal counsel and other advisors, and the experience gained from similar cases.
See additional information in “Note 9. Commitment and Contingencies.”
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements or changes in accounting pronouncements that are of significance, or potential significance, to us.