ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General
The following is a discussion by management of its view of the Company’s business, financial condition, and corporate performance for the past year. The purpose of this information is to give management’s recap of the past year, and to give an understanding of management’s current outlook for the near future. This section is meant to be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We intend for this discussion to provide information that will assist in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles affect our financial statements.
The Company was originally founded in 1999 as Spectrum Ventures LLC, a private company, registered in Tacoma, WA, for the purpose of developing, marketing and selling voice over IP products and services. In 2002, the Company changed its name to Nxtech Wireless Cable Systems, Inc. In August 2007, the Company changed its name to Oriens Travel & Hotel Management Corp. In November 2014, the Company changed its name to Pure Hospitality Solutions, Inc. During 2014, the Board of Directors of the Company deemed it in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders to switch directions and become involved in the business of numismatics, specifically the collection and ultimately the sale of coins, paper currency, bullion and medals.
Meso Numismatics, Inc., has established a growing numismatics operation Meso Numismatics focuses on the Central American Caribbean region with a concentration of products surrounding Mesoamerica (Mexico to Panama).
Having locations in Costa Rica and Florida for the purposes of conveniently shipping products, the Company has the ability to export its inventory of coins, paper currency, bullion and medals from Costa Rica, to be sold in the U.S. and around the world. Likewise, the Company also imports such products back to Costa Rica, to be sold throughout the local markets.
The Company adheres to strict processes related to acquisition and sale of its products. It begins by selecting the best inventory, be it a rare coin from Latin America, or a banknote with an error from the United States. Inventory is carefully screened by management, is then sent to be graded by the proper grading authority. For all coins, medals and bullion, the Company’s inventory is sent to the Numismatic Guaranty Company for authentication and grading. For all banknotes, the Company utilizes the services of Paper Money Guaranty, LLC for authentication and grading, both Florida-based companies. Once graded, the inventory is sent to the Company’s Florida-based location prior to being sent to one of the Company’s many customers around the world.
We maintain an online store with eBay (www.mesocoins.com) and participate in live auctions with major companies such as Heritage Auctions, Stacks Bowers Auctions, Lyn Knight Auctions and Sedwick Coins for the sale of its coins, paper currency, bullion and medals. The Company also launched a new application technology available on the Google Play Store, as well as the Apple App Store. The Application is a banknote scanner which instantly identifies key characteristics of a banknote. This includes the catalog reference number of the note, the value, which entity it was issued by, the country of origin and the printer that printed the note. A picture of each note from our database of more than 61,000 banknotes from a combined 750 countries and regions will also be included with the information. For the numismatic industry in particular, this application eliminates the need for reference books, as well as the hours of time it takes to reference all the information about banknotes. With a simple snap of a picture, information is provided to the end-user almost instantaneously.
Meso continues to acquire rare inventory at market rates, from throughout the Meso Region (including Central America and the Caribbean). The inventory is then sent for authentication and grading, followed by said items being sold throughout Meso’s sales outlets. This includes an eBay store with up to, but not limited to, $50,000 in items for sale at any one time. For some of the Company’s rarer inventory, items are sent to major auction houses around the world for sale.
Results of Operations
Below is a summary of the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue is affected by the grade assigned to each coin or banknote. Once an item has been acquired it is sent for grading and authentication. Grading is the process of determining the grade or condition of the coin and banknote, which is the key factor in determining its value. Management carefully evaluates the grades assigned to each piece of merchandise and then decides which items will be sold through its eBay store, which items will be sold at live auction and which items will be traded for other items. Grade assigned will ultimately determine the sales price of the coin or banknote.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company is working on an inventory tracking system by serial number. Until such time as an inventory tracking system exists, the inventory costs cannot be properly confirmed and written-off to cost of revenue along with the cost of grading.
Gross profit
Revenue from the sale of coins, metals and paper money for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $55,082, compared to $30,103 of revenue for the same period in 2019. The company generated a positive 20% gross profit of $11,128 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a negative 84% gross profit of $25,421 for the same period in 2019. The key reason for the increase in gross profit was a result of the amount of inventory written-off was less in 2020 vs 2019.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses decreased by 70.65% in the amount of $1,106,140 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. Listed below are the major changes to operating expenses:
Advertising and marketing decreased by $54,911 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the company engaging a consulting company to assist in development of a marketing and communications strategy to increase sales and visibility of the Company’s products and services in 2019.
Compensation expense decreased by $1,163,357 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to Meso Numismatics Inc. entered into an Assignment and Assumption Agreement with Lans Holdings Inc., whereby Lans Holdings Inc. assigned all of its rights to, obligations and interest in a Binding Letter of Intent entered into on May 23, 2019 with Global Stem Cells Group Inc. and Benito Nova, setting forth the principal terms pursuant to which the Company will acquire 50,000,000 shares of common stock of Global Stem Cells Group Inc. In consideration for the Assignment, Meso Numismatics Inc. reissued an aggregate of $1,079,626 of Convertible Redeemable Notes and issued to Lans Holdings Inc. 1,000 shares of its Series CC Convertible Preferred Stock valued at $83,731.
Professional fees decreased by $85,161 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to less audit and accounting expenses.
Officer compensation increased by $207,920 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the appointment of Mr. David Christensen as Director and President of the Company along with 50,000 shares of Series AA Preferred stock valued as $166,795 issued in 2020.
Investor relations expenses decreased by $9,137 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to amounts associated with filings.
General and administrative expenses decreased by $1,494 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to licenses and permits.
Other income (expense)
Other income (expense) increased by $4,529,231 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily as a result of the change in fair market value of the convertible notes along with default penalty and expense of unamortized discount as a result of debt restructuring.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, the Company has financed its operations through private placements and convertible notes. The following is a summary of the cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
To fund basic operations for the next twelve months, the Company projects a need for $750,000 that will have to be raised through debt or equity. In addition to the estimated $300,000 for operating expenses the Company is budgeting $180,000 for advertising and marketing and $90,000 for new technology. To attract more customers to Meso Numismatics, the Company plans on hiring an advertising firm and placing more ads on sites such as NGC and PMG. Along with the advertising program the Company plans on investing in upgrading and expanding the Meso App. To continue expanding sales the Company plans to invest $90,000 to acquire additional inventory along with exploring possible acquisitions, which the Company estimates it will need approximately $100,000.
Summary of Cash Flows
Below is a summary of the Company’s cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $322,745 during the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted of a net loss of $5,895,686, which was offset by a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $1,092,756 and non-cash items of $4,480,184. The primary non-cash items for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisted of amortization of debt discount of $1,851,882, penalty on debt of $1,183,530, preferred shares issued for services of $166,795 and by change in derivative liabilities of $1,233,277. The significant change in operating assets and liabilities was an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $362,325 during the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted of a net loss of $2,509,144, which was offset by a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $157,695 offset by non-cash items of $1,989,123. The primary non-cash items for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisted of compensation expense of $1,163,357, amortization of debt discount of $461,400 and by change in derivative liabilities of $295,863. The significant change in operating assets and liabilities was an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Investing activities
Net cash used by investing activities was $175,000 consisted of cash paid for deposit on acquisition for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $516,900 consisted of proceeds received from the issuance of convertible notes was approximately $701,900 offset by repurchase of preferred stock in the amount of $160,000 and payments on notes of $25,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $354,870 during the same period in 2019.
Going Concern
The financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern. The Company has incurred losses since inception, resulting in an accumulated deficit of approximately $33,785,163 and negative working capital of $871,941 as of December 31, 2020 and future losses are anticipated. These factors, among others, generally tend to raise substantial doubt as to its ability to obtain additional long-term debt or equity financing in order to have the necessary resources to further design, develop and launch the website and market the Company’s new service.
The ability of the Company to continue its operations as a going concern is dependent on management’s plans, which include the raising of capital through debt and/or equity markets with some additional funding from other traditional financing sources, including term notes, until such time that funds provided by operations are sufficient to fund working capital requirements.
The Company will require additional funding to finance the growth of its current and expected future operations as well as to achieve its strategic objectives. The Company believes its current available cash along with anticipated revenues may be insufficient to meet its cash needs for the near future. There can be no assurance that financing will be available in amounts or terms acceptable to the Company, if at all. The accompanying financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our critical accounting policies have not materially changed during the year ended December 31, 2020. Furthermore, the preparation of our financial statements is in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, or GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires management to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Our management believes that we consistently apply these judgments and estimates, and the financial statements fairly represent all periods presented. However, any differences between these judgments and estimates and actual results could have a material impact on our statements of income and financial position.
Derivative Instruments
The derivative instruments are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair market value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in fair value recognized in operations for each reporting period. The Company uses the Binomial option pricing model to value the derivative instruments.
Stock Based Compensation
Stock based compensation costs are measured at fair value on date of grant and recognition of compensation over the service period for awards expected to vest. The Company determines the fair value of awards using the Black - Scholes valuation model.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases. ASU 2016-02 requires a lessee to record a right of use asset and a corresponding lease liability on the balance sheet for all leases with terms longer than 12 months. ASU 2016-02 is effective for all interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018. Early adoption is permitted. A modified retrospective transition approach is required for lessees for capital and operating leases existing at, or entered into after, the beginning of the earliest comparative period presented in the financial statements, with certain practical expedients available. The Company has no physical office space only a month to month online virtual office lease that doesn’t required implementation of ASU 842 in the year ended December 31, 2019 to assets and liabilities.
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvement to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting, which is part of the FASB’s simplification initiative to maintain or improve the usefulness of the information provided to the users of financial statements while reducing cost and complexity in financial reporting. This update provides consistency in the accounting for share-based payments to nonemployees with that of employees. The Company has adopted ASU 2018-07 in the first quarter of 2019. The adoption of ASU 2018-07 did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements and related disclosures.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820), which modifies the disclosures on fair value measurements by removing the requirement to disclose the amount and reasons for transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy and the policy for timing of such transfers. The ASU expands the disclosure requirements for Level 3 fair value measurements, primarily focused on changes in unrealized gains and losses included in other comprehensive income (loss). The ASU is effective for public entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019. The Company has not historically had any transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 or assets or liabilities measured at fair value under Level 3. The Company does not expect the adoption of this ASU to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements.
Other accounting standards and amendments to existing accounting standards that have been issued and have future effective dates are not applicable or are not expected to have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASU 2014-09 Revenue from Contracts with Customers and all subsequent amendments to the ASU (collectively, “ASC 606”), the Company recognizes revenue from the sales of products, by applying the following steps:
(1) Identify the contract with a customer
(2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract
(3) Determine the transaction price
(4) Allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract
(5) Recognize revenue when each performance obligation is satisfied
There was no impact on the Company’s financial statements as a result of adopting Topic 606 for the period ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The Company’s only revenue stream is acquiring rare coins and banknotes from Latin America at reduced costs, which it then sends to Numismatic Guaranty Corporation and Paper Money Guaranty for authentication and grading. Once graded, the inventory is transferred to Meso’s Florida-based location and then sent around the world to the Company’s many customers, with sales recorded net of fees. The Company recognizes revenue when it satisfies a performance obligation by transferring control over a product to a customer. Revenue is measured based on the consideration the Company receives in exchange for those products.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of these financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of financial instruments, which include cash, accounts payable and accrued expenses and advances from related parties were estimated to approximate their carrying values due to the immediate or short-term maturity of these financial instruments. Management is of the opinion that the Company is not exposed to significant interest, currency or credit risks arising from financial instruments.
Fair value is defined as the price which would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. A three-tier fair value hierarchy which prioritizes the inputs used in the valuation methodologies, as follows:
Level 1 Inputs - Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the reporting entity has the ability to access at the measurement date.
Level 2 Inputs - Inputs other than quoted prices included in Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly. These might include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability (such as interest rates, volatilities, prepayment speeds, credit risks, etc.) or inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by market data by correlation or other means.
Level 3 Inputs - Unobservable inputs for determining the fair values of assets or liabilities that reflect an entity’s own assumptions about the assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the assets or liabilities.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the carrying amounts of the Company’s financial instruments, including cash, account payables, and accrued expenses, approximate their respective fair value due to the short-term nature of these instruments.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company does not have any assets or liabilities except for derivative liabilities and convertible notes payable required to be measured at fair value in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurement.