Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
Our principal business consists of attracting retail deposits from the general public and investing those funds, along with borrowed funds, in loans secured by first and second mortgages on one-to-four family residences (including home equity loans and lines of credit), commercial and multi-family, consumer and commercial business loans and, to a lesser extent, construction and land loans. We offer a wide variety of consumer loan products, including automobile loans, boat loans, manufactured homes not secured by permanent dwellings and recreational vehicle loans. We intend to continue emphasizing our residential mortgage, home equity and consumer lending, while also expanding our emphasis in commercial and multi-family and commercial business lending.
Our operating revenues are derived principally from earnings on interest earning assets, service charges and fees. Our primary sources of funds are deposits, FHLB advances and other borrowings, and payments received on loans and securities. We offer a variety of deposit accounts that provide a wide range of interest rates and terms, generally including savings, money market, term certificate and checking accounts. Our noninterest expenses consist primarily of salaries and employee benefits, expenses for occupancy, marketing and computer services and FDIC deposit insurance premiums. Salaries and benefits consist primarily of the salaries and wages paid to our employees, payroll taxes, expenses for retirement and other employee benefits. Occupancy expenses, which are the fixed and variable costs of buildings and equipment, consist primarily of lease payments, property taxes, depreciation charges, maintenance and costs of utilities.
Our strategic plan targets individuals, small and medium size businesses in our market area for loan and deposit growth. In pursuit of these goals, and while managing the size of our loan portfolio, we focused on including a significant amount of commercial business and commercial and multi-family loans in our portfolio. A significant portion of these commercial and multi-family and commercial business loans have adjustable rates, higher yields or shorter terms and higher credit risk than traditional fixed-rate mortgages. Our commercial loan portfolio (commercial and multi-family real estate, commercial construction and commercial business loans) decreased to $45.2 million, or 39.3% of our total loan portfolio at December 31, 2020, from $50.9 million or 40.8% of our total loan portfolio, at December 31, 2019. The impact of additional commercial and multi-family, commercial construction and commercial business loans has had a positive impact on our interest income and has helped to further diversify our loan portfolio mix. At December 31, 2020, our commercial real estate and commercial real estate construction portfolios totaled $31.0 million, which represents a 11.8% decrease since December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, our commercial business loans were $5.2 million, which represents a 19.3% decrease since December 31, 2019.
Our primary market area is in Washington, Lawrence, Orange and Floyd counties, Indiana. Adverse economic conditions in our market area can reduce our rate of growth, affect our customers’ ability to repay loans and adversely impact our financial condition and earnings. Weak economic conditions and ongoing strains in the financial and housing markets in portions of the United States, including our market area, have presented an unusually challenging environment for banks and their holding companies, including us. This has been particularly evident in our need to provide for credit losses during these periods at significantly higher levels than our historical experience and has also adversely affected our net interest income and other operating revenues and expenses.
Significant Developments and the Impact of COVID-19
The recent COVID-19 pandemic is expected to have a significant adverse impact on the United States’ economy, including the banking industry, in future fiscal periods. The impact is subject to a high degree of uncertainty.
Our commercial and banking products are offered primarily in Indiana, where municipal and state-wide responses to the pandemic have led to a broad curtailment of economic activity beginning in March 2020. On May 1, 2020, Governor Eric J. Holcomb announced a five-phase plan to gradually ease restrictions with the goal of allowing nearly all activities to resume by July 4, 2020. Due to a growing number of infections in the state, Governor Holcomb issued an executive order on July 1, 2020 implementing “Stage 4.5” which continued face mask mandates and limitations on social gatherings to 250 people. On September 26, 2020, the state entered “Stage 5” which removed size limitations for social gatherings and meetings. Restaurants, bars and other indoor and outdoor venues are allowed to open to full capacity, although social
distancing and face masks are still required. On October 15, 2020, Governor Holcomb issued an executive order extending the termination of Stage 5 from October 17, 2020 to November 14, 2020. On November 13, 2020, Governor Holcomb issued an executive order, which reaffirmed the termination of Stage 5 on November 14, 2020, and established targeted restrictions for counties that had high positivity rates of COVID-19 and continued the requirement of face masks throughout the state. On December 10, 2020, in response to rising positivity rates, Governor Holcomb issued an executive order which implemented restrictions on gatherings and events for each county in Indiana based upon its current color-coded rating. Through a series of additional executive orders, the governor has continued his December 10, 2020 executive order, with the current order scheduled to expire on March 31, 2021.
As a result of the economic contraction, according to the Indiana Department of Workforce Development, unemployment levels in Indiana increased considerably during the pandemic, growing to a maximum state-wide seasonally adjusted rate of 17.5% in April 2020. The state-wide seasonally-adjusted unemployment rate as of December 2020 was 4.3%, compared to 3.2% in December 2019. The combined non-seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates in Washington, Lawrence and Orange counties (comprising a majority of our market area), are slightly higher than the state average as of December 2020. While the social and economic impacts from COVID-19 have been concentrated in large metropolitan areas, we anticipate to continue experiencing similar effects in smaller communities like in our market area.
In response to the pandemic, several regulatory directives have been enacted at the federal, state and local levels, including the following:
● The Federal Reserve took action to reduce the federal funds target rate by 50 basis points on March 3, 2020 and then by another 100 basis points on March 16, 2020. The current range is 0.00% to 0.25%.
● On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law. The CARES Act established a $2 trillion economic stimulus package, providing cash payments to individuals, supplemental unemployment insurance benefits and a $349 billion loan program administered through the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”), referred to as the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”). Under the PPP, small businesses, sole proprietorships, independent contractors and self-employed individuals may apply for loans from existing SBA lenders and other approved regulated lenders that enroll in the program, subject to numerous limitations and eligibility criteria. The Bank participated as a lender in the PPP. Through December 31, 2020, the Bank has issued 29 loans under the PPP totaling $474,000. As of December 31, 2020, 12 loans with a total principal balance of $268,000 received full forgiveness from the SBA. The remaining 16 loans had an outstanding principal balance of $168,000 as of December 31, 2020. One PPP loan totaling approximately $21,000 was charged off due to the death of the borrower but is expected to be recovered in full. We expect that the majority of our remaining PPP borrowers will seek full or partial forgiveness of their loan obligations.
● In addition, the CARES Act and related bank agency regulatory guidance provide financial institutions the option to temporarily suspend certain requirements under GAAP related to TDRs for a limited period of time to account for the effects of COVID-19. Through December 31, 2020, the Bank has modified 89 loans related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Most modifications allowed deferral of principal and interest payments for 90 days. As of December 31, 2020, 78 modified loans with a principal balance of $16.2 million remained outstanding, and all modified loans have returned to their pre-modification payment terms. Five of these loans totaling $270,000 are pre-existing TDRs. See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional disclosure of TDRs as of December 31, 2020. All loans modified due to COVID-19 will be separately monitored and any request for continuation of relief beyond the initial modification will be reassessed at that time to determine if a further modification should be granted and if a downgrade in risk rating is appropriate. As of December 31, 2020, none of our customers who received PPP loans were granted some form of COVID-19 related loan modification.
We currently expect that the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic developments will have an adverse impact on our business. The extent and duration of the COVID-19 economic impact is difficult to quantify, however our financial condition, capital levels and results of operations could be materially adversely affected. While the ultimate
impact of the crisis is difficult to predict, we believe the Company is well-capitalized and has the financial stability to continue to responsibly serve its customers and communities during this unprecedented time.
In response to the pandemic, we have undertaken several actions to address the needs of our employees, our customers and our communities, including the following:
● We are working with our loan customers who have been negatively impacted by the pandemic and require loan modifications and deferrals.
● We waived fees for early withdrawals of certificates of deposit by customers due to hardship.
● We participated as a lender in the PPP through the CARES Act in order to assist our customers and communities.
● While we opened the lobbies of all of our branches to customer activity on May 13, 2020, per Governor’s Holcomb’s executive orders, customers are still required to wear face masks, and we have installed signage, stanchions and ropes to encourage social distancing and protective shielding in all customer-facing locations. Employees receive temperature checks upon entering the buildings, and we are observing face mask requirements, social distancing, cleaning and other protocols in order to mitigate risk. Our pandemic protocols are continually evaluated and updated based upon the most-recent recommendations from federal, state and local health officials.
Business Strategy
We intend to operate as a well-capitalized and profitable community bank dedicated to providing exceptional personal service to our individual and business customers. We believe that we have a competitive advantage in the markets we serve because of our knowledge of the local marketplace and our long-standing history of providing superior, relationship-based customer service. Our current executive management team is comprised of individuals with strong banking backgrounds. Erica B. Schmidt, our Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, joined Mid-Southern Savings Bank in 2005. In December 2013, Alexander Babey joined Mid-Southern Savings Bank as Executive Vice President and Chief Credit Officer, and we appointed him as our President and Chief Executive Officer in October 2016. In June 2014, we hired Frank (Buzz) Benson, III as Executive Vice President and Senior Loan Officer. The management team has worked to revise our business strategy and position Mid-Southern Savings Bank for future growth and profitability.
Our current business strategy consists of the following:
● Continuing to emphasize the origination of one-to-four family residential mortgage loans. We have been and will continue to be a significant one-to-four family residential mortgage lender to borrowers in our market area. As of December 31, 2020, $66.1 million, or 28.1%, of our total assets consisted of one-to-four family residential mortgage loans. We historically have held all of our loan originations, including our fixed-rate one-to-four family residential mortgage loans, in our loan portfolio, however, beginning in October 2019 we began brokering one-to-four family residential mortgage loans.
● Increasing commercial and multi-family real estate and commercial business lending. In order to increase the yield on our loan portfolio and reduce the term to repricing, our new management team began to increase our commercial and multi-family real estate and commercial business loan portfolios while maintaining what we believe are conservative underwriting standards. We focus our commercial lending to small businesses located in our market area, targeting owner occupied businesses such as manufacturers and professional service providers. Our commercial and multi-family real estate and commercial business loan portfolios were $39.1 million and $5.2 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020.
● Increasing our lower-cost core deposits. NOW, Demand, savings and money market accounts are a lower cost source of funds than certificates of deposit, and we have made a concerted effort to increase these lower-cost transaction deposit accounts. We plan to continue to market our core transaction accounts, emphasizing our high-quality service and competitive pricing of these products. We also offer the convenience of technology-based products, such as bill pay, internet and mobile banking.
● Managing credit risk to maintain a low level of non-performing assets. We believe strong asset quality is a key to our long-term financial success. Our strategy for credit risk management focuses on having an experienced team of credit professionals, well-defined policies and procedures, appropriate loan underwriting criteria and active credit monitoring. Our non-performing assets to total assets ratio was 0.5% and 0.6% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. At December 31, 2020, we had $1.2 million of non-performing one-to-four family residential loans and $96,000 in non-performing commercial real estate loans.
● Growing organically and through opportunistic branch acquisitions. We expect to consider both organic growth as well as acquisition opportunities that we believe would enhance the value of our franchise and yield potential financial benefits for our stockholders. We expect to focus our growth in our primary market areas and Louisville, Kentucky. We will consider expanding our branch network through the acquisition of other financial institutions, opening of additional branches or loan production offices or the acquisition of branches if the right opportunity occurs.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which are prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions affecting the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, and the reported amounts of income and expenses. We consider the accounting policies discussed below to be significant accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions that we use are based on historical experience and various other factors and are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, resulting in a change that could have a material impact on the carrying value of our assets and liabilities and our results of operations.
The JOBS Act permits us an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards affecting public companies. We have elected to take advantage of this extended transition period, which means that the financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K, as well as any financial statements that we file in the future, will not be subject to all new or revised accounting standards generally applicable to public companies for the transition period for so long as we remain an emerging growth company or until we affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period under the JOBS Act.
The following represent our significant accounting policies:
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses represents management’s estimate of losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of the date of the statement of condition and it is recorded as a reduction of loans. The allowance is increased by the provision for loan losses, and decreased by charge-offs, net of recoveries. Loans deemed to be uncollectible are charged against the allowance for loan losses, and subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. All, or part, of the principal balance of loans receivable are charged off to the allowance as soon as it is determined that the repayment of all, or part, of the principal balance is highly unlikely. Because all identified losses are immediately charged off, no portion of the allowance for loan losses is restricted to any individual loan and the entire allowance is available to absorb all loan losses.
The allowance for loan losses is maintained at a level considered adequate to provide for losses that can be reasonably anticipated. Management performs a quarterly evaluation of the adequacy of the allowance. The allowance is based on our past loan loss experience, known and inherent risks in the portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the borrower’s ability to repay, the estimated value of any underlying collateral, composition of the loan portfolio, current
economic conditions and other relevant factors. This evaluation is inherently subjective, as it requires material estimates that may be susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available.
The allowance consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are classified as impaired. For loans that are classified impaired, an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows or collateral value of the impaired loan are lower than the carrying value of that loan.
The general component covers pools of loans, by loan class, including commercial loans not considered impaired, as well as smaller balance homogenous loans, such as residential real estate, home equity and other consumer loans. These pools of loans are evaluated for loss exposure based on historical loss rates for each of these categories of loans, which are adjusted for qualitative factors. The qualitative factors include:
● Lending policies and procedures, including underwriting standards and collection, charge-off and recovery practices;
● National, regional and local economic and business conditions as well as the condition of various market segments, including the value of underlying collateral for collateral dependent loans;
● Nature and volume of the portfolio and terms of the loans;
● Experience, ability and depth of the lending management and staff;
● Volume and severity of past due, classified and non-accrual loans, as well as other loan modifications; and
● Quality of our loan review system and the degree of oversight by our board of directors.
Each factor is assigned a value to reflect improving, stable or declining conditions based on management’s best judgment using relevant information available at the time of the evaluation. Adjustments to the factors are supported through documentation of changes in conditions in a narrative accompanying the allowance for loan loss analysis and calculation.
In addition, various bank regulatory agencies periodically review the allowance for loan losses and may require an increase in the provision for possible loan losses or the recognition of further loan charge-offs based on their judgment about information available to them at the time of their examination.
Income Taxes. Income taxes are provided for the tax effects of certain transactions reported in the consolidated financial statements. Income taxes consist of taxes currently due plus deferred taxes related primarily to temporary differences between the financial reporting and income tax basis of the allowance for loan losses, premises and equipment, certain state tax credits, and deferred loan origination costs. The deferred tax assets and liabilities represent the future tax return consequences of the temporary differences, which will either be taxable or deductible when the assets and liabilities are recovered or settled. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are reflected at income tax rates applicable to the period in which the deferred tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. As changes in tax laws or rates are enacted, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted through the provision for income taxes.
Estimation of Fair Values. Fair values for securities available-for-sale are obtained from an independent third-party pricing service. Where available, fair values are based on quoted prices on a nationally recognized securities exchange. If quoted prices are not available, fair values are measured using quoted market prices for similar benchmark securities. Management generally makes no adjustments to the fair value quotes provided by the pricing source. The fair values of foreclosed real estate and the underlying collateral value of impaired loans are typically determined based on evaluations by third parties, less estimated costs to sell. When necessary, appraisals are updated to reflect changes in market conditions.
Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Cash and Cash Equivalents. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash and cash equivalents totaled $9.7 million and $18.8 million, respectively. Cash and cash equivalents decreased due primarily to net purchases in investments and treasury stock, partially offset from funds provided by increases in deposits and operating activities. We have focused on investing excess liquidity in higher yielding loans and investment securities in an effort to increase net interest income.
Loans. Our primary lending activity is the origination of loans secured by real estate. We originate one-to-four family residential loans, multi-family residential loans, commercial real estate loans and construction loans. To a lesser extent, we originate commercial business loans and consumer loans. In August 2016, we opened a loan production office in New Albany, Indiana as part of our effort to increase our business lending and diversify the loan portfolio. Net loans receivable decreased $10.0 million, or 8.1%, to $113.3 million at December 31, 2020 from $123.3 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease in net loans receivable was due primarily to decreases in one-to-four family residential loans, commercial real estate loans and commercial real estate construction loans.
One-to-four family residential loans comprise the largest segment of our loan portfolio. At December 31, 2020, these loans totaled $66.1 million, or 57.6% of total loans, compared to $71.6 million, or 57.4% of total loans, at December 31, 2019. The Bank originates both fixed- and adjustable-rate one-to-four family residential loans. We have recently increased our efforts to originate adjustable-rate one-to-four family residential loans and originated $9.3 million and $7.5 million of adjustable-rate loans in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Management intends to continue its focus on offering adjustable-rate mortgage loans at attractive rates.
Multi-family residential mortgage loans totaled $9.0 million, or 7.8% of total loans, at December 31, 2020 compared to $9.3 million, or 7.4% of total loans at December 31, 2019. Despite the decrease in the year-over-year balance, we continue our effort to originate this type of loan.
Commercial real estate loans totaled $30.2 million, or 26.3% of total loans, at December 31, 2020 compared to $32.3 million, or 25.9% of total loans, at December 31, 2019. During 2020 and 2019, we originated $5.8 million and $5.7 million, respectively, of commercial real estate loans with an emphasis on adjustable-rate loans.
Our construction loan portfolio consists of residential and commercial construction loans. Construction loans totaled $2.9 million, or 2.5% of total loans (excluding unfunded construction loan commitments of $2.9 million), at December 31, 2020, compared to $3.2 million, or 2.6% of total loans (excluding unfunded construction loan commitments of $1.8 million), at December 31, 2019. Commercial construction loan originations decreased to $850,000 during 2020 from $2.7 million in 2019.
Commercial business loans totaled $5.2 million, or 4.5% of total loans at December 31, 2020, compared to $6.5 million, or 5.2% of total loans, at December 31, 2019. During 2020 and 2019, we originated commercial business loans of $3.3 million and $2.3 million, respectively.
Consumer loans totaled $1.4 million, or 1.3% of total loans at December 31, 2020, compared to $1.9 million, or 1.5% of total loans, at December 31, 2019. Originations of consumer loans were $603,000 in 2020 compared to $1.0 million in 2019.
Securities Available for Sale. Our available for sale securities portfolio consists primarily of U.S. government agency debt securities, including mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations, and municipal obligations. Available for sale securities increased by $46.0 million, or 78.8%, to $104.5 million at December 31, 2020 from $58.4 million at December 31, 2019. Investment securities increased due primarily to the purchase of $57.4 million of available for sale securities and a $2.6 million increase in the unrealized gain on available for sale securities which were partially offset by the $4.5 million sale of available for sale securities and $9.3 million from scheduled principal payments and maturities of mortgage-backed and tax-exempt securities. During 2020, we continued our strategy to increase our investment in municipal obligations as a component of our available for sale securities portfolio due to their higher tax-equivalent yield. At December 31, 2020, our investment in municipal obligations was $66.4 million compared to $37.9 million at December 31, 2019.
Securities Held to Maturity. Our held to maturity securities portfolio consists primarily of U.S. government agency mortgage-backed securities. Held to maturity securities decreased $11,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease during 2020 was due to principal repayments on mortgage-backed securities. We have not purchased investment securities as held to maturity during the past three years.
Premises and Equipment. Premises and equipment were $1.9 million at both December 31, 2020 and 2019. See Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this report for further information.
Other Assets. Other assets decreased $24,000 to $418,000 at December 31, 2020 from $442,000 at December 31, 2019 primarily due to a decrease in the net deferred tax asset during 2020.
Deposits. Deposit accounts, primarily obtained from individuals and businesses throughout our local market area, are the primary source of funds for our lending and investments. Our deposit accounts are comprised of noninterest-bearing checking, interest-bearing checking, savings, and money market accounts and certificates of deposit. Deposits increased $27.1 million or 18.5%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of increases in both interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing accounts.
Borrowings. On June 27, 2019, the Company borrowed $10.0 million from the FHLB which matures on June 27, 2024 and bears interest at a rate of 1.73%. On December 30, 2020, the Company borrowed $1.0 million from the FHLB, bearing an interest rate of 0.26% and matured on January 6, 2021.
Stockholders’ Equity. Stockholders’ equity decreased $1.8 million to $49.0 million at December 31, 2020 from $50.8 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease was due primarily to the repurchase of 403,171 shares of our common stock at a total cost of $5.0 million or an average cost of $12.48 per share, partially offset by an increase in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, of $1.9 million due primarily to increases in the fair market value of available-for-sale investments and net income of $1.2 million, less dividends of $255,000.
Average Balances, Net Interest Income, Yields Earned and Rates Paid
The following table presents information regarding average balances of assets and liabilities, the total dollar amounts of interest income and dividends from average interest-earning assets, the dollar amounts of interest expense on average interest-bearing liabilities, and the resulting annualized average yields and costs. The yields and costs for the periods indicated are derived by dividing income or expense by the average balances of assets or liabilities respectively, for the periods presented. Average balances are calculated using daily balances. Nonaccrual loans are included in average daily balances only. Loan fees are included in interest income on loans and are not material. Tax exempt income on loans and investment securities has been calculated on a tax equivalent basis using a federal marginal tax rate of 21% for
the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Weighted average yields for tax exempt loans and investment securities at December 31, 2020 have been calculated on a tax equivalent basis using a federal marginal tax rate of 21%.
(1) Loan amount is net of deferred loan origination fees and costs, undisbursed loan funds and includes nonperforming loans.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following schedule presents the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for major components of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. It distinguishes between the changes related to outstanding balances and that due to the changes in interest rates. For each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, information is provided on changes attributable to (i) changes in volume (i.e., changes in volume multiplied by old rate) and (ii) changes in rate (i.e., changes in rate multiplied by old volume). For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately to the change due to volume and the change due to rate.
(1) Includes interest-bearing deposits (cash) at other financial institutions.
(2) Includes FHLB Stock.
Comparison of Operating Results Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Overview. The Company reported net income of $1.2 million ($0.38 per common share diluted) for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $960,000 ($0.29 per common share diluted) for the year ended December 31, 2019. The significant factors that contributed to the increase in net income for 2020 was a decrease in noninterest expenses, partially offset by a decrease in net interest income after provision for loan losses.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income decreased $560,000, or 7.9%, to $6.5 million for 2020 from $7.1 million for 2019 primarily as the result of a decrease in the average yield earned on interest-earning assets. The ratio of average interest-earning assets to average interest-bearing liabilities decreased slightly to 144.0% for 2020 from 144.6% for 2019. The interest rate spread decreased to 3.08% for 2020 from 3.52% for 2019.
Total interest income decreased $549,000, or 6.9%, to $7.5 million for 2020 from $8.0 million for 2019. The decrease is primarily due to a decrease in the average yield earned on interest-earning assets. The average balance of interest-earning assets increased to $208.0 million for 2020 from $195.3 million for 2019. The average tax-equivalent yield on interest-earning assets decreased to 3.73% for 2020 from 4.20% for 2019 primarily due to lower market interest rates and a shift in the asset mix from loans to investment securities.
Interest income on loans was $5.6 million for 2020 compared to $6.1 million for 2019. The decrease was due to a decrease in the average tax-equivalent yield on loans to 4.58% for 2020 from 4.82% for 2019, and a decrease in average loans outstanding of $6.1 million, or 4.8%, to $121.5 million in 2020 from $127.6 million in 2019.
Interest income on investment securities increased $249,000, or 15.7%, to $1.8 million for 2020 from $1.6 million for 2019, primarily due to a $14.3 million increase in the average balance of total investment securities to $67.5 million for 2020 from $53.2 million for 2019 partially offset by an 18 basis point decrease in the average tax-equivalent yield on investment securities.
Interest income on interest-bearing deposits with banks decreased $218,000, or 78.4%, due primarily to a decrease in the average yield to 0.31% for 2020 from 1.92% for 2019.
Total interest expense increased $11,000, or 1.2%, due to an increase in the average balance of interest-bearing liabilities, partially offset by a decrease in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities. The average cost of interest-bearing liabilities decreased to 0.65% for 2020 from 0.68% for 2019. The average balance of interest-bearing liabilities increased $9.4 million to $144.5 million for 2020 from $135.1 million for 2019, due primarily to increases in both the average balance of Federal Home Loan Bank borrowings and the average balance of savings and interest-bearing demand deposit accounts, partially offset by a decrease in the average balance of time deposits.
Provision for Loan Losses. Based on an analysis of the factors described in “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Allowance for Loan Losses”, the Company recognized a provision for loan losses of $132,000 for 2020 compared to $12,000 for 2019. Non-performing loans increased to $1.3 million, or 1.1% of total loans at December 31, 2020, compared to $1.2 million, or 0.9% of total loans at December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net charge-offs totaled $41,000 compared to $18,000 for 2019. Impaired loans decreased $291,000 or 11.9%, from $2.4 million at December 31, 2019 to $2.2 million at December 31, 2020.
Noninterest Income. Noninterest income increased $62,000, or 7.7%, to $865,000 for 2020 as compared to $803,000 for 2019. The year-over-year increase in noninterest income was primarily due to increases of $97,000 in net gain on sales of securities available for sale, $39,000 in ATM and debit card fee income and $57,000 in other income, partially offset by a $127,000 decrease in deposit account service charges.
Noninterest Expense. Noninterest expense decreased $799,000, or 11.7%, to $6.0 million for 2020 as compared to $6.8 million for 2019. The decrease was due primarily to decreases in data processing expenses of $801,000, decreases in professional fees of $79,000, decreases in impairment loss on real estate held for sale of $67,000, decreases in stockholders’ meeting expenses of $53,000, and other expenses of $70,000, partially offset by increases of $225,000 in compensation and benefits expense and $48,000 in directors’ compensation expense. Data processing expenses decreased due primarily to contract termination expenses recognized during 2019 related to the Bank’s core processing system conversion which was completed in the fourth quarter of 2019. In October 2019, we upgraded our core processing system with the objective to improve internal reporting capabilities for both management and the board of directors and create a scalable corporate infrastructure that will significantly expand our ability to handle continued growth and improve our levels of operational efficiency. Further, our new system enhances our capabilities and capacity to offer new products and services for loan and deposit customers and will enable us to offer more state-of-the-art technology-based services and delivery channels such as remote deposit capture and other business banking services. As a result of this conversion, we recognized approximately $389,000 in several one-time expenses related to contract termination expenses during 2019.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense was $35,000 for 2020 compared to $85,000 for 2019 resulting from reductions in pre-tax income and in the effective tax rate. The effective tax rate for 2020 decreased to 2.9% compared to 8.1% for 2019 due largely to increased tax-exempt investment income proportionate to overall pre-tax income. See Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this report for additional information.
Liquidity
Liquidity management is both a daily and longer-term function of management. Excess liquidity is generally invested in short-term investments, such as overnight deposits and federal funds. On a longer-term basis, we maintain a
strategy of investing in various lending products and investment securities, including municipal and mortgage-backed securities. We use our sources of funds primarily to meet ongoing commitments, pay maturing deposits, fund deposit withdrawals and fund loan commitments.
We maintain cash and investments that qualify as liquid assets to maintain adequate liquidity to ensure safe and sound operation and meet demands for customer funds (particularly withdrawals of deposits). At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $114.1 million and $77.2 million, respectively, in cash and investment securities available for sale generally available for our cash needs. We can also obtain funds from borrowings, primarily FHLB advances. At December 31, 2020, we had $11.0 million in FHLB advances outstanding and the ability to borrow an additional $14.0 million in FHLB advances, subject to certain collateral requirements. We are required to have enough cash and investments that qualify as liquid assets in order to maintain sufficient liquidity to ensure safe and sound operations. Liquidity may increase or decrease depending upon the availability of funds and comparative yields on investments in relation to the return on loans. Historically, we have maintained liquid assets above levels believed to be adequate to meet the requirements of normal operations, including potential deposit outflows. Cash flow projections are regularly reviewed and updated to assure that adequate liquidity is maintained.
Liquidity management involves the matching of cash flow requirements of customers, who may be either depositors desiring to withdraw funds or borrowers needing assurance that sufficient funds will be available to meet their credit needs and our ability to manage those requirements. We strive to maintain an adequate liquidity position by managing the balances and maturities of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities so that the balance we have in short-term investments at any given time will cover adequately any reasonably anticipated, immediate need for funds. Additionally, we maintain relationships with correspondent banks, which could provide funds on short-term notice if needed. Our liquidity, represented by cash and cash-equivalents, is a product of our operating, investing and financing activities.
Our liquidity, represented by cash and cash equivalents and investment securities, is a product of our operating, investing and financing activities. Our primary sources of funds are deposits, amortization, prepayments and maturities of outstanding loans and mortgage-backed securities, maturities of investment securities and other short-term investments and funds provided from operations. While scheduled payments from the amortization of loans and mortgage-backed securities and maturing investment securities and short-term investments are relatively predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, which provide liquidity to meet lending requirements. We also generate cash through borrowings. We utilize FHLB advances to leverage our capital base and provide funds for our lending and investment activities, and to enhance our interest rate risk management.
We use our sources of funds primarily to meet ongoing commitments, pay maturing deposits and fund withdrawals, and to fund loan commitments. At December 31, 2020, the approved outstanding loan commitments, including unused lines and letters of credit, amounted to $17.6 million. Certificates of deposit scheduled to mature in one year or less at December 31, 2020, totaled $22.6 million. It is management’s policy to manage deposit rates that are competitive with other local financial institutions. Based on this management strategy, we believe that a majority of maturing deposits will remain with us.
Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company is a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business in order to meet the financing needs of its customers. For information regarding our commitments and off-balance sheet arrangements, see Notes 15 and 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
The following table summarizes our commitments and contingent liabilities with off-balance sheet risks as of December 31, 2020:
Capital
Mid-Southern Savings Bank is subject to minimum capital requirements imposed by regulations of the OCC. Based on its capital levels at December 31, 2020, Mid-Southern Savings Bank exceeded these requirements as of that date. Consistent with our goals to operate a sound and profitable organization, our policy is for Mid-Southern Savings Bank to maintain a “well-capitalized” status under the regulatory capital categories of the OCC. Based on capital levels at December 31, 2020, Mid-Southern Savings Bank was considered to be well-capitalized. Management monitors the capital levels to provide for current and future business opportunities and to maintain Mid-Southern Savings Bank’s “well-capitalized” status. See Item 1. “Business - Regulation - Federal Regulation of Savings Institutions - Capital Requirements.” and Note 17 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional details on Mid-Southern Savings Bank’s regulatory capital requirements.
On May 24, 2018, the President signed into law the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act passed by Congress (the “Act”). The Act contains a number of provisions extending regulatory relief to banks and savings institutions and their holding companies. Effective January 1, 2020, a bank or savings institution that elects to use the Community Bank Leverage Ratio (“CBLR”) will generally be considered well-capitalized and to have met the risk-based and leverage capital requirements of the capital regulations if it has a leverage ratio greater than 9.0% (adjusted to 8.0% effective April 1, 2020). On October 9, 2020, the OCC along with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, published a final rule, effective November 9, 2020, implementing a temporary change to the CBLR framework pursuant to the CARES Act, and provides a graduated increase from the temporary 8.0% requirement to the 9.0% requirement as established under the final rule published in 2019. To be eligible to elect to use the CBLR, the bank or institution also must have total consolidated assets of less than $10 billion, off-balance sheet exposures of 25% or less of its total consolidated assets, and trading assets and trading liabilities of 5.0% or less of its total consolidated assets, all as of the end of the most recent quarter. The Bank elected to use the CBLR effective January 1, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, the Bank was considered well-capitalized under applicable federal regulatory capital guidelines with a CBLR of 17.6%. As a result of this election as of January 1, 2020, a comparative ratio to December 31, 2019 is not available.
The following table shows the capital ratios of Mid-Southern Savings Bank at December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Based on total adjusted assets of $210.0 million.
(2) Based on risk-weighted assets of $116.7 million.
For a bank holding company with less than $3.0 billion in assets, the capital guidelines apply on a bank only basis and the Federal Reserve expects the holding company’s subsidiary banks to be well capitalized under the prompt corrective action regulations. If Mid-Southern Bancorp, Inc. was subject to regulatory guidelines for bank holding companies with $3.0 billion or more in assets, at December 31, 2020, Mid-Southern Bancorp, Inc. would have exceeded all regulatory capital requirements.
Asset/Liability Management
Our Risk When Interest Rates Change. The rates of interest we earn on assets and pay on liabilities generally are established contractually for a period of time. Market rates change over time. Like other financial institutions, our results of operations are impacted by changes in interest rates and the interest rate sensitivity of our assets and liabilities. The risk associated with changes in interest rates and our ability to adapt to these changes is known as interest rate risk and is our most significant market risk.
How We Measure Our Risk of Interest Rate Changes. As part of our attempt to manage our exposure to changes in interest rates and comply with applicable regulations, we monitor our interest rate risk. In doing so, we analyze and manage assets and liabilities based on their interest rates and payment streams, timing of maturities, repricing opportunities, and sensitivity to actual or potential changes in market interest rates.
We are subject to interest rate risk to the extent that our interest-bearing liabilities, primarily deposits and FHLB advances, reprice more rapidly or at different rates than our interest-earning assets. In order to minimize the potential for adverse effects of material prolonged increases or decreases in interest rates on our results of operations, we have adopted an asset and liability management policy. Our board of directors sets the asset and liability policy, which is implemented by the asset/liability committee.
The purpose of the asset/liability committee is to communicate, coordinate, and control asset/liability management consistent with our business plan and board-approved policies. The committee establishes and monitors the volume and mix of assets and funding sources, taking into account relative costs and spreads, interest rate sensitivity and liquidity needs. The objectives are to manage assets and funding sources to produce results that are consistent with liquidity, capital adequacy, growth, risk and profitability goals.
The committee generally meets quarterly to, among other things, protect capital through earnings stability over the interest rate cycle; maintain our well-capitalized status; and provide a reasonable return on investment. The committee recommends appropriate strategy changes based on this review. The committee is responsible for reviewing and reporting the effects of the policy implementations and strategies to the board of directors at least quarterly. Executive management oversee the process on a daily basis.
Our asset/liability management strategy dictates acceptable limits on the amounts of change in given changes in interest rates. For interest rate increases of 100, 200, and 300 basis points, our policy dictates that our Economic Value of
Equity (“EVE”) ratio should not fall below 10.0%, 20.0%, and 30.0%, respectively. As illustrated in the table below, we were in compliance with this aspect of our asset/liability management policy at December 31, 2020.
Mid-Southern Savings Bank uses an EVE interest rate sensitivity analysis in order to evaluate the impact of its interest rate risk on earnings and capital. This is measured by computing the changes in net EVE for its cash flow from assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet items in the event of a range of assumed changes in market interest rates. EVE modeling involves discounting present values of cash flows for on and off-balance sheet items under different interest rate scenarios and provides no effect given to any steps that management might take to counter the effect of the interest rate movements. The discounted present value of all cash flows represents the Mid-Southern Savings Bank’s EVE and is equal to the market value of assets minus the market value of liabilities, with adjustments made for off balance sheet items. The amount of base case EVE and its sensitivity to shifts in interest rates provide a measure of the longer-term re-pricing and option risk in the balance sheet. The table presented below, as of December 31, 2020, is an internal analysis of our interest rate risk as measured by changes in EVE for instantaneous and sustained parallel shifts in the yield curve, in 100 basis point increments, from no change to up 400 basis points. A decline beyond 100 basis points is not reported as any further decline in rates is unlikely as the current federal funds rate is from 0.0% to 0.25%.
In addition to monitoring selected measures of EVE, management also monitors effects on net interest income resulting from increases or decrease in rates. This process is used in conjunction with EVE measures to identify excessive interest rate risk. In managing our assets/liability mix, depending on the relationship between long- and short-term interest rates, market conditions and consumer preference, we may place somewhat greater emphasis on maximizing its net interest margin than on strictly matching the interest rate sensitivity of its assets and liabilities. Management also believes that the increased net income which may result from an acceptable mismatch in the actual maturity or re-pricing of its asset and liability portfolios can, during periods of declining or stable interest rates, provide sufficient returns to justify the increased exposure to sudden and unexpected increases in interest rates which may result from such a mismatch. Management believes that our level of interest rate risk is acceptable under this approach.
In evaluating our exposure to interest rate movements, certain shortcomings inherent in the method of analysis presented in the foregoing table must be considered. For example, although certain assets and liabilities may have similar maturities or re-pricing periods, they may react in different degrees to changes in market interest rates. Also, the interest rates on certain types of assets and liabilities may fluctuate in advance of changes in market interest rates, while interest rates on other types may lag behind changes in interest rates. Additionally, certain assets, such as adjustable-rate mortgages, have features which restrict changes in interest rates on a short-term basis and over the life of the asset. Further, in the event of a significant change in interest rates, prepayment and early withdrawal levels would likely deviate significantly from those assumed above. Finally, the ability of many borrowers to service their debt may decrease in the event of an interest rate increase. We consider all of these factors in monitoring our exposure to interest rate risk.