Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read together with the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements. Please see the cautionary note regarding these statements at the beginning of this report.
Overview
The Company has historically provided leasing and finance services to regional airlines worldwide and has been principally engaged in leasing mid-life regional aircraft to customers worldwide under operating leases and finance leases. In addition to leasing activities, the Company has also sold aircraft from its operating lease portfolio to third parties, including other leasing companies, financial services companies, and airlines. Its operating performance is driven by the composition of its aircraft portfolio, the terms of its leases, and the interest rate of its debt, as well as asset sales.
The COVID-19 pandemic has led to significant cash flow issues for many lessors. Some of the Company’s customers were unable to timely meet their obligations under their lease obligations with the Company during 2020. This in turn has caused those lessees to make requests for lease payment concessions and/or deferrals from the Company, which in turn impacted the Company’s cash flow. The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic substantially impeded the Company’s ability to regain compliance with its debt covenants under its credit facility with lenders led by agent bank MUFG Union Bank (the “MUFG Lenders”), which credit facility was in default prior to the COVID-19 pandemic due to the failure of the Company’s largest customer, a European regional carrier.
Average portfolio utilization was approximately 88% and 95% during 2020 and 2019, respectively. The year-to-year decrease was due to aircraft sales during 2020 and aircraft that were on lease in 2019, but off lease in 2020.
Net loss for 2020 and 2019 was $42.2 million and $16.7 million, respectively, resulting in basic and diluted loss per share of $(27.33) and $(10.78), respectively. Pre-tax profit margin (which the Company calculates as its (loss)/income before income tax (benefit)/provision as a percentage of its revenues and other income) was (284%) and (49%) in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Due to the Company’s default under its indebtedness, the Company was unable to purchase any aircraft during 2020. During 2020, the Company sold one aircraft that been held for sale and two aircraft that had been held under operating leases. A customer that financed an aircraft that had been held under a sales-type lease and a customer that financed three aircraft under direct financing leases exercised purchase options during 2020. The Company ended the year with a total of six aircraft held for lease, with a net book value of approximately $46 million. This represents a 58% decrease compared to the net book value of the Company’s aircraft and engines held for lease at December 31, 2019. In addition to the aircraft held for lease at year-end, the Company held two aircraft subject to finance leases and held seven aircraft and airframe parts from two aircraft held for sale.
Since September 2019, the Company has been primarily occupied with the workout of its debt with the MUFG Lenders and with the special purpose debt on six aircraft financed with NordDeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale, New York Branch (“Nord LB”).
The workout with the MUFG Lenders culminated in the sale of the MUFG indebtedness to Drake in October 2020, which consisted of $87.9 million loan indebtedness to the MUFG Lenders, including deferred interest, and approximately $3.1 million owed to MUFG Bank, Ltd for termination of interest rate swaps entered into with respect to the Drake Indebtedness (collectively, the “MUFG Indebtedness”).
The Company’s special purpose financing debt owed to Nord LB related to three of the Company’s assets was repaid in full as a result of dispositions of the three aircraft over the course of the last two years. In March 2021, the Company sold its membership interest in ACY E-175 LLC (“ACY E-175”), and the buyer assumed the last refinancing debt owed to Nord LB.
On March 29, 2021, the Company and its subsidiaries, JetFleet Holding Corp. and JetFleet Management Corp. (“the Debtors”) filed a voluntary petition for bankruptcy protection under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware. The Company also filed motions with the Bankruptcy Court seeking authorization to continue to operate its businesses as “debtors-in-possession” under the jurisdiction of the Court and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Bankruptcy Code and orders of the Court. The Company expects to continue existing operations without interruption during the pendency of the Chapter 11 Case. To maintain and continue uninterrupted ordinary course operations during the Chapter 11 Case, the Debtors have filed a variety of “first day” motions seeking approval from the Court for various forms of customary relief. These motions are designed primarily to minimize the effect of bankruptcy on the Company’s operations, customers and employees. The Company intends to conduct an Auction Sale of the collateral securing the Drake Indebtedness, which comprises nearly all of the aircraft assets currently owned by the Company, as part of its Chapter 11 proceeding in order to satisfy the Company’s obligations pursuant to the Drake Indebtedness to Drake, the Company’s sole secured lender. The Company has entered into a stalking horse agreement with an affiliate of Drake for the sale of the Drake Collateral to Drake in full satisfaction of the Company’s obligations under the Drake Indebtedness. If the Auction Sale is completed, the Company would be left with only the Part-out Assets and sales-type finance lease receivables from two customers in Kenya, for which the Company has not received payments since early 2020.
Fleet Summary
(a) Assets Held for Lease
Key portfolio metrics of the Company’s aircraft held for lease as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were as follows:
The following table sets forth the net book value and percentage of the net book value, by type, of the Company’s assets that were held for lease at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
The Company did not purchase any aircraft during 2020 and sold one aircraft that been held for sale, one aircraft that had been held under a sales-type lease, three aircraft that had been held under direct financing leases and two aircraft that had been held under operating leases, as well as certain aircraft parts.
During 2019, the Company purchased no aircraft and sold one aircraft that had been held for lease, one aircraft that had been reclassified during the year from held for lease to a sales-type finance lease and two aircraft and an engine that been held for sale, as well as certain aircraft parts. The Company also reclassified three aircraft from held for lease to held for sale.
The following table sets forth the net book value and percentage of the net book value of the Company’s assets that were held for lease at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 in the indicated regions (based on the domicile of the lessee):
For the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately 50%, 19%, 15% and 14% of the Company’s operating lease revenue was derived from customers in the United States, Spain, Canada and Croatia, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2019, approximately 30%, 23%, 23% and 10% of the Company’s operating lease revenue was derived from customers in the United States, Spain, Slovenia and Croatia, respectively. Operating lease revenue does not include interest income from the Company’s finance leases. The following table sets forth geographic information about the Company’s operating lease revenue for leased aircraft and aircraft equipment, grouped by domicile of the lessee:
For the Years Ended December 31,
Region
Number
of lessees
% of
operating
lease revenue
Number
of lessees
% of
operating
lease revenue
Europe
35%
59%
North America
65%
40%
Asia
-
-%
1%
At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company also had two aircraft and six finance lease receivables, respectively, collateralized by aircraft. For the year ended December 31, 2020, 100% of the Company’s finance lease revenue was derived from a customer in Europe. For the year ended December 31, 2019, approximately 57% and 43% of the Company’s finance lease revenue was derived from customers in Africa and Europe, respectively.
(b) Assets Held for Sale
Assets held for sale at December 31, 2020 consisted of three Canadair 900 aircraft, three Embraer 175 aircraft, one Bombardier Dash-8-300 aircraft and airframe parts from two turboprop aircraft. The three Embraer 175 aircraft were owned by a special-purpose subsidiary of the Company. The aircraft, restricted cash and debt obligations, including derivative liability, of the subsidiary were classified as held for sale at December 31, 2020, and the subsidiary was sold during March 2021.
Results of Operations
(i) Revenues and Other Income
Revenues and other income decreased by 63% to $16.2 million in 2020 from $43.6 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily a result of decreased operating lease, maintenance reserves and finance lease revenues in 2020.
Operating lease revenue decreased by 40% to $15.5 million in 2020 from $25.6 million in 2019, primarily due to reduced rent income resulting from the early termination of four aircraft leases with one of the Company’s customers in the third quarter of 2019.
Maintenance reserves that are retained by the Company at lease end are recorded as revenue at that time and decreased by 99% in 2020 from 2019. The Company recorded $0.2 million of such revenue during 2020 when an aircraft that had been on lease was returned to the Company and the lease was terminated. During 2019, the Company recorded $17.0 million of such revenue, arising from maintenance reserves retained upon the termination of four aircraft leases with one customer.
Finance lease revenue decreased by 93% to $0.1 million in 2020 from $0.9 million in 2019 as a result of the exercise of purchase options by the customer for three aircraft during the first quarter of 2020 that had been subject to direct finance leases. The Company is accounting for its two sales-type leases on a non-accrual basis as payments are received.
(ii) Expenses
Total expenses decreased by 4% to $62.0 million in 2020 from $64.8 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily a result of decreases in depreciation, asset impairment losses and bad debt expense, the effects of which were partially offset by increases in interest expense and professional fees and general and administrative and other expenses.
Depreciation expense decreased 39% to $7.0 million in 2020 from $11.6 million in 2019 primarily as a result of the reclassification of four aircraft from held for lease to held for sale during the third quarter of 2019, as well as a decrease in depreciation for two aircraft that were written down to their estimated sale values during the second quarter of 2020 and were sold during the fourth quarter.
During 2020, the Company recorded impairment losses totaling $14,639,900 for seven of its aircraft held for lease, comprised of (i) $7,006,600 for two aircraft that were written down to their sales prices, less cost of sale and (ii) $7,633,300 for five aircraft that were written down based on third-party appraisals. The Company also recorded losses of $11,337,200 for a turboprop aircraft and three regional jet aircraft that are held for sale and that were written down based on third-party appraisals and $2,774,700 for three regional jet aircraft and two turboprop aircraft that are being sold in parts based on estimated sales prices, less cost of sale, provided by the part-out vendors. During 2019, the Company recorded impairment charges totaling $31.0 million on four assets held for sale, based on appraised values, and five assets held for sale, based on expected sales proceeds. As a result of four lease terminations during 2019, the appraised values were based on the maintenance-adjusted condition of the aircraft, rather than the previous basis, which reflected future cash flows under the leases.
During 2019, as a result of payment delinquencies by two customers that financed three of the Company’s aircraft under finance leases, one of which was paid in full by the customer in early 2020, the Company recorded a bad debt expense of $2.9 million. During 2020, the Company recorded an additional bad debt expense of $1.5 million related to the finance leases of the two remaining aircraft to these customers.
The Company’s interest expense increased by 49% to $16.8 million in 2020 from $11.3 million in 2019, primarily as a result of a higher average interest rate and interest expense related to the termination of the Company’s two MUFG Swaps in 2020, the effects of which were partially offset by a lower average debt balance.
Professional fees, general and administrative and other expenses increased 15% to $4.6 million in 2020 from $4.0 million in 2019, primarily due to increased legal fees related to the May 2020 MUFG Indebtedness amendment and litigation relating to an activist shareholder, which was completed in 2020, consulting fees related to the May 2020 MUFG Indebtedness amendment and increased amortization related to the Company’s office lease right of use, the effects of which were partially offset by decreased travel expenses.
The Company had a tax benefit of $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to tax benefit of $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a 7.8% tax benefit compared to a 21.3% tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2019. The difference in the effective income tax rate from the normal statutory rate was primarily related to recording a $7.5 million valuation allowance in the current period on the Company’s U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets after concluding that the Company’s net U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets are not supported by either future taxable income or availability of future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, or available refunds from carryback of foreign operating losses.
In March of 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) became law. The CARES Act included tax provisions under which net operating losses from 2018, 2019 and 2020 can be carried back for five years, modifying the law that had previously not permitted any carryback, and also increased the amount of deductible interest from 30% to 50% of adjusted taxable income for the 2019 and 2020 years. These changes have not had any effect on the Company’s expected cash tax expenditures or income tax expense. The CARES Act also accelerated the ability to receive refunds of alternative minimum tax credits from prior years, which allowed the Company to accelerate $11,400 of the refund of such credit into its 2019 return.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, the Company had total book assets of approximately $93.4 million and liabilities of $111 million, resulting in a negative book equity of $17.6 million. The largest portion, $92.4 million, of the Company’s debt is owed to Drake and was payable with accrued interest on March 31, 2021.
The Company did not have the resources to meet its obligations to repay the Drake debt when due on March 31, 2021, which is a principal reason for its decision to file for protection under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code, as discussed in Note 1(e). Management has also recognized that the Company requires additional funding to continue its operations and has not identified a source for such funding to date. Although management plans include securing additional funding, it cannot conclude that it is probable that such plan will be achieved and mitigate the conditions that led to substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company’s poor financial position, including its poor short-term liquidity given the impending maturity of the Drake debt, the amount of liability under the Drake debt in relation to the fair value of the Company’s assets and the uncertainty of generating sufficient funds over the year after publication of its financial statements to continue operations have led the Company to conclude that there is substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern.
The accompanying audited consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern and contemplate the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is contingent upon its ability to successfully implement a plan of reorganization, among other factors, and the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities are subject to uncertainty. Further, any plan of reorganization could materially change the amounts of assets and liabilities reported in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. The consolidated financial statements presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been prepared on a going concern basis and do not include any adjustments that might arise as a result of uncertainties about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern or as a consequence of its Chapter 11 filing.
(a) MUFG Credit Facility and Drake Indebtedness
On May 1, 2020, the Company and the MUFG Lenders entered into a Fourth Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement (the "MUFG Loan Agreement") that amended and restated the existing agreement regarding the Company's indebtedness to the MUFG Lenders and granted forbearances of the existing defaults and events of default under the MUFG Loan Agreement. On October 30, 2020, Drake purchased all of the indebtedness of the Company under the MUFG Loan, totaling approximately $87.9 million as well as all of the Company's indebtedness to MUFG Bank, Ltd. of approximately $3.1 million for termination of interest rate swaps entered into with respect to such MUFG Loan Agreement indebtedness. The purchase and sale was consented to by the Company pursuant to a Consent and Release Agreement of Borrower Parties, entered into by the Company and its subsidiaries.
On the same day, the Company entered into an Amendment No. 1 to the MUFG Loan Agreement (“Amendment No. 1”) with Drake and UMB Bank, N.A., the replacement Administrative Agent under the MUFG Loan Agreement, to amend the MUFG Loan Agreement to: (i) defer the cash component of any monthly interest payments due under the MUFG Loan Agreement, commencing with the payments due for March 2020, and capitalize and add such deferred interest to the principal balance of the indebtedness until such time as the indebtedness is repaid; (ii) require lender approval for any material changes in lease terms with respect to the collateral; and (iii) delete certain financial reporting requirements and change required frequency of certain other surviving reporting requirements. The indebtedness continues to be secured by a first priority lien on all of the Company's assets, including the Company’s aircraft portfolio.
The Company and Drake have entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (“Stalking Horse Agreement”) for the sale of the Drake Collateral, subject to better and higher offers. The Stalking Horse Agreement was entered into in conjunction with the filing by the Company of its Chapter 11 Case. The Company has requested the Court approve certain bidding procedures with respect to the Auction Sale for the Drake Collateral and other Company’s assets, in order to fund repayment of its indebtedness to Drake, as its sole secured lender. The consummation of a sale of Drake Collateral in the Auction Sale on terms as set forth in the Stalking Horse Agreement, or pursuant to higher and better offers, is expected to resolve in full the Company’s obligations owed pursuant to the Drake Indebtedness.
Following is a summary of the principal terms and conditions of the Stalking Horse Agreement:
● Assets Covered. The Stalking Horse Agreement covers the Drake Collateral, consisting of ten aircraft assets and related leases (“Assumed Leases”) over which Drake holds a first priority lien that secures the Drake Indebtedness.
●
Purchase Price. The aggregate consideration for the purchase of the Drake Collateral is an amount equal to the amount of the outstanding secured obligations.
●
Sale Order Approval Required. The mutual obligations for the purchase and sale of the Drake Collateral is subject to the entry of an order by the Bankruptcy Court authorizing the purchase transaction as the best and highest offer available with respect to such assets.
●
Excluded Assets. Certain assets are not being sold to Drake pursuant to the Stalking Horse Agreement (“Excluded Assets”), including two aircraft on lease to Kenyan lessees, and certain aircraft and an engine that are being parted out under consignment arrangements, which Excluded Assets shall remain free and clear of Drake claims, if and when the sale of the Drake Collateral pursuant to the Stalking Horse Agreement or to another higher and better offer is consummated.
●
Economic Closing Date Allocation. Lease revenue received with respect to the Drake Collateral shall be allocated based on a February 1, 2021 economic closing date (the “ECD”). Any lease revenue received by the Company for periods prior to the ECD shall be the property of the Company. Any lease revenue received that relates to any period after the ECD (“Post-ECD Proceeds”) shall be held by the Company for the benefit of Drake and remitted to Drake pursuant to terms of the cash collateral order entered into in connection with the Company's Chapter 11 Case.
●
Assumed Liabilities. Drake shall assume liability for (a) any amounts required to be paid by the Company pursuant to section 365 of the Bankruptcy Code in connection with the assumption and assignment of the Assumed Leases; (b) all costs of obtaining necessary consents to assignment of the Assumed Leases (to the extent not assignable pursuant to contract or applicable law); (c) all of the legal fees payable to lessees under the Assumed Leases incurred in connection with legal review and negotiation of the lease novation or assignment documents for the Assumed Leases, and 50% of the Company’s legal fees for such legal review and negotiation; (d) sales, use, documentary, transfer, property, bulk, stamp, ad valorem or similar tax imposed on the assignment and transfer of the Drake Collateral, and any related penalties, or interest incurred; (e) reimbursements payable to a lessee upon completion of specific qualified maintenance projects, as defined and specified under any Assumed Lease; and (f) any unsatisfied liabilities with respect to certain programs that the Company maintains in connection with its leasing business in respect of the Assumed Leases.
●
Release of Secured Lender Claims on Company Assets. On the date that the transfer of title to all Drake Collateral shall have been completed, the Drake Indebtedness shall be deemed satisfied in full and canceled, and Drake shall release any claims it may otherwise have in: (a) any cash held in the Company’s bank accounts that are not Post-ECD Proceeds; (b) any proceeds received by the Company under any consignment contract with respect to Excluded Assets; (c) all assets of the Company other than the Drake Collateral; and (d) any proceeds of sale or other funds received in respect of the foregoing items listed in (a)-(c).
(b) Special-purpose Financing and Nord Loans
In August 2016, the Company acquired, using wholly-owned special-purpose entities, two regional jet aircraft, using cash and third-party financing (referred to as “special-purpose financing” or “UK LLC SPE Financing”) separate from the MUFG Credit Facility.
In February 2019, the UK LLC SPE Financing was repaid as part of a refinancing involving the Nord Loans, which were made to two other special-purpose subsidiaries of AeroCentury (the “LLC Borrowers”). Under the Nord Loans, four aircraft that previously served as collateral under the MUFG Credit Facility were moved into newly formed special-purpose subsidiaries and, along with the aircraft owned by the two existing special-purpose subsidiaries, were pledged as collateral under the Nord Loans. The Nord Loans were unaffected by the Company’s default under the MUFG Credit Facility.
Collectively, the LLC Borrowers entered into six interest rate derivatives, or interest rate swaps. Each such interest rate swap had a notional amount that mirrored the amortization under the corresponding Nord Loan entered into by the LLC Borrowers, effectively converting each of the six Nord Loans from a variable to a fixed interest rate. Each of these six interest rate swaps extend for the length of the corresponding Nord Loan, with maturities from 2020 through 2025. One of the aircraft that was subject to Nord Loan financing was sold during the fourth quarter of 2019 and the related Nord Loan and interest rate swap were terminated. Accumulated other comprehensive loss of $896,800 related to the Nord Swaps was recognized as an expense in the 2020.
In October 2020, the Company sold two regional jet aircraft to the lessee, and fully repaid the indebtedness on such aircraft with the sale proceeds. The excess proceeds from the sale were held as restricted cash by another special-purpose subsidiary of the Company and were retained by the special purpose entity holding the remaining three aircraft subject to the Nord Loans upon its sale in March 2021.
On March 16, 2021, the Company sold ACY E-175, the debtor under the Nord Loans secured by the three remaining E-175 aircraft that were refinanced through the Nord Loans, which were assumed by the buyer. The Company received a $2.1 million cash payment, the balance of the sales proceeds were used to reduce the Drake Indebtedness and the Company was released from all obligations with respect to the Nord Loan indebtedness and the related interest swaps. In December 2020, the Company determined that it was probable that the remaining interest payments subject to the ACY E-175 LLC swaps occurring after January 2021 would not occur, and accumulated other comprehensive income related to such payments was recognized in ordinary income in December 2020.
(c) Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On May 20, 2020, JetFleet Management Corp. (the “PPP Borrower”), a subsidiary of AeroCentury Corp., was granted a loan (the “PPP Loan”) from American Express National Bank in the aggregate amount of $276,353, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under Division A, Title I of the CARES Act, which was enacted on March 27, 2020. The application for these funds required the Company to, in good faith, certify that the current economic uncertainty made the loan request necessary to support the ongoing operations of the Company. This certification further required the Company to take into account its current business activity and its ability to access other sources of liquidity sufficient to support ongoing operations in a manner not significantly detrimental to the business. The forgiveness of the related loan is dependent on the Company having initially qualified for the loan and then qualifying for loan forgiveness based on its future adherence to the forgiveness criteria.
The PPP Loan, which was in the form of a Note dated May 18, 2020 issued by the PPP Borrower, matures on April 22, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 1.00% per annum, payable in 18 monthly payments commencing on October 19, 2021.
In February 2021, the Company was granted a second PPP Loan (“Second PPP Loan”) (collectively, with the initial PPP Loan, the “PPP Loans”) in the aggregate amount of $170,002. The Second PPP Loan, in the form of a Note dated February 11, 2021, matures on February 11, 2026 and bears interest at a rate of 1.00% per annum, payable in monthly payments commencing 30 days after the Small Business Administration has made its final determination that any part of the loan will not be forgiven.
The PPP Loans may be prepaid by the PPP Borrower at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties. Funds from the PPP Loans may only be used for payroll costs and any payments of certain covered interest, lease and utility payments. The Company intends to use the entire PPP Loans for qualifying expenses. Under the terms of the PPP, certain amounts of the PPP Loans may be forgiven if they are used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act. Although the Company expects that all or a significant portion of the PPP Loans will be forgiven, no assurance can be provided that the Company will obtain such forgiveness.
(d) Cash Flow
The Company’s primary sources of cash from operations are payments due under the Company’s operating and finance leases, maintenance reserves, which are billed monthly to lessees based on asset usage, and proceeds from the sale of aircraft and engines.
The Company’s primary uses of cash are for (i) salaries, employee benefits and general and administrative expenses, (ii) professional fees and legal expenses with respect to the Company’s Chapter 11 Case and restructuring and recapitalization effort; (iii) maintenance expense and (iv) reimbursement to lessees from collected maintenance reserves. The Company’s cash flow is subject to a cash collateral order issued by the Bankruptcy Court.
During 2019, the Company engaged B. Riley Securities, Inc. as an investment banking advisor to help (i) negotiate with the Company’ stakeholders and formulate and analyze the Company’s various strategic financial alternatives with respect to its plan of reorganization and (ii) locate and negotiate with potential lenders, investors or transaction partners who would play a role in recapitalization of the Company.
The Company’s ability to develop and obtain approval for its plan of reorganization is subject to a variety of factors, as discussed under Factors that May Affect Future Results and Liquidity - Risks Related to Chapter 11 Case.
The Company’s payments for maintenance consist of reimbursements to lessees for eligible maintenance costs under their leases and maintenance incurred directly by the Company for preparation of off-lease assets for re-lease to new customers. The timing and amount of such payments may vary widely between quarterly and annual periods, as the required maintenance events can vary greatly in magnitude and cost, and the performance of the required maintenance events by the lessee or the Company, as applicable, are not regularly scheduled calendar events and do not occur at uniform intervals.
Though the Company’s maintenance payments typically constitute a large portion of its cash outflow, this is not likely to be the case in the near term. Only three lessees of the Company’s aircraft pay maintenance reserves under their leases. One lessee has agreed with the Company that if the Company is unable or unwilling to repay its maintenance reimbursement obligations to the lessee, the reimbursement obligation will be offset against the lessee’s monthly rental obligations to the Company until such maintenance reimbursement obligations are repaid in full. The two other lessees that pay maintenance reserves are currently in arrearage under their leases and will not be eligible to submit maintenance reserve claims until they have cured their arrearages. When and if the Auction Sale of the Company’s aircraft portfolio is consummated, any existing reimbursement obligations under the Company’s leases sold at the Auction Sale will be assumed by the asset buyer.
Actual results could deviate substantially from the assumptions management has made in forecasting the Company’s future cash flow. As discussed in Liquidity and Capital Resources - (a) MUFG Credit Facility and Drake Indebtedness and in Outlook and Factors that May Affect Future Results and Liquidity, there are a number of factors that may cause actual results to deviate from these forecasts. If these assumptions prove to be incorrect and the Company’s cash requirements exceed its cash flow, the Company would need to pursue additional sources of financing to satisfy these requirements, which may not be available when needed, on acceptable terms or at all. See Factors that May Affect Future Results and Liquidity for more information about financing risks and limitations.
(i) Operating activities
The Company’s cash flow from operations decreased by $4.2 million in 2020 compared to 2019. As discussed below, the decrease in cash flow was primarily a result of decreases in payments received for rent, maintenance reserves and finance lease interest, the effects of which were partially offset by decreases in payments made for interest and maintenance.
(A) Payments for rent
Receipts from lessees for rent decreased by $7.5 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to delinquencies related to one of the Company’s customers, the repossession of four aircraft during the third quarter of 2019, the sale of an aircraft during each of the first and fourth quarters of 2019 and the sale of two aircraft in the fourth quarter of 2020.
(B) Payments for maintenance reserves
Receipts from lessees for maintenance reserves decreased by $2.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the repossession of four aircraft during the third quarter of 2019.
(C) Payments for finance lease interest
Payments received for finance lease interest decreased by $0.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019 as a result of the sale during the first quarter of 2020 of four aircraft that were subject to finance leases and a decrease in payments received from two lessees which have been impacted by the COVID 19 pandemic.
(D) Payments for interest
Payments made for interest decreased by $4.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019 as a result the deferral of a portion of the interest due on the Company’s MUFG Indebtedness and Drake Indebtedness.
(E) Payments for maintenance
Payments made for maintenance decreased by $1.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019 as a result of decreased maintenance performed by the Company on off-lease aircraft to prepare them for sale or re-lease and decreased lessee maintenance reserves claims in 2020.
(ii) Investing activities
The Company did not acquire any aircraft during 2020 or 2019. During 2020 and 2019, the Company received net cash of $17.1 million and $16.8 million, respectively, from asset sales.
(iii) Financing activities
During 2020, the Company borrowed $5.6 million, in the form of paid-in-kind interest that was added to the outstanding principal balance under the MUFG Indebtedness and Drake Indebtedness. During 2019, the Company borrowed $6.0 million under the MUFG Credit Facility. In 2020 and 2019, the Company repaid $1.2 million and $44.3 million, respectively, of its total outstanding debt under the MUFG Indebtedness and Drake Indebtedness. Such repayments were funded by excess cash flow, the sale of assets and, in 2019, a portion of the $44.3 million in proceeds from the Nord Loans. During 2020 and 2019, the Company’s special-purpose entities repaid $16.8 million and $13.4 million, respectively, of the Nord Loans. During 2019, the Company also repaid $9.2 million of UK LLC SPE Financing. During 2020 and 2019, the Company paid approximately $1.7 million and $6.5 million, respectively, for debt issuance and amendment fees.
(iv) Off balance sheet arrangements
The Company has no material off -balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies, Judgments and Estimates
The Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations are based upon the consolidated financial statements included in this report, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements or during the applicable reporting period. In the event that actual results differ from these estimates or the Company adjusts these estimates in future periods, the Company’s operating results and financial position could be materially affected. For a further discussion of Critical Accounting Policies, Judgments and Estimates, refer to Note 1 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Outlook
Bankruptcy Process. The Company filed for protection under Chapter 11 of Title 11 of the U.S. Code on March 29, 2021, in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware, (Case No. 21-10636). Immediately prior to the filing, the Company completed the sale of its ACY E-175 LLC subsidiary, thereby resolving $13.4 million in financing debt that was remaining due under the Nord Loans, and also generated $2.1 million in cash proceeds for the Company. As part of the bankruptcy proceedings, the Company intends to conduct an Auction Sale of the Drake Collateral to generate proceeds to be applied to the satisfaction of the Drake Indebtedness. The Company has in place a stalking horse agreement with Drake that provides that if Drake prevails at the Auction Sale as the approved buyer for the Drake Collateral, the purchase would fully resolve the Company’s obligations under the Drake Indebtedness, or, in the alternative, if the Bankruptcy Court and Drake approve a more favorable bid than Drake’s bid, then Drake would waive any deficiency between the winning bid and the amount of the Drake Indebtedness. If the Auction Sale is approved by the Bankruptcy Court and consummated, the Company anticipates that this will fully resolve the Drake Indebtedness, but it will also result in the Company’s disposition the Drake Collateral as revenue-generating assets of the Company, and would leave the Company with minimal cash-generating assets, and the Company’s only source of cash would be the remainder of the Company’s cash on hand upon the conclusion of the Chapter 11 Case.
Based on the Company’s current projections, the Company anticipates that the Company’s current cash position should be sufficient to fund the Company through a planned exit from its bankruptcy process sometime in the late second or early third quarter of 2021, assuming no significant unexpected expenses are incurred during the bankruptcy process. The Company is currently developing its plan of reorganization and is seeking debt or equity investors to provide capital to the Company to fund its business plan to restart its aircraft leasing business upon exit from bankruptcy. If the Company is unsuccessful in timely exiting its Chapter 11 proceeding, or has insufficient cash to complete its reorganization, or is unable to find post-exit funding, the Company will likely be forced to cease operations and liquidate and distribute any remaining assets toward satisfaction of the Company’s creditors.
Factors that May Affect Future Results and Liquidity
The Company’s business, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, prospects and reputation could be affected by a number of factors. In addition to matters discussed elsewhere in this discussion, the Company believes the following are the most significant factors that may impact the Company; however, additional or other factors not presently known to the Company or that management presently deems immaterial could also impact the Company and its performance and liquidity.
●
Risks related to the Chapter 11 Case
Chapter 11 Effect on Common Stock Value. As previously disclosed, on March 29, 2021, the Company and its subsidiaries filed voluntary petitions under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code in the Bankruptcy Court, thereby commencing the Chapter 11 Case. The price of the Company’s common stock has been volatile following the commencement of the Chapter 11 Case and the Company’s common stock may decrease in value or become worthless. Accordingly, any trading in the Company’s common stock during the pendency of the Company’s Chapter 11 Case is highly speculative and poses substantial risks to purchasers of the Company’s common stock. As discussed below, recoveries in the Chapter 11 Case for holders of common stock, if any, will depend upon the Company’s ability to negotiate and confirm a plan, the terms of such plan, the recovery of the Company’s business from its loan default and the COVID-19 pandemic, if any, and the value of the Company’s assets. Although the Company cannot predict how its common stock will be treated under a plan, the Company expects that common stockholders would not receive a recovery through any plan unless the holders of more senior claims and interests, such as secured indebtedness, are paid in full, which would require a significant, rapid and currently unanticipated improvement in business conditions to pre-COVID-19 or close to pre-COVID-19 levels. Consequently, there is a significant risk that the holders of the Company’s common stock will receive no recovery under the Chapter 11 Case and that the Company’s common stock will be worthless.
Impact of Chapter 11 on Business Strategy. For the duration of the Chapter 11 Case, the Company’s operations and ability to execute its business strategy will be subject to the risks and uncertainties associated with bankruptcy. These risks include:
●
the ability to obtain Bankruptcy Court approval with respect to motions filed in the Chapter 11 Case from time to time;
●
the ability to comply with and operate under the requirements and constraints of the Bankruptcy Code and under any cash management, adequate protection, or other orders entered by the Bankruptcy Court from time to time;
●
the ability to fund operations from cash on hand;
●
the ability to negotiate and consummate a Chapter 11 plan; and
●
the ability to develop, fund, and execute a business plan.
These risks and uncertainties could affect the Company’s business and operations in various ways. For example, negative events or publicity associated with the Chapter 11 Case could adversely affect the Company’s relationships with its suppliers, customers and employees. In particular, critical vendors, suppliers, and/or customers may determine not to do business with the Company due to the Chapter 11 Case and the Company may not be successful in securing alternative sources or relationships. Also, transactions outside the ordinary course of business are subject to the prior approval of the Bankruptcy Court, which may limit the Company’s ability to respond timely to certain events or take advantage of opportunities. Because of the risks and uncertainties associated with the Chapter 11 Case, the Company cannot predict or quantify the ultimate impact that events occurring during the Chapter 11 process may have on the Company’s business, financial condition and results of operations.
Adverse Impact of Chapter 11 Case on Business and Human Resources. While the Chapter 11 Case continues, the Company’s management will be required to spend a significant amount of time and effort focusing on the case. This diversion of attention may materially adversely affect the conduct of the Company’s business, and, as a result, the Company’s financial condition and results of operations, particularly if the Chapter 11 Case becomes protracted. During the Chapter 11 Case, the Company’s employees will face considerable distraction and uncertainty and the Company may experience increased levels of employee attrition. A loss of key personnel or material erosion of employee morale could have a materially adverse effect on the Company’s ability to meet customer expectations, thereby adversely affecting its business and results of operations. The failure to retain or attract members of the Company’s management team and other key personnel could impair its ability to execute its strategy and implement operational initiatives and the Company’s reorganization plan, thereby having a material adverse effect on its financial condition and results of operations.
Inability to Confirm Chapter 11 Plan of Reorganization; Conversion to Chapter 7. As part of the Chapter 11 process, the Company will need to negotiate a plan of reorganization with its creditors. If the Company is unable to negotiate a plan of reorganization that will result in it remaining a going concern, upon a showing of cause, the Bankruptcy Court may convert the Chapter 11 Case to a case under Chapter 7 proceeding. In such event, a Chapter 7 trustee would be appointed or elected to liquidate the Company’s assets for distribution to creditors in accordance with the priorities established by the Bankruptcy Code. Holders of the Company’s common stock could lose their entire investment in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy.
Change in Capital Structure Upon Bankruptcy Exit. The Company’s post-bankruptcy capital structure has yet to be determined and will be set pursuant to the reorganization plan (“Reorganization Plan”) that requires Bankruptcy Court approval. The reorganization of the Company’s capital structure may include exchanges or new issuances of new debt or equity securities for existing securities, debt or claims against the Company. Existing equity securities are subject to risk of being cancelled. The success of a reorganization through any such exchanges or modifications will depend on approval by the Bankruptcy Court and the willingness of existing stakeholders to agree to the exchange or modification, subject to the provisions of the Bankruptcy Code, and there can be no guarantee of success. If such exchanges or modifications are successful, holders of the Company’s debt or of claims against it may find their holdings no longer have any value or are materially reduced in value, or they may be converted to equity and be diluted or may be modified or replaced by debt with a principal amount that is less than the outstanding principal amount, longer maturities and reduced interest rates. Holders of common stock may also find that their holdings no longer have any value and face highly uncertain or no recoveries under a Reorganization Plan.
There can be no assurance that any newly issued debt or equity securities issued for existing securities will maintain their value at the time of issuance. If existing debt or equity holders are adversely affected by a reorganization, it may adversely affect the Company’s ability to issue new debt or equity in the future. Although the Company cannot predict how the claims and interests of stakeholders in the Chapter 11 Case, including holders of common stock, will ultimately be resolved, the Company expects that common stockholders will not receive a recovery through any Reorganization Plan unless the holders of more senior claims and interests, such as secured and unsecured indebtedness, are paid in full. Consequently, there is a significant risk that the holders of the Company’s common stock would receive no recovery under the Chapter 11 Case and that the Company’s common stock will be worthless.
Plan Assumptions May Prove Inaccurate. Any Chapter 11 Reorganization Plan that the Company may implement will affect both its capital structure and the ownership, structure and operation of its business and will likely reflect assumptions and analyses based on its experience and perception of historical trends, current conditions and expected future developments, as well as other factors that the Company considers appropriate under the circumstances. Whether actual future results and developments will be consistent with management’s expectations and assumptions depends on a number of factors, including but not limited to (i) the Company’s ability to substantially change its capital structure; and (ii) the overall strength and stability of general economic conditions, both in the U.S. and in global markets. The failure of any of these factors could materially adversely affect the successful reorganization of the Company’s businesses.
In addition, any Reorganization Plan will likely rely upon financial projections, including with respect to revenues, consolidated adjusted EBITDA, capital expenditures, debt service and cash flow. Financial forecasts are necessarily speculative, and it is likely that one or more of the assumptions and estimates that are the basis of these financial forecasts will not be accurate. In the Company’s case, the forecasts will be even more speculative than normal, because they may involve fundamental changes in the nature of the Company’s capital structure. Additionally, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the aviation and travel industry in general, and on the Company, make it even more challenging than usual to develop business forecasts. Accordingly, the Company expects that its actual financial condition and results of operations will differ, perhaps materially, from what is anticipated. Consequently, there can be no assurance that the results or developments contemplated by any Reorganization Plan will occur or, even if they do occur, that they will have the anticipated effects on the Company’s businesses or operations. The failure of any such results or developments to materialize as anticipated could materially adversely affect the successful execution of any Reorganization Plan.
Non-dischargeable Claims. The Bankruptcy Code provides that the confirmation of a debtor’s Reorganization Plan by the Bankruptcy Court discharges a debtor from substantially all debts arising prior to confirmation. With few exceptions, all claims that arose prior to confirmation of the Reorganization Plan (i) would be subject to compromise and/or treatment under the Reorganization Plan and (ii) would be discharged in accordance with the Bankruptcy Code and the terms of the Reorganization Plan. Any claims not ultimately discharged through the Company’s Chapter 11 Reorganization Plan could be asserted against the reorganized entities and may have an adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations on a post-reorganization basis.
Protracted Chapter 11 Case Adverse to Business. A long period of operations under Bankruptcy Court protection could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s business, financial condition, results of operations, and liquidity. So long as the Chapter 11 Case continues, senior management will be required to spend a significant amount of time and effort dealing with the reorganization instead of focusing exclusively on business operations. A prolonged period of operating under Bankruptcy Court protection also may make it more difficult to retain management and other key personnel necessary to the success of the Company’s business. In addition, the longer the Chapter 11 Case continues, the more likely it is that customers and suppliers will lose confidence in the Company’s ability to reorganize its business successfully and will seek to establish alternative commercial relationships.
So long as the Chapter 11 Case continues, the Company will be required to incur substantial costs for professional fees and other expenses associated with the administration of the Chapter 11 Case, including potentially the cost of litigation. In general, litigation can be expensive and time consuming to bring or defend against. Such litigation could result in settlements or damages that could significantly affect the Company’s financial results. It is also possible that certain parties will commence litigation with respect to the treatment of their claims under a Reorganization Plan. It is not possible to predict the potential litigation that the Company may become party to, nor the final resolution of such litigation. The impact of any such litigation on the Company’s business and financial stability, however, could be material. Should the Chapter 11 Case be protracted, the Company may also need to seek new financing to fund operations. If the Company is unable to obtain such financing on favorable terms or at all, the chances of confirming a Reorganization Plan may be seriously jeopardized and the likelihood that we will instead be required to liquidate the Company’s assets may increase.
Court-ordered Restrictions on Trading Common Stock. In connection with the Chapter 11 Case, the Bankruptcy Court entered an order that, among other things, imposes certain trading restrictions on holders of greater than 4.9% of the Company’s common stock. The restrictions in this order are intended to preserve certain of the Company’s tax attributes, including tax losses and carryforwards. There can be no assurance that the existing restrictions will remain in place or that additional or modified trading restrictions will not be implemented with respect to the Company’s common stock, nor can there be any assurance of the Company’s ability to use its tax attributes.
Impact of Further Equity Financings on Existing Stockholders and Market Price. In order to raise additional capital to execute its Reorganization Plan, the Company may in the future issue additional shares of its common stock or other securities convertible into or exchangeable for its common stock at prices that may not be the same as quoted on the NYSE American Stock Exchange at the time of issuance. Investors acquiring shares or other securities in the future could have rights superior to existing stockholders.
Sales of a substantial number of shares of the Company’s common stock, whether in a private placement or in the public markets, or the perception that such sales could occur, could depress the market price of the Company’s common stock and impair the Company’s ability to raise capital through the sale of additional equity securities. The Company cannot predict the effect that future sales of its common stock would have on the market price of its common stock.
No Committed Operating Capital or Acquisition Financing. The Company has no current and no committed capital financings available to it. If the Company succeeds in exiting the Chapter 11 Case, it is unlikely to have available cash to fund long term operations and new aircraft acquisitions. The Company will need to obtain new capital to fund its reorganization and the restart of its aircraft leasing business. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to obtain such additional capital when needed in the amounts desired or on favorable terms. If it is unable to find suitable post-exit funding, the Company will likely be forced to cease operations and liquidate and distribute any remaining assets toward satisfaction of the Company’s creditors.
●
Leasing Industry and Aviation Related Risks.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has had an overwhelming adverse effect on the Company, as it has had on all forms of transportation globally, but most acutely for the airline industry. The combined effect of fear of infection during air travel, quarantines, and shifting international and domestic travel restrictions has caused a dramatic decrease in passenger loads in all areas of the world, not just in those countries with active clusters of COVID-19. This has led to significant cash flow issues for airlines, including some of the Company’s customers, and some airlines have been unable to timely meet their obligations under their lease obligations with the Company. Any significant nonpayment or late payment of lease payments by a significant lessee or combination of lessees could in turn impose limits on the Company’s ability to fund its ongoing operations. Furthermore, for the duration of the pandemic and a period of financial recovery thereafter, sale transactions and financing availability could be curtailed entirely or delayed while the industry returns to financial stability, which could impact the Company’s ability to implement any restart of its leasing business following exit from its Chapter 11 Case.
General Economic Conditions and Lowered Demand for Travel. Because of the international nature of the Company’s business, a downturn in the health of the global economy could have a negative impact on the Company’s financial results, as demand for air travel generally decreases during slow or no-growth periods, and thus demand by airlines for aircraft capacity is also decreased. As discussed above, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant disruptions to the global supply chain, the stock market and consumer and business-to-business commerce, the effects of which may endure well beyond the current pandemic’s life cycle and result in low or negative growth in future periods. According to current reports, scheduled airline flights have been significantly reduced. While lower demand for air travel may actually lead to business opportunities as airlines turn to smaller aircraft to right-size capacity, it also presents potential challenges for the Company as it may impact the values of aircraft in the Company’s portfolio, lower market rents for aircraft that are being offered for lease by the Company, cause Company customers to be unable to meet their lease obligations, or reduce demand by airlines that would be potential customers for additional or replacement regional aircraft offered by the Company.
A downturn in the Chinese domestic or export economy that reduces demand for imported raw materials, such as an extended period of economic slowdown associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, could have a significant negative longer-term impact on the demand for business and regional aircraft in developing countries, including in some of the markets in which the Company seeks to do business.
Furthermore, instability arising from new U.S. sanctions or trade wars against U.S. trading partners, and the global reaction to such sanctions, or due to other factors, could have a negative impact on the Company’s customers located in regions affected by such sanctions.
Also, the withdrawal of the United Kingdom (“UK”) from the European Union, known as “Brexit,” could threaten “open-sky” policies under which UK-based carriers operate throughout the European Union, and European Union-based carriers operate between the UK and other European Union countries. Losing open-sky flight rights could have a significant negative impact on the health of the Company’s European lessees and, as a result, the financial performance and condition of the Company.
If international conflicts erupt into military hostilities, heightened visa requirements make international travel more difficult, terrorist attacks involving aircraft or airports occur, or if another major flu or new pandemic occurs, air travel could be severely affected. Any such occurrence would have an adverse impact on many of the Company’s customers.
Airline reductions in capacity in response to lower passenger loads can result in reduced demand for aircraft and aircraft engines and a corresponding decrease in market lease rental rates and aircraft values. This reduced market value could affect the Company’s results if the market value of an asset or assets in the Company’s portfolio falls below carrying value, and the Company determines that a write-down of the value is appropriate. Furthermore, if older, expiring leases are replaced with leases at decreased lease rates, the lease revenue from the Company’s existing portfolio is likely to decline, with the magnitude of the decline dependent on the length of the downturn and the depth of the decline in market rents.
Lessee Credit Risk. The Company carefully evaluates the credit risk of each customer and attempts to obtain a third-party guaranty, letters of credit or other credit enhancements, if it deems them necessary, in addition to customary security deposits. There can be no assurance, however, that such enhancements will be available, or that, if obtained, they will fully protect the Company from losses resulting from a lessee default or bankruptcy.
If a U.S. lessee defaults under a lease and seeks protection under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code, Section 1110 of the Bankruptcy Code would automatically prevent the Company from exercising any remedies against such lessee for a period of 60 days. After the 60-day period had passed, the lessee would have to agree to perform the lease obligations and cure any defaults, or the Company would have the right to repossess the equipment. However, this procedure under the Bankruptcy Code has been subject to significant litigation, and it is possible that the Company’s enforcement rights would be further adversely affected in the event of a bankruptcy filing by a defaulting lessee.
Lessees located in low-growth or no-growth areas of the world carry heightened risk of lessee default. A customer’s insolvency or bankruptcy usually results in the Company’s total loss of the receivables from that customer, as well as additional costs in order to repossess and, in some cases, repair the aircraft leased by the customer. The Company closely monitors the performance of all of its lessees and its risk exposure to any lessee that may be facing financial difficulties, in order to guide decisions with respect to such lessee in an attempt to mitigate losses in the event the lessee is unable to meet or rejects its lease obligations. There can be no assurance, however, that additional customers will not become insolvent, file for bankruptcy or otherwise fail to perform their lease obligations, or that the Company will be able to mitigate any of the resultant losses.
It is possible that the Company may enter into deferral agreements for overdue lessee obligations. When a customer requests a deferral of lease obligations, the Company evaluates the lessee’s financial plan, the likelihood that the lessee can remain a viable carrier, and whether the deferral is likely to be repaid according to the agreed schedule. The Company may elect to record the deferred rent and reserves payments from the lessee on a cash basis, which could have a material effect on the Company’s financial results in the applicable periods.
Lack of Portfolio Diversification. Because of the diminished size of the Company’s portfolio relative to its historical size, the Company’s current portfolio lacks diversification and any default by a lessee would have a significant impact on the Company’s financial results. If the Auction Sale of the Drake Collateral is consummated, the Company’s portfolio of leased aircraft will shrink even further and be limited to two lessees located in one country. This risk of non-diversification is likely to last for a considerable time through and after the Company’s exit from its Chapter 11 Case as it may take a number of years for the Company, if and when it is able to continue its aircraft leasing business, to rebuild its portfolio to a size that reflects diversification in terms of lessees and geographic location.
Concentration of Aircraft Type. The Company’s aircraft portfolio is likely to remain focused on a small number of aircraft types and models relative to the variety of aircraft used in the commercial air carrier market, most of these types are used extensively by regional airlines. A change in the desirability and availability of any of the particular types and models of aircraft owned by the Company could affect valuations and future rental revenues of such aircraft, and would have a disproportionately significant impact on the Company’s portfolio value. In addition, the Company is dependent on the third-party companies that manufacture and provide service for the aircraft types in the Company’s portfolio. The Company has no control over these companies, and they could decide to curtail or discontinue production of or service for these aircraft types at any time or significantly increase their costs, which could negatively impact the Company’s prospects and performance. These effects would diminish if the Company acquires assets of other types. Conversely, acquisition of additional aircraft of the types currently owned by the Company will increase the Company’s risks related to its concentration of those aircraft types.
Competition. The aircraft leasing industry is highly competitive. The Company competes with other leasing companies, banks, financial institutions, private equity firms, aircraft leasing syndicates, aircraft manufacturers, distributors, airlines and aircraft operators, equipment managers, equipment leasing programs and other parties engaged in leasing, managing or remarketing aircraft. Many of these competitors have longer operating histories, more experience, larger customer bases, more expansive brand recognition, deeper market penetration and significantly greater financial resources.
Prior to the COVID pandemic, competition was intense as competitors who have traditionally neglected the regional air carrier market began to focus on this market. The industry also experienced a number of consolidations of smaller leasing companies, creating a handful of very large companies operating in this market, as well as new entrants to the market. The entry of traditional large aircraft lessors into the regional aircraft niche, particularly those with greater access to capital than the Company, led to fewer acquisition opportunities for the Company and lower lease yields to the Company, as well as fewer renewals of existing leases or new leases of existing aircraft.
The current COVID pandemic has disrupted the airline industry and many of its competitors, as many airline customers have grounded aircraft and are seeking rent holidays or terminating leases, and in the absence of such lessor accommodations are defaulting on lease obligations. Many of the Company’s aircraft leasing competitors have left the market, been acquired, or, like the Company, are shedding assets in order to raise cash to resolve debt non-compliance. In the near and medium term, those lessors with substantial cash reserves and/or available acquisition financing for speedy closings will have opportunities for profitable transactions and will have a significant competitive advantage in the market that the Company cannot currently match unless and until it obtains readily drawable acquisition financing. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to find such financing.
Risks Related to Regional Air Carriers. The Company’s continued focus on its customer base of regional air carriers subjects the Company to certain risks. Many regional airlines rely heavily or even exclusively on a code-share or other contractual relationship with a major carrier for revenue, and can face financial difficulty or failure if the major carrier terminates or fails to perform under the relationship or files for bankruptcy or becomes insolvent. Some regional carriers may depend on contractual arrangements with industrial customers such as mining or oil companies, or franchises from governmental agencies that provide subsidies for operating essential air routes, which may be subject to termination or cancellation on short notice. Furthermore, many lessees in the regional air carrier market are start-up, low-capital, and/or low-margin operators. A current concern for regional air carriers is the supply of qualified pilots. Due to recently imposed regulations of the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration requiring a higher minimum number of hours to qualify as a commercial passenger pilot, many regional airlines have had difficulty meeting their business plans for expansion. This could in turn affect demand for the aircraft types in the Company’s portfolio and the Company’s business, performance and liquidity.
International Risks. The Company leases some assets in overseas markets. Leases with foreign lessees, however, may present different risks than those with domestic lessees.
A lease with a foreign lessee is subject to risks related to the economy of the country or region in which such lessee is located, which may be weaker or less stable than the U.S. economy. An economic downturn in a particular country or region may impact a foreign lessee’s ability to make lease payments, even if the U.S. and other foreign economies remain strong and stable.
The Company is subject to certain risks related to currency conversion fluctuations. The Company currently has one customer with rent obligations payable in Euros, and the Company may, from time to time, agree to additional leases that permit payment in foreign currency, which would subject such lease revenue to monetary risk due to currency exchange rate fluctuations. During the periods covered by this report, the Company considers the estimated effect on its revenues of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations to be immaterial; however, the impact of these fluctuations may increase in future periods if additional rent obligations become payable in foreign currencies.
Even with U.S. dollar-denominated lease payment provisions, the Company could still be negatively affected by a devaluation of a foreign lessee’s local currency relative to the U.S. dollar, which would make it more difficult for the lessee to meet its U.S. dollar-denominated payments and increase the risk of default of that lessee, particularly if its revenue is primarily derived in its local currency.
Foreign lessees that operate internationally may also face restrictions on repatriating foreign revenue to their home country. This could create a cash flow crisis for an otherwise profitable carrier, affecting its ability to meet its lease obligations. Foreign lessees may also face restrictions on payment obligations to foreign vendors, including the Company, which may affect their ability to timely meet lease obligations to the Company.
Foreign lessees are not subject to U.S. bankruptcy laws, although there may be debtor protection similar to U.S. bankruptcy laws available in some jurisdictions. Certain countries do not have a central registration or recording system which can be used to locally record the Company’s interest in equipment and related leases. This could make it more difficult for the Company to recover an aircraft in the event of a default by a foreign lessee. In any event, collection and enforcement may be more difficult and complicated in foreign countries.
Ownership of a leased asset operating in a foreign country and/or by a foreign carrier may subject the Company to additional tax liabilities that are not present with aircraft operated in the United States. Depending on the jurisdiction, laws governing such tax liabilities may be complex, not well formed or not uniformly enforced. In such jurisdictions, the Company may decide to take an uncertain tax position based on the best advice of the local tax experts it engages, which position may be challenged by the taxing authority. Any such challenge could result in increased tax obligations in these jurisdictions going forward or assessments of liability by the taxing authority, in which case the Company may be required to pay penalties and interest on the assessed amount that would not give rise to a corresponding foreign tax credit on the Company’s U.S. tax returns.
Significant changes in U.S. trade policy that materially impact U.S. trade, including terminating, renegotiating or otherwise modifying U.S. trade agreements with countries in various regions and imposing tariffs on certain goods imported into the United States could have a financial impact on the Company. Such changes in U.S. trade policy could trigger retaliatory actions by affected countries, including China, resulting in “trade wars” with these countries. These trade wars could generally increase the cost of aircraft, aircraft and engine components and other goods regularly imported by the Company’s customers, thereby increasing costs of operations for its air carrier customers that are located in the affected countries. The increased costs could materially and adversely impact the financial health of affected air carriers, which in turn could have a negative impact on the Company’s business opportunities, and if the Company’s lessees are significantly affected, could have a direct impact on the Company’s financial results. Furthermore, the Company often incurs maintenance or repair expenses not covered by lessees in foreign countries, which expenses could increase if such countries are affected by such a trade war.
Ownership Risks. The Company’s leases typically are for a period shorter than the entire, anticipated, remaining useful life of the leased assets. As a result, the Company’s recovery of its investment and realization of its expected yield in such a leased asset is dependent upon the Company’s ability to profitably re-lease or sell the asset following the expiration of the lease. This ability is affected by worldwide economic conditions, general aircraft market conditions, regulatory changes, changes in the supply or cost of aircraft equipment, and technological developments that may cause the asset to become obsolete. If the Company is unable to remarket its assets on favorable terms when the leases for such assets expire, the Company’s financial condition, cash flow, ability to service debt, and results of operations could be adversely affected.
The market for used aircraft equipment has been cyclical, and generally reflects economic conditions and the strength of the travel and transportation industry. The demand for and value of many types of used aircraft in the recent past has been depressed by such factors as airline financial difficulties, airline consolidations, the number of new aircraft on order, an excess supply of newly manufactured aircraft or used aircraft coming off lease, as well as introduction of new aircraft models and types that may be more technologically advanced, more fuel efficient and/or less costly to maintain and operate. Values may also increase or decrease for certain aircraft types that become more or less desirable based on market conditions and changing airline capacity. Declines in the value of the Company’s aircraft and any resulting decline in market demand for these aircraft could materially adversely affect the Company’s revenues, performance and liquidity.
In addition, a successful investment in an asset subject to an operating lease depends in part upon having the asset returned by the lessee in the condition as required under the lease. Each operating lease obligates a customer to return an asset to the Company in a specified condition, generally in a condition that will allow the aircraft to be readily re-leased to a new lessee, and/or pay an economic settlement for redelivery that is not in compliance with such specified conditions. The Company strives to ensure this result through onsite management during the return process. However, if a lessee becomes insolvent during the term of its lease and the Company has to repossess the asset, it is unlikely that the lessee would have the financial ability to meet these return obligations. In addition, if a lessee files for bankruptcy and rejects the aircraft lease, the lessee would be required to return the aircraft but would be relieved from further lease obligations, including return conditions specified in the lease. In either case, it is likely that the Company would be required to expend funds in excess of any maintenance reserves collected to return the asset to a remarketable condition.
Several of the Company’s leases do not require payment of monthly maintenance reserves, which serve as the lessee’s advance payment for its future repair and maintenance obligations. If repossession due to lessee default or bankruptcy occurred under such a lease, the Company would need to pay the costs of unperformed repair and maintenance under the applicable lease and would likely incur an unanticipated expense in order to re-lease or sell the asset.
Furthermore, the occurrence of unexpected adverse changes that impact the Company’s estimates of expected cash flow from an asset could result in an asset impairment charge against the Company’s earnings. The Company periodically reviews long-term assets for impairment, particularly when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment charge is recorded when the carrying amount of an asset is estimated to be not recoverable and exceeds its fair value. The Company recorded impairment charges as recently as the fourth quarter of 2020 and may be required to record asset impairment charges in the future as a result of the Auction Sale of the Drake Collateral, the impact of COVID-19 on the aviation industry, prolonged weak economic environment, challenging market conditions in the airline industry, events related to particular lessees, assets or asset types or other factors affecting the value of aircraft or engines.
Government Regulation. There are a number of areas in which government regulation may result in costs to the Company. These include aircraft registration safety requirements, required equipment modifications, maximum aircraft age, and aircraft noise requirements. Although it is contemplated that the burden and cost of complying with such requirements will fall primarily upon lessees, there can be no assurance that the cost will not fall on the Company. Additionally, even if lessees are responsible for the costs of complying with these requirements, changes to the requirements to make them more stringent or otherwise increase these costs could negatively impact the Company’s customers’ businesses, which could result in nonperformance under their lease agreements or decreased demand for the Company’s aircraft. Furthermore, future government regulations could cause the value of any noncomplying equipment owned by the Company to decline substantially. Moreover, any failure by the Company to comply with the government regulations applicable to it could result in sanctions, fines or other penalties, which could harm the Company’s reputation and performance.
Casualties and Insurance Coverage. The Company, as an owner of transportation equipment, may be named in a suit claiming damages for injuries or damage to property caused by its assets. As a triple-net lessor, the Company is generally protected against such claims, because the lessee would be responsible for, insure against and indemnify the Company for such claims. A “triple net lease” is a lease under which, in addition to monthly rental payments, the lessee is generally responsible for the taxes, insurance and maintenance and repair of the aircraft arising from the use and operation of the aircraft during the term of the lease. Although the United States Aviation Act may provide some additional protection with respect to the Company’s aircraft assets, it is unclear to what extent such statutory protection would be available to the Company with respect to its assets that are operated in foreign countries where the provisions of this law may not apply.
The Company’s leases generally require a lessee to insure against likely risks of loss or damage to the leased asset and liability to passengers and third parties pursuant to industry standard insurance policies, and require lessees to provide insurance certificates documenting the policy periods and coverage amounts. The Company has adopted measures designed to ensure these insurance policies continue to be maintained, including tracking receipt of the insurance certificates, calendaring their expiration dates, and reminding lessees of their obligations to maintain such insurance and provide current insurance certificates to the Company if a replacement certificate is not timely received prior to the expiration of an existing certificate.
Despite these requirements and procedures, there may be certain cases where losses or liabilities are not entirely covered by the lessee or its insurance. Although the Company believes the possibility of such an event is remote, any such uninsured loss or liability, or insured loss or liability for which insurance proceeds are inadequate, might result in a loss of invested capital in and any profits anticipated from the applicable aircraft, as well as potential claims directly against the Company.
Compliance with Environmental Regulations. Compliance with environmental regulations may harm the Company’s business. Many aspects of aircraft operations are subject to increasingly stringent environmental regulations, and growing concerns about climate change may result in the imposition by the U.S. and foreign governments of additional regulation of carbon emissions, including requirements to adopt technology to reduce the amount of carbon emissions or imposing a fee or tax system on carbon emitters. Any such regulation could be directed at the Company’s customers, as operators of aircraft, at the Company, as an owner of aircraft, and/or on the manufacturers of aircraft. Under the Company’s triple-net lease arrangements, the Company would likely try to shift responsibility for compliance to its lessees; however, it may not be able to do so due to competitive or other market factors, and there might be some compliance costs that the Company could not pass through to its customers and would itself have to bear. Although it is not expected that the costs of complying with current environmental regulations will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial position, results of operations, or liquidity, there is no assurance that the costs of complying with environmental regulations as amended or adopted in the future will not have such an effect.
Cybersecurity Risks. The Company believes that its main vulnerabilities to a cyber-attack would be interruption of the Company’s email communications internally and with third parties, loss of customer and lease archives, and loss of document sharing between the Company’s offices and remote workers. Such an attack could temporarily impede the efficiency of the Company’s operations; however, the Company believes that sufficient replacement and backup mechanisms exist in the event of such an interruption such that there would not be a material adverse financial impact on the Company’s business. A cyber-hacker could also gain access to and release proprietary information of the Company, its customers, suppliers and employees stored on the Company’s data network. Such a breach could harm the Company’s reputation and result in competitive disadvantages, litigation, lost revenues, additional costs, or liability to third parties. While to date the Company has not experienced a material cyber-attack and the Company believes that it has sufficient cybersecurity measures in place commensurate with the risks to the Company of a successful cyber-attack or breach of its data security, its resources and technical sophistication may not be adequate to prevent or adequately respond to and mitigate all types of cyber-attacks.
●
Risks Related to the Company’s Common Stock
Listing Compliance Deficiency Notice from NYSE American. On September 11, 2020, the Company received a deficiency letter from NYSE American Stock Exchange notifying that the Company was not in compliance with the continued listing standards as set forth in Section 1003(a)(i) - (iii) of the NYSE American Company Guide (the “Company Guide”). The noncompliance arose from the Company’s financial statement showing a stockholders’ equity deficiency as of June 30, 2020 combined with net losses for the most recent fiscal years ended December 31, 2018 and December 31, 2019.
The Company Guide requires a minimum stockholders’ equity of $2.0 million or more if it has reported losses from continuing operations and/or net losses in two of its three most recent fiscal years; Stockholders’ equity of $4.0 million or more if it has reported losses from continuing operations and/or net losses in three of its four most recent fiscal years (Section 1003(a)(ii)); and Stockholders’ equity of $6.0 million or more if it has reported losses from continuing operations and/or net losses in its five most recent fiscal years (Section 1003(a)(iii)).
The letter had no immediate effect on the listing of the Company’s common stock on the NYSE American and the Company’s common stock will continue to trade on the NYSE American while the Company takes measures to regain compliance with the continued listing standards. As required by Company Guide, the Company has submitted a detailed plan of compliance to the NYSE American, advising the NYSE American of the actions the Company has taken, or plans to take, that would bring it into compliance with the continued listing standards within 18 months of receipt of the Deficiency Letter and must periodically report on its progress or any deviation from its plan.
If the Company fails to return to compliance by the end of that eighteen-month period, the NYSE American exchange could de-list the Company’s stock. If that occurs, liquidity of common stock held by the shareholders of the Company could be significantly impacted, as any trading in the Company’s securities would no longer be executed over the NYSE American Exchange but would have to be transacted through over-the-counter exchanges or pink sheets. This could depress the Company’s market price substantially. De-listing may also make further equity financing of the Company more difficult by eliminating as potential investors those who are seeking immediate liquidity in their investment.
Possible Volatility of Stock Price. The market price of the Company’s common stock is subject to fluctuations following developments relating to the Company’s operating results, changes in general conditions in the economy, the financial markets or the airline industry, changes in accounting principles or tax laws applicable to the Company or its lessees, or other developments affecting the Company, its customers or its competitors, including changes in investor perception on competitor’s stock prices and operating results, or arising from other investor sentiment unknown to the Company. The Chapter 11 Case may also contribute significantly to market price volatility of the Company’s common stock due to investors’ perceptions of the Company’s equity value in light of the Chapter 11 Case and speculation on the impact of the plan of reorganization that will be proposed and the Court’s decision on such plan. Because the Company has a relatively small capitalization of approximately 1.55 million shares outstanding, there is a correspondingly limited amount of trading and float of the Company’s shares. Consequently, the Company’s stock price is more sensitive to a single large trade or a small number of simultaneous trades along the same trend than a company with larger capitalization and higher trading volume and float. This stock price and trading volume volatility could limit the Company’s ability to use its capital stock to raise capital, if and when needed or desired, or as consideration for other types of transactions, including strategic collaborations, investments or acquisitions. Any such limitation could negatively affect the Company’s performance, growth prospects and liquidity.