Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on June 29, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a Business Combination with one or more target businesses. We completed our Public Offering on December 15, 2020.
We presently have no revenue, have had losses since inception from incurring formation costs and have had no operations other than the active solicitation of a target business with which to complete a business combination.
Since completing our Public Offering, we have reviewed, and continue to review, a number of opportunities to enter into a Business Combination with an operating business, but we are not able to determine at this time whether we will complete a Business Combination with any of the target businesses that we have reviewed or with any other target business. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt, or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Recent Developments
Proposed Matterport Business Combination
On February 7, 2021, the Company entered into a Merger Agreement, by and among the Company, First Merger Sub, Second Merger Sub, and Matterport, which provides for, among other things: (a) the First Merger; and (b) immediately following the First Merger and as part of the same overall transaction as the First Merger, the Second Merger. The transactions set forth in the Merger Agreement, including the Mergers, will constitute a “Business Combination” as contemplated by the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation.
The Merger Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby were unanimously approved by the Board of Directors of the Company on February 7, 2021 and the Matterport Board on February 7, 2021.
The Merger Agreement
Merger Consideration
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, at the effective time of the First Merger (the “Effective Time”), each share of Matterport’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Matterport Common Stock”), will be converted into the right to receive a number of newly-issued shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Company Class A common stock”), equal to the Per Share Company Common Stock Consideration (as defined in the Merger Agreement) and each share of Matterport’s preferred stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Matterport Preferred Stock”), will be converted into the right to receive a number of newly-issued shares of Company Class A common stock equal to the Per Share Company Preferred Stock Consideration (as defined in the Merger Agreement). Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, the Company is required to use reasonable best efforts to cause the shares of Company Class A common stock to be issued in connection with the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement (the Business Combination) to be listed on Nasdaq at the closing of the Business Combination.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the aggregate merger consideration payable at the closing of the Business Combination to all of the stockholders and holders of equity awards of Matterport will be an aggregate number of shares, or equity awards exercisable for shares, of Company Class A common stock (deemed to have a value of $10.00 per share) equal to $2,188,750,000, divided by $10.00.
In addition to the consideration to be paid at the closing of the Business Combination, stockholders of Matterport will be entitled to receive their pro rata share of an additional number of earn-out shares from the Company, issuable in Company Class A common stock and subject to the terms provided in the Merger Agreement, up to an aggregate of 23,460,000 shares collectively issuable to all Matterport equityholders.
Treatment of Matterport’s Equity Awards
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, at the closing of the Business Combination, each of Matterport’s stock options, to the extent then outstanding and unexercised, will automatically be converted into (a) an option to acquire a certain number of shares of Company Class A common stock (pursuant to a ratio based on the Per Share Company Common Stock Consideration), at an adjusted exercise price per share and (b) the right to receive a pro rata portion of a number of earn-out shares from the Company, issuable in Company Class A common stock and subject to the terms provided in the Merger Agreement (including that such right to receive earn-out shares is conditional on the holder continuing to provide services to the Company), up to an aggregate of 23,460,000 shares collectively issuable to all Matterport equityholders. Each such converted option will be subject to the same terms and conditions as were applicable immediately prior to such conversion.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, at the closing of the Business Combination, each of Matterport’s restricted stock units, to the extent then unvested and outstanding, will automatically be converted into (a) an award of restricted stock units covering a certain number of shares of Company Class A common stock (pursuant to a ratio based on the Per Share Company Common Stock Consideration) and (b) the right to receive a pro rata portion of a number of earn-out shares from the Company, issuable in Company Class A common stock and subject to the terms provided in the Merger Agreement (including that such right to receive earn-out shares is conditional on the holder continuing to provide services to the Company), up to an aggregate of 23,460,000 shares collectively issuable to all Matterport equityholders. Each such converted restricted stock unit will be subject to the same terms and conditions as were applicable immediately prior to such conversion.
Private Placement Subscription Agreements
On February 7, 2021, the Company entered into subscription agreements (each, a “Subscription Agreement” and collectively, the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors, including certain individuals (each, an “Individual Investor Subscription Agreement”), institutional investors (each, an “Institutional Investor Subscription Agreement”) and Gores Sponsor VI LLC (the “Sponsor”), pursuant to which the investors have agreed to purchase an aggregate of 29,500,000 shares of Class A common stock in a private placement for $10.00 per share (the “Private Placement”). The proceeds from the Private Placement will remain on the Company’s balance sheet following the consummation of the Business Combination.
Results of Operations
For the period from June 29, 2020 to December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of ($98,837). Our business activities during the year mainly consisted of identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates for a Business Combination. We believe that we have sufficient funds available to complete our efforts to effect a Business Combination with an operating business by December 15, 2022. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination.
As indicated in the accompanying unaudited financial statements, at December 31, 2020, we had $633,266 in cash and deferred offering costs of $12,075,000. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our Business Combination, including the Proposed Business Combination, will be successful.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On July 24, 2020, the Sponsor purchased 17,250,000 shares of Class F Common Stock for $25,000, or approximately $0.001 per share. On October 1, 2020, the Sponsor surrendered 8,625,000 Founder Shares to us for no consideration, on October 23, 2020, the Company effected a stock dividend with respect to its Class F Common Stock of 6,468,750 shares thereof and on November 13, 2020 the Sponsor surrendered 6,468,750 Founder Shares to us for no consideration, resulting in an aggregate of 8,625,000 outstanding shares of Class F Common Stock. As a result of such surrenders and stock dividend, the per-share purchase price increased to approximately $0.003 per share. The number of Founder Shares issued was determined based on the expectation that such Founder Shares would represent 20% of the outstanding shares upon completion of the Public Offering. On September 11, 2020, the Sponsor transferred 25,000 Founder Shares to each of the independent directors at their original purchase price.
On December 15, 2020, the Company consummated its Public Offering of 34,500,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, including 4,500,000 Units as a result of the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option, generating gross proceeds of $345,000,000. On the IPO Closing Date, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 4,450,000 Private Placement Warrants, each exercisable to purchase one share of Common Stock at $11.50 per share, to our Sponsor, at a price of $2.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds, before expenses, of $8,900,000. After deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions (excluding the Deferred Discount, which amount will be payable upon consummation of the Business Combination, if consummated) and the estimated offering expenses, the total net proceeds from our Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants were $346,055,000, of which $345,000,000 (or $10.00 per share sold in the Public Offering) was placed in the Trust Account. The amount of proceeds not deposited in the Trust Account was $1,055,000 at the closing of our Public Offering. Interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account may be released to us to fund our Regulatory Withdrawals, for a maximum of 24 months and/or additional amounts necessary to pay our franchise and income taxes.
On July 24, 2020, Company borrowed $300,000 by the issuance of an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor for $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Public Offering. This Note was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of June 30, 2021 or the completion of the Public Offering. This Note was repaid in full upon the completion of the Public Offering.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash held outside of the Trust Account of approximately $633,266, which is available to fund our working capital requirements. Additionally, interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account may be released to us to fund our Regulatory Withdrawals, for a maximum of 24 months and/or additional amounts necessary to pay our franchise and income taxes.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had current liabilities of $530,703 and working capital of $1,000,317, largely due to amounts owed to professionals, consultants, advisors and others who are working on seeking a Business Combination. Such work is continuing after December 31, 2020 and amounts are continuing to accrue.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including interest (which interest shall be net of Regulatory Withdrawals and taxes payable) to consummate our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete a Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of shares of our Common Stock upon completion of a Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to consummate our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in our Trust Account, if any, will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategy. Following the closing of the Proposed Business Combination, we do not expect there to be remaining proceeds in our Trust Account.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We had no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We had not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial agreements involving assets.
Contractual obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities. In connection with the Public Offering, we entered into an administrative services agreement to pay monthly recurring expenses of $20,000 to The Gores Group for office space,
utilities and secretarial support. The administrative services agreement terminates upon the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination or the liquidation of the Company.
The underwriters are entitled to underwriting discounts and commissions of 5.5% ($18,975,000), of which 2.0% ($6,900,000) was paid at the IPO Closing Date, and 3.5% ($12,075,000) was deferred. The Deferred Discount will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. The underwriters are not entitled to any interest accrued on the Deferred Discount.
Significant Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) and pursuant to the accounting and disclosure rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), and reflect all adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring adjustments, which are, in the opinion of management, necessary for a fair presentation of the financial position as of December 31, 2020 and the results of operations and cash flows for the periods presented. Operating results for the period ended December 31, 2020 are not necessarily indicative of results that may be expected for the full year or any other period. While the Company was formed on June 29, 2020, there were no transactions or operations between inception and July 24, 2020. Therefore, these financials statements do not include comparative statements to prior 2020 periods.
Offering Costs
The Company complies with the requirements of the Accounting Standards Codification (the “ASC”) 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering.” Offering costs consist principally of professional and registration fees incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to our Public Offering and were charged to stockholders’ equity upon the completion of our Public Offering. Accordingly, offering costs totaling $19,865,948 (including $18,975,000 in underwriters’ fees), and were charged to stockholders’ equity.
Net loss per common share
The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock (the “Common Stock”) and Class F Common Stock (the “Founders Shares”). Net income/(loss) per common share is computed utilizing the two-class method. The two-class method is an earnings allocation formula that determines earnings per share separately for each class of common stock based on an allocation of undistributed earnings per the rights of each class. At December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income/(loss) per common share is the same as basic net income/(loss) per common share for the period.
Income Taxes
The Company follows the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes under ASC 740, “Income Taxes.” Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statements carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
For those liabilities or benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. The Company recognizes accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax liabilities as income tax expense. No amounts were accrued for the payment of interest and penalties at December 31, 2020.
The Company may be subject to potential examination by U.S. federal, states or foreign jurisdiction authorities in the areas of income taxes. These potential examinations may include questioning the timing and amount of deductions, the nexus of income amounts in various tax jurisdictions and compliance with U.S. federal, states or foreign tax laws.
The Company is incorporated in the State of Delaware and is required to pay franchise taxes to the State of Delaware on an annual basis.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements based on current operations of the Company. The impact of any recently issued accounting standards will be re-evaluated on a regular basis or if a business combination is completed where the impact could be material.