Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview: Manitowoc is a leading provider of engineered lifting solutions, including lattice-boom cranes, tower cranes, mobile hydraulic cranes and boom trucks. The Company has three reportable segments, the Americas segment, EURAF segment, and MEAP segment. The segments were identified using the “management approach,” which designates the internal organization that is used by the CEO, who is also the Company’s Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”), for making decisions about the allocation of resources and assessing performance. Further information regarding the Company’s reportable segments can be found in Note 17, “Segments,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In Management’s Discussion and Analysis, unless otherwise indicated, references to “Manitowoc” and the “Company” refer to The Manitowoc Company, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
All dollar amounts are in millions throughout the tables included in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations unless otherwise indicated.
Segment Operating Performance
Americas
Americas net sales decreased 35.4% in 2020 to $626.1 million from $969.7 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily related to lower crane shipments as a result of entering the year with lower backlog coupled with the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, which significantly reduced demand in most of the Company’s end markets.
Americas operating income decreased 71.7% in 2020 to $32.1 million from $113.4 million in 2019. This change was mainly due to the decrease in net sales and under absorption of facility costs. This was partially offset by decreases of $4.3 million in engineering, selling and administrative expenses and $1.8 million in restructuring expense. Lower engineering, selling and administrative expenses were driven by lower discretionary spend in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Americas net sales increased 9.9% in 2019 to $969.7 million from $882.7 million in 2018. This increase was primarily driven by market expansion in petrochemical and utility segments along with fleet replenishment. Share gains were also realized in several product lines, aided by positive market acceptance of new product introductions.
Americas operating income increased 92.9% in 2019 to $113.4 million from $58.8 million in 2018. This change was primarily due to increased revenues as discussed above, price realization, $8.3 million of lower engineering, selling and administrative costs due primarily to cost reduction actions, $3.3 million of lower restructuring expenses and better utilization of the U.S. manufacturing facilities.
EURAF
EURAF net sales decreased 7.2% in 2020 to $598.7 million from $644.9 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily related to lower crane shipments as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which significantly reduced demand in most of the Company’s end markets. This was partially offset by $10.4 million from favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
EURAF operating income increased in 2020 to $12.0 million from $3.8 million in 2019. The increase was primarily related to favorable sales mix, $6.6 million of lower engineering, selling and administrative expenses and $2.6 million of lower restructuring expense. Lower engineering, selling and administrative expenses were driven by lower discretionary spend in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. This was partially offset by the decrease in net sales. In addition, operating income was impacted by $1.4 million from favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
EURAF net sales decreased 5.2% in 2019 to $644.9 million from $680.6 million in 2018. The decrease was primarily due to $34.7 million from unfavorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
EURAF operating income increased in 2019 to income of $3.8 million from a loss of $68.2 million in 2018. This change was mainly due to a goodwill impairment charge of $82.2 million recorded in 2018. Excluding this item, operating income decreased $10.2 million. This decrease was primarily due to a $2.0 million increase in restructuring expense and $2.3 million of incremental trade show costs in 2019. This was also impacted unfavorably by $4.3 million from changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
MEAP
MEAP net sales decreased 0.4% in 2020 to $218.6 million from $219.5 million in 2019. Net sales were impacted favorably by project driven demand in the Middle East, offset by lower crane shipments as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. MEAP net sales were favorably impacted by $2.4 million from changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
MEAP operating income increased 34.5% in 2020 to $30.4 million from $22.6 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to $7.1 million of lower engineering, selling and administrative expenses and $1.9 million of lower restructuring expense compared to 2019. Lower engineering, selling and administrative expenses were driven by lower discretionary spend in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
MEAP net sales decreased 22.6% in 2019 to $219.5 million from $283.5 million in 2018. The decrease was primarily due to lower shipments of cranes for the energy end markets. MEAP net sales were also unfavorably impacted by approximately $9.2 million from changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
MEAP operating income decreased 28.3% in 2019 to $22.6 million from $31.5 million in 2018. The decrease was primarily due to lower shipments of cranes as discussed above and a $2.1 million increase in restructuring expenses compared to 2018. This was partially offset by $4.2 million of lower engineering, selling and administrative costs primarily due to cost reduction actions.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Orders and Backlog
Orders for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 7.8% to $1,511.4 million from $1,638.6 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily related to lower crane demand in most end markets as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates of $14.2 million.
The year-end backlog includes accepted orders that have been placed on a production schedule that are expected to be shipped and billed primarily within one year. The Company’s backlog as of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, was $543.2 million, $475.1 million and $670.6 million, respectively. The Company’s backlog at the end of 2020 increased from the end of 2019 primarily due to the timing of shipments and $20.9 million from favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Net Sales
Consolidated net sales decreased 21.3% in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily related to lower crane shipments as a result of entering the year with lower backlog in the Americas segment as well as the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, which significantly reduced demand in most of the Company’s end markets. This was partially offset by $12.4 million from favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Consolidated net sales decreased 0.7% in 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily due to $44.3 million of unfavorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates and lower shipments of cranes for the energy end market in the MEAP segment. This was partially offset by an increase in crane shipments primarily in North America.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 26.0% to $254.7 million compared to $344.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the decrease in net sales and an increase in costs due to under absorption of facility costs from lower utilization of the Company’s manufacturing facilities due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Gross profit was favorably impacted by $3.0 million from changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Gross profit percentage decreased in 2020 to 17.6% from 18.8% in 2019 primarily due to under absorption of facility costs from lower utilization of the Company’s manufacturing facilities due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by 4.9% to $344.1 million compared to $328.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was mainly due to favorable price realization and mix. This was partially offset by $10.8 million from unfavorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
As a result of favorable price realization and mix, gross profit percentage increased in 2019 to 18.8% from 17.8% in 2018.
Engineering, Selling and Administrative Expenses
Engineering, selling and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $16.8 million to $208.8 million. The decrease was primarily due to lower short-term incentive compensation costs, reduced discretionary spending in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and a decrease in compensation and benefits due to cost reduction actions primarily in North America. This was partially offset by a $8.9 million benefit recorded in 2019 related to the settlement of a legal matter. Engineering, selling and administrative expenses were also unfavorably impacted by $1.1 million from changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Engineering, selling and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $26.0 million to $225.6 million. The decrease was primarily due to the settlement of a legal matter, which included a $8.9 million recovery of legal fees expensed in previous periods, $6.8 million from favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates and cost reduction actions.
Asset Impairment Expense
There were no asset impairments for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Asset impairment expense for the year ended December 31, 2018 totaled $82.6 million. This was primarily related to a $82.2 million goodwill impairment charge recorded in the EURAF reporting unit.
Restructuring Expense
Restructuring expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $7.0 million compared to $9.8 million in 2019. Expenses in 2020 related primarily to costs associated with headcount reductions in Europe and North America, partially offset by $2.5 million of income from the forfeiture of equity compensation awards associated with employee separation agreements.
Restructuring expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $9.8 million compared to $12.9 million in 2018. Expenses for 2019 related primarily to severance costs for headcount reductions in Europe, North America and India. Expenses for 2018 related primarily to severance costs for the departure of an executive officer, costs associated with training of skilled labor as a result of the transfer of crawler production to Shady Grove, PA and costs associated with headcount reductions in Europe.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $29.1 million versus $32.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a reduction of the average effective interest rate from 10.1% in 2019 to 9.0% in 2020. The decrease in the average effective interest rate was primarily due to the refinancing of the Company’s senior secured high yield notes that occurred in the first quarter of 2019 as well as the reduction in interest rates on the Company’s variable rate debt.
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $32.7 million versus $39.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This decrease was primarily due to a reduction of the average effective interest rate from 11.9% in 2018 to 10.1% in 2019. The decrease in the average effective interest rate was primarily due to the refinancing of the Company’s debt completed in the first quarter of 2019.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a $25.0 million charge associated with the refinancing of the Company’s prior credit facility and notes. The charge is composed of $16.6 million of call premium on the prior notes, $5.3 million of unamortized discount on the prior notes and $3.1 million of unamortized debt issuance costs.
Other income (expense) - Net
Other income (expense) - net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $10.0 million of expense and was primarily composed of $3.9 million of net foreign currency losses, $3.7 million charge related to the settlement of a legal matter and $1.6 million of pension benefit costs.
Other income (expense) - net for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $9.8 million of income and was primarily composed of a $15.5 million benefit related to a settlement of a legal matter and a $3.5 million gain on the sale of the Company’s Manitowoc, Wisconsin manufacturing facility. This was partially offset by $4.4 million of pension benefit costs and $5.5 million of net foreign currency losses.
Other income (expense) - net for the year ended December 31, 2018 was $11.5 million of expense and was primarily composed of a $4.5 million non-cash pension settlement charge, $5.0 million of pension benefit costs and $2.8 million of net foreign currency losses. This was partially offset by $1.2 million of gains related to the sale of property, plant and equipment.
Income Taxes
Due to the Company’s historic losses, impacts from U.S. tax reform and full valuation allowances, the effective annual tax rate is not a meaningful measure of the Company’s cash tax position or performance of the business.
The 2020 effective tax rate was favorably impacted primarily by the passing of The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES”) by $3.7 million that allowed the Company to implement certain U.S. tax planning strategies. The rate was unfavorably impacted primarily by additional valuation allowances recorded during the year and the jurisdictional mix of the financial results.
The 2019 effective tax rate equaled the U.S. statutory rate of 21%. The rate was favorably impacted primarily by manufacturing and research incentives and non-U.S. income taxed at a rate other than the U.S. statutory rate. The rate was unfavorably impacted primarily by additional valuation allowances recorded during the year and U.S. tax reform.
The 2018 effective tax rate was favorably impacted primarily by the release of the unrecognized tax benefits reserve of $6.9 million and the release of the U.K valuation allowance of $12.3 million. In addition, the U.S. recognized a tax benefit of $7.8 million during the year related to deferred tax assets for which a valuation allowance was not recorded.
See further detail at Note 13, “Income Taxes” to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Financial Condition
Cash Flows
The table below shows a summary of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
Cash flows used for operating activities in 2020 were $35.1 million and were primarily driven by increases in working capital. Working capital increases were primarily from higher accounts receivable and lower accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities.
Cash flows used for operating activities in 2019 were $53.3 million and were primarily driven by trade receivables sold to the prior accounts receivable securitization program resulting in $126.3 million of cash flows being reported in cash provided by investing activities and $75.0 million of purchases of accounts receivable previously sold to the prior accounts receivable securitization program. This was partially offset by a $116.5 million increase in net income excluding adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to operating cash flows from operating activities, a $31.5 million net reduction in working capital since December 31, 2018 and $24.4 million of net cash received from the settlement of a legal matter.
Cash flows used for operating activities of continuing operations in 2018 were $512.8 million and were primarily driven by trade receivables sold to the prior accounts receivable securitization program resulting in $553.1 million of cash flows being reported in cash provided by investing activities and a $10.8 million net increase in other working capital since December 31, 2017. This was partially offset by a $51.1 million increase in net income excluding adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to operating cash flows from operating activities.
Cash Flows From Investing Activities
Cash flows used for investing activities were $25.8 million in 2020. Cash flows used for investing activities in 2020 consisted of $26.3 million of capital expenditures offset by $0.5 million of cash proceeds on the sale of property, plant and equipment.
Cash flows provided by investing activities were $108.4 million in 2019. Cash flows provided by investing activities in 2019 primarily consisted of $126.3 million of cash collections on accounts receivable sold to the Company’s securitization program and $17.2 million of cash proceeds on the sale of property, plant and equipment. This was partially offset by capital expenditures of $35.1 million.
Cash flows provided by investing activities were $534.4 million in 2018. Cash flows provided by investing activities in 2018 primarily consisted of $553.1 million of cash collections on accounts receivable sold to the Company’s securitization program and $13.0 million of cash proceeds on the sale of property, plant and equipment. This was partially offset by capital expenditures of $31.7 million.
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
Cash flows used for financing activities during 2020 totaled $14.8 million and consisted primarily of $12.0 million for the repurchase of the Company’s common stock and $2.9 million of payments on other debt.
Cash flows provided by financing activities during 2019 totaled $3.7 million and consisted primarily of $300.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of new high-yield notes (i.e., the 2026 Notes), partially offset by payments of $276.6 million to terminate the prior high-yield notes, $8.3 million of debt issuance costs on the ABL Revolving Credit Facility and 2026 Notes, $7.4 million from the repurchase of the Company’s common stock and $4.4 million of payments on other debt.
Cash flows used for financing activities during 2018 totaled $1.3 million and consisted of payments on debt of $3.8 million, partially offset by the exercise of stock options of $2.5 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
The Company’s debt position at various times increases our vulnerability to general adverse industry and economic conditions, and could result in a meaningful portion of our cash flows from operations being used for payment of interest on our debt. This could potentially limit the Company’s ability to respond to market conditions or take advantage of future business opportunities. The Company’s ability to service its debt is dependent upon many factors, some of which are not subject to its control, such as general economic, financial, competitive, legislative and regulatory factors. In addition, the Company’s ability to borrow additional funds under its revolving credit facility in the future will depend on the Company meeting the financial covenants contained in the ABL Revolving Credit Facility, even after taking into account such new borrowings.
The Company’s revolving credit facility, or other future facilities, may be used for working capital requirements, capital expenditures, funding future acquisitions (within the Company’s debt limitations), and other operating, investing and financing needs. The Company believes that its available cash, availability under its ABL Revolving Credit Facility, cash generated from future operations and access to public debt and equity markets will be adequate to fund its capital and debt financing requirements for the foreseeable future.
The Company’s liquidity positions as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are summarized as follows:
The Company continues to assess its business operations to ensure its liquidity is sufficient to meet expected working capital and other ongoing operational needs for the subsequent twelve months. The Company has and continues to preserve its liquidity in response to the COVID-19 pandemic by managing its cash flow, such as reducing discretionary spending,
suspending its share repurchase program and reducing capital expenditures. Globally, the Company has made use of available government subsidies and other programs to aid with liquidity and employee retention and will continue to review additional programs if and when they become available.
Cash Sources
The Company has historically relied primarily on cash flows from operations, borrowings under revolving credit facilities, issuances of notes and other forms of debt financing as its sources of cash.
The maximum availability under the Company’s current ABL Revolving Credit Facility is $275.0 million. The borrowing capacity under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility is based on the value of inventory, accounts receivable and fixed assets of the Loan Parties. The Loan Parties’ obligations under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility are secured on a first-priority basis, subject to certain exceptions and permitted liens, by substantially all of the personal property and fee-owned real property of the Loan Parties. The liens securing the ABL Revolving Credit Facility are senior in priority to the second-priority liens securing the obligations under the 2026 Notes and the related guarantees. The ABL Revolving Credit Facility has a term of five years and includes a $75.0 million letter of credit sub-facility, $10.0 million of which is available to the Company’s German subsidiary that is a borrower under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility.
In addition to the ABL Revolving Credit Facility, the Company has access to non-committed overdraft facilities to fund working capital in Europe and China. There are six facilities, of which four are denominated in Euros totaling €23.0 million, one denominated in U.S. dollars totaling $9.5 million and one denominated in Chinese Yuan totaling ¥30.0 million. Total availability as of December 31, 2020 for the six overdraft facilities is $42.2 million with zero outstanding.
Debt
On March 25, 2019, the Company and certain of its subsidiaries entered into an indenture with U.S. Bank National Association as trustee and notes collateral agent, pursuant to which the Company issued $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Notes with an annual coupon rate of 9.000%. Interest on the 2026 Notes is payable in cash semi-annually in arrears on April 1 and October 1 of each year. The 2026 Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior secured second lien basis, jointly and severally, by each of the Company’s existing and future domestic subsidiaries that is either a guarantor or a borrower under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility or that guarantees certain other debt of the Company or a guarantor. The 2026 Notes and the related guarantees are secured on a second-priority basis, subject to certain exceptions and permitted liens, by pledges of capital stock and other equity interests and other security interests in substantially all of the personal property and fee-owned real property of the Company and of the guarantors that secure obligations under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility.
Additionally, on March 25, 2019, the Loan Parties (i.e. the Company and certain subsidiaries of the Company) entered into the ABL Credit Agreement with JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A as administrative and collateral agent, and certain financial institutions party thereto as lenders, providing for the ABL Revolving Credit Facility of up to $275.0 million. The borrowing capacity under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility is based on the value of inventory, accounts receivable and fixed assets of the Loan Parties. The Loan Parties’ obligations under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility are secured on a first-priority basis, subject to certain exceptions and permitted liens, by substantially all of the personal property and fee-owned real property of the Loan Parties. The liens securing the ABL Revolving Credit Facility are senior in priority to the second-priority liens securing the obligations under the 2026 Notes and the related guarantees. The ABL Revolving Credit Facility has a term of five years and includes a $75.0 million letter of credit sub-facility, $10.0 million of which is available to the Company’s German subsidiary that is a borrower under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility.
Borrowings under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility bear interest at a variable rate using either the Alternative Base Rate or the Eurodollar and Overnight London Interbank Offer Rate (“LIBOR”). The variable interest rate is based upon the average quarterly availability as of the most recent determination date as follows:
The Company used the initial extension of credit under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility, together with the net proceeds from the offering of the 2026 Notes, to (i) redeem all of the Company’s $260.0 million in outstanding 12.750% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes due 2021 (the “Prior 2021 Notes”); (ii) repay all obligations outstanding, and terminate all commitments,
under (x) the Company’s previous $225.0 million ABL Revolving Credit Facility (“Prior ABL Facility”) and (y) $75.0 million AR Securitization Facility; and (iii) pay related fees and expenses, including $16.6 million of call premium on the Prior 2021 Notes, $5.0 million of closing costs and $4.6 million of accrued interest.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a $25.0 million charge in the Consolidated Statement of Operations associated with the Company’s refinancing of the ABL Revolving Credit Facility and 2026 Notes. The charge is composed of $16.6 million of call premium on the Prior 2021 Notes, $5.3 million of unamortized discount on the Prior 2021 Notes and $3.1 million of unamortized debt issuance costs.
Both the ABL Revolving Credit Facility and the 2026 Notes include customary covenants which include, without limitation, restrictions on the Company’s ability and the ability of the Company’s restricted subsidiaries to incur, assume or guarantee additional debt or issue certain preferred shares, pay dividends on or make other distributions in respect of the Company’s capital stock or make other restricted payments, make certain investments, sell or transfer certain assets, create liens on certain assets to secure debt, consolidate, merge, sell, or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of the Company’s assets, enter into certain transactions with affiliates and designate the Company’s subsidiaries as unrestricted. Both the ABL Revolving Credit Facility and the 2026 Notes also include customary events of default.
Additionally, the ABL Revolving Credit Facility contains a covenant requiring the Company to maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio under certain circumstances set forth in the ABL Credit Agreement.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $14.7 million outstanding of other indebtedness with a weighted-average interest rate of approximately 4.1%. This debt includes balances on local credit lines and capital lease obligations.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no borrowings outstanding under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the highest daily borrowing under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility was $50.0 million and the average borrowing was $13.3 million, while the weighted-average annual interest rate was 1.77%. The interest rate of the ABL Revolving Credit Facility fluctuates based on excess availability. As of December 31, 2020, the spreads for LIBOR and Eurodollar, and Alternative Base Rate borrowings were 1.25% and 0.25%, respectively, with excess availability of approximately $240.8 million, which represents revolver borrowing capacity of $243.8 million less U.S. letters of credit outstanding of $3.0 million.
The aggregate scheduled maturities of outstanding debt obligations in subsequent years are as follows:
•
The table of scheduled maturities above does not agree to the Company’s total debt as of December 31, 2020 as shown on the Consolidated Balance Sheet and in Note 11, “Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements due to $3.8 million of deferred financing costs related to the 2026 Notes.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all affirmative and negative covenants in its debt instruments, inclusive of the financial covenants pertaining to the ABL Revolving Credit Facility and 2026 Notes. Based upon management’s current plans and outlook, the Company believes it will be able to comply with these covenants during the subsequent twelve months.
Other Financing Arrangements
The Company has two non-U.S. accounts receivable financing programs with maximum availability of €55.0 million. Under these financing programs, the Company has the ability to sell eligible receivables up to the maximum limit and can sell additional receivables as previously sold receivables are collected. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company sold receivables and received cash of €161.0 million. The Company also has one U.S. accounts receivable financing program with maximum availability of $35.0 million. Transactions under the U.S. and non-U.S. programs were accounted for as sales in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 860, “Transfers and Servicing,” (“Topic 860”).
See further details at Note 12, “Accounts Receivable Securitization and Other Financing Arrangements” to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Capital Expenditures
The Company funds capital expenditures that are intended to:
•
improve the cost structure of the Company’s business,
•
invest in new processes, products and technology and
•
maintain high-quality production standards.
The Company spent a total of $26.3 million during 2020 for capital expenditures. For the year ended December 31, 2020, depreciation was $37.2 million.
Management also considers the following regarding liquidity and capital resources to identify trends, demands, commitments, events and uncertainties that require disclosure:
A. Our ABL Revolving Credit Facility and indenture governing the 2026 Notes require us to comply with certain financial ratios and tests. We were in compliance with these covenants as of December 31, 2020, the latest measurement date. The occurrence of any default of these covenants could result in acceleration of any outstanding balances under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility. Further, such acceleration would constitute an event of default under the indenture governing our 2026 Notes and other debt and could trigger cross default provisions in other agreements.
B. Circumstances that could impair our ability to continue to engage in transactions that have been integral to historical operations or are financially or operationally essential, or that could render that activity commercially impracticable, such as the inability to maintain a specified credit rating, level of earnings, earnings per share, financial ratios, or collateral. We do not believe that these risk factors are reasonably likely to impair our ability to continue to engage in our planned activities at this time.
C. Factors specific to us and our markets that we expect to be given significant weight in the determination of our credit rating or will otherwise affect our ability to raise short-term and long-term financing. We do not presently believe that events covered by these risk factors applicable to our business could materially affect our credit ratings or could adversely affect our ability to raise short-term or long-term financing.
D. We have disclosed information related to certain guarantees in Note 19, “Guarantees,” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
E. Written options on non-financial assets (for example, real estate puts). We do not have any written options on non-financial assets.
Non-GAAP Measures
The Company uses EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted operating income, which are financial measures that are not prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), as additional metrics to evaluate the Company’s performance.
The Company defines EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. The Company defines adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA plus the addback of certain restructuring and other charges. The Company defines adjusted operating income as adjusted EBITDA excluding the addback of depreciation and amortization. The Company believes these non-GAAP measures provide important supplemental information to readers regarding business trends that can be used in evaluating its results of operations because these financial measures provide a consistent method of comparing
financial performance and are commonly used by investors to assess performance. These non-GAAP financial measures should be considered together with, and are not substitutes for, the GAAP financial information provided herein.
The reconciliation of net income (loss) to EBITDA, and further to adjusted EBITDA and to adjusted operating income and operating income (loss) is as follows:
(1)
Other non-recurring charges in 2019 and 2018 includes losses from a long-term note receivable resulting from the 2014 divesture of the Company’s Chinese joint venture recorded in 2019 and 2018 and other non-recurring charges included in engineering, selling and administrative expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
(2)
Other (income) expense - net includes net foreign currency gains (losses), other components of net periodic pension costs, pension settlement charges, settlements of legal matters and other miscellaneous items.
The Company uses adjusted operating cash flows and free cash flows, which are financial measures that are not prepared in accordance with GAAP, as additional metrics to evaluate the Company’s performance. Adjusted operating cash flows is defined as cash flows provided by (used for) operating activities of continuing operations plus cash receipts on sold accounts receivable and other one-time items. Free cash flows are defined as adjusted operating cash flows less capital expenditures. The reconciliation of cash flows used for operating activities of continuing operations to adjusted operating cash flows and further to free cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are summarized as follows:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Our disclosures concerning transactions, arrangements and other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons that are reasonably likely to materially affect liquidity or the availability of or requirements for capital resources are as follows:
•
We have disclosed in Note 19, “Guarantees,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements our buyback commitments.
•
We have disclosed our accounts receivable securitization arrangement in Note 12, “Accounts Receivable Securitization and Other Factoring Arrangements” to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
A summary of our significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 is as follows:
•
Unrecognized tax benefits totaling $20.1 million as of December 31, 2020, excluding related interest and penalties, are not included in the table because the timing of their resolution cannot be estimated. See Note 13, “Income Taxes,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for disclosures surrounding uncertain income tax positions under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 740 “Income Taxes.”
•
The table of contractual maturities above does not agree to the Company’s total debt as of December 31, 2020 as shown on the Consolidated Balance Sheet and in Note 11, “Debt,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements due to $3.8 million of deferred financing costs related to the 2026 Notes.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had outstanding letters of credit that totaled $3.0 million. The Company also had buyback commitments with a balance outstanding of $31.7 million as of December 31, 2020. This amount is not reduced for amounts the Company would recover from the repossession and subsequent resale of collateral.
The Company maintains defined benefit pension plans for some of the Company’s employees and retirees. The Board of Directors has established the Retirement Plan Committee to manage the operations and administration of all benefit plans and related trusts. For further information see Note 21, “Employee Benefit Plans,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
In 2020, cash contributions by the Company to defined benefit pension plans were $13.1 million, and the Company estimates that its contributions in 2021 will be approximately $8.8 million. Cash contributions to the Company’s 401(k) plan were $5.9 million in 2020.
Financial Risk Management
We are exposed to market risks from changes in interest rates, commodities and foreign currency exchange rates. To reduce these risks, we selectively use derivative financial instruments and other proactive management techniques. We have written policies and procedures that place financial instruments under the direction of corporate finance and restrict all derivative transactions to those intended for hedging purposes. The use of financial instruments for trading purposes or speculation is strictly prohibited.
For a more detailed discussion of our accounting policies and the financial instruments that we use, please refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” Note 4, “Fair Value of Financial Instruments,” and Note 11, “Debt,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest Rate Risk
The Company is exposed to fluctuating interest rates for certain of its debt. At any time, the Company could be party to various interest rate swaps in connection with its fixed or floating rate debt. No interest rate swaps were entered into or outstanding during 2020 and 2019.
Commodity Prices
The Company is exposed to fluctuating market prices for commodities, including steel, copper, aluminum, and petroleum-based products. The Company’s business is subject to the effect of changing raw material costs caused by movements in underlying commodity prices. The Company has established programs to manage the negotiations of commodity prices. From time to time the Company may use commodity financial instruments to hedge commodity prices. No commodity financial instruments were entered into or outstanding during 2020 and 2019.
Currency Risk
The Company has manufacturing, sales and distribution facilities around the world, and therefore, makes investments and enters into transactions denominated in various currencies, which introduces transactional currency exchange risk.
To mitigate transactional currency exchange risk, the Company, from time-to-time, enters into foreign exchange contracts to 1) reduce the earnings and cash flows impact on non-functional currency denominated receivables and payables and 2) reduce the impact of changes in foreign currency rates between a budgeted rate and the rate realized at the time it recognizes a particular purchase or sale transaction. Gains and losses resulting from hedging instruments either impact the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period of the underlying purchase or sale transaction, or offset the foreign exchange gains and losses on the underlying receivables and payables being hedged. The maturities of these foreign exchange contracts coincide with the expected underlying settlement date of the related cash inflow or outflow. The hedges of anticipated transactions are designated as cash flow hedges under the guidance of ASC No. 815 “Derivatives and Hedging.” As of December 31, 2020, the Company was party to foreign currency forward contracts with a notional value of $9.3 million, all of which are carried on the Company’s balance sheet at fair value. As of December 31, 2020, a 10% increase or decrease in the exchange rate in the Company’s portfolio of foreign currency contracts would have increased or decreased the Company’s unrealized losses by $0.9 million. Consistent with the use of these contracts to neutralize the effect of exchange rate fluctuations, such unrealized losses or gains would be offset by corresponding gains or losses, respectively, in the remeasurement of the underlying transactions being hedged.
Amounts invested in non-U.S. based subsidiaries are translated into U.S. dollars at the exchange rate in effect at year-end. Results of operations are translated into U.S. dollars at an average exchange rate for the period. The resulting translation adjustments are recorded in stockholders’ equity as other comprehensive income (loss). The cumulative translation adjustment recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss as of December 31, 2020 was a loss of $49.6 million.
Environmental, Health, Safety, Contingencies and Other Matters
Please refer to Part II, Item 8, Note 18, “Commitments and Contingencies,” where the Company has disclosed environmental, health, safety, contingencies and other matters.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of the Company and all its subsidiaries. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires the Company to make estimates and assumptions in certain circumstances that affect amounts reported in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and related footnotes. In preparing these Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company has made its best estimates and judgments of certain amounts included in the Consolidated Financial Statements giving due consideration to materiality. However, application of these accounting policies involves the exercise of judgment and use of assumptions as to future uncertainties and, as a result, actual results could differ from these estimates. Although the Company has listed a number of accounting policies below which the Company believes to be most critical, the Company also believes that all of the Company’s accounting policies are important to the reader. Therefore, please refer also to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more detailed description of these and other accounting policies of the Company.
Revenue Recognition - The Company records revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606 - “Revenue from Contracts with Customers.” Below are our revenue recognition policies by performance obligation.
•
Crane Sales
Crane sales are primarily generated through the sale of new and used cranes. Contracts with customers are generally in the form of a purchase order. Based on the nature of the Company’s contracts, the Company does not have any significant financing terms. Contracts may have variable consideration in the form of early pay discounts or rebates. Revenue is earned under these contracts when control of the product is transferred to the customer. Control transfers to the customer generally upon delivery to the carrier or acceptance through an independent inspection company that acts as an agent of the customer.
From time to time, the Company enters into agreements where the customer has the right to exercise a put option requiring the Company to buyback a crane at an agreed upon price. The Company evaluates each agreement at the inception of the order to determine if the customer has a significant economic incentive to exercise that right. If it is determined that the customer has a significant economic incentive to exercise that right, the agreement is accounted for as a lease in accordance with ASC Topic 842 - “Leases.” If it is determined that the customer does not have a significant economic incentive to exercise that right, then revenue is recognized when control of the asset is transferred to the customer.
Given the nature of the Company’s products, the customer may request that the product be held until a delivery location is identified. Under these “bill and hold” arrangements, sales are recognized when all of the following criteria are met: 1) the reason for the bill-and-hold arrangement is substantive, 2) the product is separately identified as belonging to the customer, 3) the product is ready for transfer to the customer and 4) the Company does not have the ability to use the product or direct it to another customer.
•
Aftermarket Part Sales
Aftermarket part sales are generated through the sale of new and used parts to end customers and distributors. Aftermarket parts revenue is recognized when control of the product is transferred to the customer. Control transfers to the customer generally upon delivery to the carrier. Customers generally have a right of return which the Company estimates using historical information. The amount of estimated returns is deducted from net sales.
•
Other Sales
The Company’s other sales consist primarily of sales from:
o
Repair and field service work; and
o
Training and technical publications.
As it relates to the Company’s other sales, the Company’s performance obligations generally relate to performing specific agreed upon services. Sales are earned upon the completion of those services.
Inventories and Related Reserve for Obsolete and Excess Inventory - Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Finished goods and work-in-process inventories include material, labor and manufacturing overhead costs. Inventories are reduced by a reserve for excess and obsolete inventories. The estimated reserve is based upon specific identification of excess or obsolete inventories based on historical usage, estimated future usage, sales requiring the inventory and historical write-off experience and are subject to change if experience improves or deteriorates.
Goodwill, Other Intangible Assets and Other Long-Lived Assets - The Company accounts for goodwill and other intangible assets under the guidance of ASC Topic 350-10, “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other.” Under ASC Topic 350-10, goodwill is not amortized; instead, the Company performs an annual impairment review. The date for the annual impairment review is October 31, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the assets might be impaired. To perform its goodwill impairment review, the Company uses a fair-value method, primarily the income approach, based on the present value of expected future cash flows. Goodwill impairment is determined by the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. To perform its indefinite lived intangible assets impairment test, the Company uses a fair-value method, based on a relief of royalty valuation approach. Management’s judgments and assumptions about the amounts of those cash flows and the discount rates are inputs to these analyses. The
estimated fair value is then compared with the carrying amount of the reporting unit or indefinite lived intangible asset and are subject to a write-down to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds the estimated fair value.
The Company has three reporting units: Americas, EURAF and MEAP.
As of October 31, 2020, the Company performed its annual goodwill and indefinite-lived assets impairment tests, and based on those results, no impairments were indicated. The valuation of the goodwill is particularly sensitive to management’s assumptions of revenue growth rates and projected operating income, and an unfavorable change in those assumptions could put goodwill at risk for impairment in future periods.
Other intangible assets with definite lives continue to be amortized over their estimated useful lives. Definite lived intangible assets are also subject to impairment testing whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. If an indicator of impairment is identified, the Company would use the income approach, which is based on the present value of expected future cash flows.
The Company also reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset's carrying amount may not be recoverable. The Company conducts its long-lived asset impairment analyses in accordance with ASC Topic 360-10-5, “Property, Plant, and Equipment.” ASC Topic 360-10-5 requires the Company to group assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities and to evaluate the asset group against the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows.
The Company monitors market conditions to determine if any additional interim reviews of goodwill, other intangibles or long-lived assets are warranted. Deterioration in the market or actual results as compared with the Company’s projections may ultimately result in a future impairment. In the event the Company determines that assets are impaired in the future, the Company would recognize a non-cash impairment charge, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet and Results of Operations.
Employee Benefit Plans - The Company provides a range of benefits to its employees and retired employees, including pensions and postretirement health care coverage. Plan assets and obligations are recorded annually based on the Company’s measurement date utilizing various actuarial assumptions such as discount rates, expected return on plan assets, compensation increases, retirement and mortality rates and health care cost trend rates as of that date. The approach the Company used to determine the annual assumptions are as follows:
•
Discount Rate - The Company’s discount rate assumptions are based on the interest rate of noncallable high-quality corporate bonds, with appropriate consideration of our pension plans’ participants’ demographics and benefit payment terms. The Company’s discount rate is provided by an independent third party calculated based on an appropriate mix of high-quality bonds.
•
Expected Return on Plan Assets - The Company’s expected return on plan assets assumptions are based on the Company’s expectation of the long-term average rate of return on assets in the pension funds, which is reflective of the current and projected asset mix of the funds and considers the historical returns earned on the funds, net of estimated fees.
•
Compensation increase - The Company’s compensation increase assumptions reflect its long-term actual experience, the near-term outlook and assumed inflation.
•
Retirement and Mortality Rates - The Company’s retirement and mortality rate assumptions are based primarily on actual plan experience and mortality tables.
•
Health Care Cost Trend Rates - The Company’s health care cost trend rate assumptions are developed based on historical cost data, near-term outlook and an assessment of likely long-term trends.
Measurements of net periodic benefit cost are based on the assumptions used for the previous year-end measurements of assets and obligations. The Company reviews its actuarial assumptions on an annual basis and makes modifications to the assumptions when appropriate. As required by GAAP, the effects of the modifications are recorded currently or amortized over future periods. The Company has developed the assumptions with the assistance of its independent actuaries and other relevant sources, and believes the assumptions used are reasonable; however, changes in these assumptions could impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Refer to Note 21, “Employee Benefit Plans” to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for a summary of the impact of a 0.50% change in the discount rate and rate of return on plan assets would have on the Company’s financial statements.
Product Liability - The Company is subject, in the normal course of business, to product liability lawsuits. To the extent permitted under applicable laws, the Company’s exposure to losses from these lawsuits is mitigated by insurance with self-insurance retention limits. The Company’s reserve is based upon two estimates. First, the Company tracks the population of all outstanding product liability cases to determine an appropriate case reserve for each based upon its best judgment and the advice of legal counsel. These estimates are continually evaluated and adjusted based upon changes to the facts and circumstances surrounding the case. Second, the Company determines the amount of additional reserve required to cover incurred, but not reported, product liability issues and to account for possible adverse development of the established case reserves (collectively referred to as “IBNR”). The Company has established a position within the actuarially determined range, which it believes is the best estimate of the IBNR liability.
Income Taxes - The Company accounts for income taxes under the guidance of ASC Topic 740-10, “Income Taxes.” Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance that represents a reserve on deferred tax assets for which utilization is not more likely than not. Management judgment is required in determining its provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and the valuation allowance recorded against its net deferred tax assets. The Company does not currently provide for additional U.S. and non-U.S. income taxes which would become payable upon repatriation of undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries.
The Company measures and records income tax contingency accruals under the guidance of ASC Topic 740-10. The Company recognizes liabilities for uncertain income tax positions based on a two-step process. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step requires the Company to estimate and measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. It is inherently difficult and subjective to estimate such amounts, as the Company must determine the probability of various possible outcomes. The Company reevaluates these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis or when new information becomes available to management. These reevaluations are based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, successfully settled issues under audit, expirations due to statutes, and new audit activity. Such a change in recognition or measurement could result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an increase to the tax accrual.
Warranties - In the normal course of business, the Company provides its customers warranties covering workmanship, and in some cases materials, on products manufactured. Such warranties generally provide that products will be free from defects for periods ranging from 12 months to 60 months with certain equipment having longer-term warranties. If a product fails to comply with the Company’s warranties, it may be obligated, at its expense, to correct any defect by repairing or replacing such defective product. The Company provides for an estimate of costs that may be incurred under its warranties at the time product revenue is recognized based on historical warranty experience for the related product or estimates of projected losses due to specific warranty issues on new products. These costs primarily include labor and materials, as necessary, associated with repair or replacement. The primary factors that affect the Company’s warranty liabilities include the number of shipped units and historical and anticipated rates or warranty claims. As these factors are impacted by actual experience and future expectations, the Company assesses the adequacy of its recorded warranty liability and adjusts the amounts as necessary.
Recent Accounting Changes and Pronouncements
See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” under the caption “Recent Accounting Changes and Pronouncements,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.