Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward- looking statements as a result of many factors, including but not limited to those under the heading “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Report. Certain amounts in this section may not foot due to rounding.
Overview
We are a financial technology-driven group specializing in payment acceptance and value-added solutions across multiple channels in the United States and selected international markets. We are differentiated by our proprietary technology which enables us to provide a broad suite of payment products, end-to-end transaction processing services and superior client support. We are able to deliver our services across multiple points of access, or “multi-channel,” including brick and mortar locations, software integration, e-commerce, mobile operator billing, mobile and tablet-based solutions. In the United States, via our U.S. based subsidiaries, we generate revenues from transactional services and value-added payment technologies for small and medium-sized businesses. Through PayOnline, we provide transactional services, mobile payment transactions, online payment transactions and other payment technologies in selected international markets, the Russian Federation, Eurasian Economic Community (“EAEC”), Europe and Asia.
Our transactional services business enables merchants to accept credit cards as well as other forms of payment, including debit cards, checks, gift cards, loyalty programs and alternative payment methods in traditional card-present or swipe transactions, as well as card-not-present transactions, such as those conducted over the phone or through the Internet or a mobile device. We market and sell our services through both independent sales groups (“ISGs”), which are non-employee, external sales organizations and other third-party resellers of our products and services, and directly to merchants through electronic media, telemarketing and other programs, including utilizing partnerships with other companies that market products and services to local and international merchants. We have agreements with several banks that sponsor us for membership in the Visa ®, MasterCard ®, American Express ® and Discover ® card brands and settle card transactions for our merchants. These agreements allow us to use the banks’ identification numbers, referred to as Bank Identification Numbers (BIN) for Visa® transactions and Interbank Card Association (ICA) number for MasterCard® transactions. The principal sponsoring banks through which we process the majority of our transaction in the United States include Citizens Bank, Esquire Bank, N.A. and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. From time to time, we may enter into agreements with additional banks. We perform core functions for merchants such as application processing, underwriting, number account set-up, risk management, fraud detection, merchant assistance and support, equipment deployment, chargeback services and offer our own dedicated BIN and ICA for various types of specialty merchants.
Netevia, our future-ready payments and merchant management platform acts as a framework and core for a number of value-added services that connect merchants and consumers directly utilizing disruptive emerging technologies while increasing the economic efficiency of all transactions being made within the ecosystem. Specifically, Netevia delivers end-to-end payment processing through easy-to-use APIs and complements the Company’s ability to perform in a multi-channel environment, including point-of-sale (POS), e-commerce and mobile devices and will enable the Company to perform as a hub for disruptive emerging technology solutions.
Our mobile payments business, previously provided through Digital Provider, has been combined with PayOnline to provide contracts with mobile operators that give us the ability to offer our clients in-app, premium SMS (short message services, which is a text messaging service), Wireless Application Protocol (WAP)-click, one click and other carrier billing services. We have substantially reorganized this business, and currently we are not generating revenues from new mobile content. We have not yet been able to find or solidify an acceptable joint venture partner or other arrangement that provides sufficient profit potential and operating benefit for our mobile payments operations.
PayOnline provides flexible, high-tech payment solutions to companies doing business on the Internet or in the mobile environment. PayOnline specializes in integration and customization of payment solutions for websites and mobile apps. In particular, PayOnline arranges payment on the website of any commercial organization, which increases the convenience of using the website and helps maximize the number of successful transactions. In addition, PayOnline is focused on providing online and mobile payment acceptance services to the travel industry through direct integration with leading Global Distribution Systems (“GDS”), which include Amadeus® and Sabre®. Key geographic regions that PayOnline serves include Eastern Europe, Central Asia, Western Europe, North America and Asia major sub regions. PayOnline offices are located in Moscow, Russia.
Aptito is a proprietary, cloud-based payments platform for the hospitality industry, which creates an online consumer experience in offline commerce environments via tablet, mobile and all other cloud-connected devices. Aptito’s easy to use point-of-sale (“POS”) system makes things easier by providing a comprehensive solution to the hospitality industry to help streamline management and operations. Orders placed tableside by customers directly speed up the ordering process and improve overall efficiency. Aptito’s mobile POS system provides portability to the staff while performing all the same functions as a traditional POS system.
Recent Developments
The COVID-19 pandemic has and continues to affect businesses across the globe, in particular the service industry, which includes restaurants, a significant part of our business. Over the past year, we have taken initiatives to help minimize the risks to our business and protect our shareholders. Our management team’s experience during the 2008 financial crisis is proving to be very valuable in dealing with the current crisis. Our entire staff is fully committed and working diligently to support our merchants through these difficult times. Most of our merchants have contactless payment acceptance capabilities through their POS solutions, as well as, e-commerce and mobile contactless payment acceptance capabilities to eliminate the need for physical payments to help reduce the spread of the virus. The following initiatives, including an extensive business continuity plan, have been implemented:
Risk Management:
●
Enhanced risk controls and safeguards have been put in place for merchants that sell products with an extended delivery time frame, products paid in advance, catering, ticketing, limo and travel related merchants
●
Onboarding of new merchants in the above categories has been put on hold until further notice
●
For those employees that will be working from home, we have implemented a “remote work” policy and provided employees with the technology necessary to do so
●
For those employees that require office attendance, we are taking significant steps to ensure seamless service delivery while safeguarding employees health
Contactless Payments:
●
Most of our merchants have contactless payment acceptance capabilities through their POS devices from equipment manufacturers such as PAX, Poynt and Verifone which are fully integrated into Netevia and Aptito platforms
●
We launched an initiative to deploy contactless payment acceptance equipment to merchants that don’t currently have it
●
Mobile contactless payment acceptance is available through our Unified mPOS App which can be downloaded from Apple’s App Store and Google’s Google Play Apps
●
Online ecommerce payments through shopping carts allow our merchants to sell their products and services to customers that prefer to shop from the convenience of their homes
Moving forward, we will continue proactively managing the situation and providing support for our merchants. We continue our mission to build value for our shareholders as we work our way out of this crisis. We believe that given our team experience, dedicated and talented staff and our dedication to the business we will emerge stronger than ever. We wish our shareholders, partners, merchants and their loved ones good health during these difficult times.
To date, COVID-19 has not had a material impact on the Company. However, the Company cannot predict whether COVID-19 will have a material impact on our future financial condition and results of operations due to understaffing in the service sector and the decrease in revenues and profits, particularly from restaurants, which is the largest industry group serviced by our Company, any possible future government ordinances that may further restrict restaurant and other service or retail sector operations, or measures undertaken to contain and eliminate the spread domestically and internationally. The exact extent of the impact from COVID-19 will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. In most respects, it is still too early in the COVID-19 pandemic to be able to quantify or qualify the longer-term ramifications on our business, our merchants, and our potential investors. The Company is aware that the processing volume for the year ended 2021 may continue to be affected, primarily due to any possible complete closure or suspension of dine-in services in the restaurant industry, in particular.
Acquisitions of Recurring Cash Flow Portfolios
From time to time, the Company acquires future recurring revenue streams from sales agents in exchange for an upfront cash payment. This results in an increase in net cash flow to the Company. The acquisitions of recurring cash flows are treated as asset acquisitions, resulting in recording a recurring cash flow portfolio intangible asset, at cost, on the date of acquisition. These assets are amortized over a straight-line period of approximately four years and is included in intangible assets on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets (See Note 6 - item labeled “Portfolio and Clients Lists”, on the accompanying consolidated audited financial statements). During the year ended December 31, 2019 we acquired the following recurring cash flow portfolios. There were no recurring cash flow portfolios acquired during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Universal Partners, LLC
On July 30, 2018, our subsidiary, Unified Portfolio Acquisitions, LLC (the “Purchaser”), entered into an Advance and Residual Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Universal Partners, LLC (“Universal”). Pursuant to the Agreement, the Purchaser acquired certain transactional services portfolios (“cash flow assets”) from Universal and Payment Club, LLC (together with Universal, the “Seller”) for $2,700,000 (the “Advance Amount”). The cash flow assets consist of residuals (the “Residuals”) that the Sellers are entitled to receive pursuant to certain agreements (the “Combined Marketing Agreements”) with TOT Payments, LLC (doing business as Unified Payments), our subsidiary, or any other agreements pursuant to which the Seller is entitled to residuals.
The Advance Amount is to be repaid to the Purchaser whereby each and every month, commencing from July 1, 2018 (the “Effective Date”) and for a period of 24 months thereafter, terminating on June 30, 2020 (the “Advance Period”), the Purchaser is entitled to a certain amount of the Residuals. Such Residuals due to the Purchaser are secured by certain of the Seller’s property as collateral.
At the end of the Advance Period (the “Transfer Date”), the Purchaser and the Seller have agreed to create a new static portfolio pool of mutually agreed residual income from Seller portfolios comprising merchant accounts boarded by the Seller under the Combined Marketing Agreements that on the Transfer are generating at least $120,000 per month in net cash flow income (the “Portfolio Residuals”). From and after the Transfer Date, the Purchaser and Seller will share/split the Portfolio Residuals with the Purchaser owning an 80% interest in the Portfolio Residuals and the Seller owning a 20% interest in the Portfolio Residuals.
As of December 31, 2020, the Purchaser and Seller agreed to and finalized the terms of a new static portfolio.
Argus Merchant Services, LLC
On December 26, 2018, Unified Portfolio Acquisitions, LLC (the “Purchaser”), a subsidiary of Net Element, Inc. (the “Company”), entered into an Advance and Residual Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Argus Merchant Services, LLC ("Argus") and Treasury Payments, LLC ("Treasury"); Argus and Treasury are collectively referred to herein as the (“Seller”). Pursuant to the Agreement, the Purchaser acquired certain transactional services portfolios (“cash flow assets”) from the Seller for a total purchase consideration of $1,426,000. The cash flow assets consist of residuals (the “Residuals”) that the Seller is entitled to receive pursuant to certain agreements (including any amendments of such agreements, the “Combined Marketing Agreements”) with TOT Payments, LLC (doing business as Unified Payments, a subsidiary of the Company).
On December 27, 2018, the Purchaser paid to Seller $1,150,000 (the “Advance Amount”). The Advance Amount and the balance of the purchase consideration is to be repaid to the Purchaser from Residuals due to the Seller, whereby each and every month, commencing from January 2019 (the “Effective Date”) and for a period of 24 months (the “Advance Period”), the Purchaser will be entitled to a certain amount of the Seller’s Residuals. Such Residuals due to the Purchaser are secured by certain of the Seller’s property as collateral.
At the end of the Advance Period (the “Transfer Date”), the Purchaser will receive an ownership interest in a portfolio of cash flow assets by creating with the Seller, a new static portfolio pool of mutually agreed residual income from Seller portfolios comprising merchant accounts boarded by the Seller under the Combined Marketing Agreements.
As of December 31, 2020, the Purchaser and Seller have not finalized the terms of a new static portfolio.
Operating Segments
Our reportable segments are business units that offer different products and services in different geographies. The reportable segments are each managed separately because they offer distinct products, in distinct geographic locations, with different delivery and service processes.
North American Transaction Solutions
Our North American Transaction Solutions business segment consists of the former Unified Payments business and Aptito. This segment operates primarily in North America. In March 2013, we acquired all of the business assets of Unified Payments, a provider of comprehensive turnkey, payment processing solutions to small and medium size business owners (merchants) and independent sales organizations across the United States. In April 2013, we acquired 80% of Aptito, a cloud-based Software-as-a-Service (“SaaS”) restaurant management solution, which provides integrated POS, mPOS, Kiosk, Digital Menus functionality to drive consumer engagement via Apple® iPad®-based POS, kiosk and all other cloud-connected devices.
International Transaction Solutions
Our International Transaction Solutions segment consists of PayOnline, which also now includes our mobile payments operations, primarily located in Russia. PayOnline provides a secure online payment processing system to accept bank card payments for goods and services.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are described more fully in Note 3 of the accompanying notes to our audited consolidated financial statements.
The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses for the reporting period. Such estimates include, but are not limited to, the value of purchase consideration paid and identifiable assets acquired and assumed in acquisitions, goodwill and asset impairment review, valuation reserves for accounts receivable, valuation of acquired or current merchant portfolios, incurred but not reported claims, revenue recognition for multiple element arrangements, loss reserves, assumptions used in the calculation of equity-based compensation and in the calculation of income taxes, and certain tax assets and liabilities, as well as, the related valuation allowances. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Below is a summary of the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates for which the nature of management’s assumptions are material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change, and for which the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material.
Revenue
We recognize revenue when all of the following criteria are met: (1) the parties to the contract have approved the contract and are committed to perform their respective obligations, (2) we can identify each party’s rights regarding the goods or services to be transferred, (3) we can identify the payment terms for the goods or services to be transferred, (4) the contract has commercial substance, and (5) it is probable that we will collect substantially all of the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer. The Company considers persuasive evidence of a sales arrangement to be the receipt of a billable transaction from aggregators, signed contract or the processing of a credit card transaction. Collectability is assessed based on a number of factors, including transaction history with the customer and the credit worthiness of the customer. If it is determined that the collection is not reasonably assured, revenue is not recognized until collection becomes reasonably assured, which is generally upon receipt of cash. We record cash received in advance of revenue recognition as deferred revenue. Revenue consists primarily of fees generated through the electronic processing of payment transactions and related services and is recognized as revenue during the period the transactions are processed or when the related services are performed.
The majority of our revenues is derived from volume-based payment processing fees ("discount fees”) and other related fixed transaction or service fees. Discount fees represent a percentage of the dollar amount of each credit or debit transaction processed. Discount fees are recognized at the time the merchants’ transactions are processed. Generally, where we have control over merchant pricing, merchant portability, credit risk and ultimate responsibility for the merchant relationship, revenues are reported at the time of sale on a gross basis equal to the full amount of the discount charged to the merchant. This amount includes interchange fees paid to card issuing banks and assessments paid to payment card networks pursuant to which such parties receive payments based primarily on processing volume for particular groups of merchants. Revenues generated from merchant portfolios where we do not have control over merchant pricing, liability for merchant losses or credit risk or rights of portability are reported net of interchange and other fees.
Revenues are also derived from a variety of fixed transaction or service fees, including authorization fees, convenience fees, statement fees, annual fees, and fees for other miscellaneous services, such as handling chargebacks. Revenues derived from service fees are recognized at the time the services are performed and there are no further performance obligations. Revenue from the sale of equipment is recognized upon transfer of ownership and delivery to the customer, after which there are no further performance obligations.
We primarily report revenues gross as a principal versus net as an agent. Although some of our processing agreements vary with respect to specific terms, the transactional processing service fees collected from merchants generally are recognized as revenue on a gross basis as we are the principal in the delivery of the managed payments solutions to the sellers. The gross fees we collect are intended to cover the interchange, assessments and other processing and non-processing fees which are included and are part of our gross margin.
Accounts Receivable and Credit Policies
Accounts receivable consist primarily of uncollateralized credit card processing residual payments due from processing banks requiring payment within thirty days following the end of each month. Accounts receivable also include amounts due from the sales of our technology solutions to our customers. The carrying amount of accounts receivable is reduced by an allowance for doubtful accounts, if necessary, which reflects management’s best estimate of the amounts that will not be collected. The allowance is estimated based on management’s knowledge of its customers, historical loss experience and existing economic conditions. Accounts receivable and the allowance are written-off when, in management’s opinion, all collection efforts have been exhausted.
Goodwill
Our goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired in business combinations. The goodwill generated from the business combinations is primarily related to the value placed on the employee workforce and expected synergies. Judgment is involved in determining if an indicator or change in circumstances relating to impairment has occurred. Such changes may include, among others, a significant decline in expected future cash flows, a significant adverse change in the business climate, and unforeseen competition.
We have the option of performing a qualitative assessment of impairment to determine whether any further quantitative testing for impairment is necessary. The option of whether or not to perform a qualitative assessment is made annually and may vary by reporting unit. Factors we consider in the qualitative assessment include general macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance of our reporting units, events or changes affecting the composition or carrying amount of the net assets of its reporting units, sustained decrease in its share price, and other relevant entity specific events. If we determine on the basis of qualitative factors that the fair value of the reporting unit is more likely than not less than the carrying value, then we perform a quantitative test for that reporting unit. The fair value of each reporting unit is compared to the reporting unit’s carrying value, including goodwill. Subsequent to the adoption on January 1, 2017 of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2017-04, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other: Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, if the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we recognize an impairment equal to the excess carrying value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
At December 31, 2019, our management determined that an impairment charge of approximately $1.3 million was necessary to reduce the goodwill relating to the acquisition of PayOnline which is part of our International Transaction Solutions segment . We did not recognize any impairment charge to goodwill during the year ended December 31, 2020.
How We Assess Our Business
Technology Enabling Payment Solutions
Our technology provides comprehensive payment solutions to small and medium size businesses and organizations. Our merchant services includes third-party integrated payment solutions, as well as, traditional payment services across our strategic vertical markets.
Proprietary Software and Payments
Our proprietary software and payments services, Aptito, delivers embedded payment solutions to our clients through company-owned software and we also provide the traditional merchant processing model.
Corporate Expenses and Eliminations
Our corporate expenses and eliminations category includes corporate overhead expenses, when presenting reportable segment information. For additional information on our segments, see Note 16 of our accompanying audited consolidated financial statements.
Key Operating Metrics
We evaluate our performance through key operating metrics, including:
•
the dollar volume of payments our clients process through us (“payment volume”);
•
the portion of our payment volume that is produced by integrated transactions; and
•
period-to-period payment volume attrition.
Our payment volume for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $2.7 billion and $3.6 billion, respectively, representing a period- to-period decrease of 25%. We focus on volume, because it reflects the scale and economic activity of our client base and because a significant part of our revenue is derived as a percentage of our clients’ dollar volume receipts. Payment volume reflects the addition of new clients and same store payment volume growth of existing clients, partially offset by client attrition during the period. The COVID-19 pandemic affected businesses across the globe, in particular the service industry, which includes restaurants, a significant part of our business.
Total transactions processed during 2020 were 73.3 million compared to 106 million for 2019.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
We reported a net loss attributable to common stockholders of approximately $5.9 million or ($1.34) loss per share for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a net loss of approximately $6.5 million or ($1.60) loss per share for the year ended December 31, 2019. This resulted in a decrease in net loss attributable to stockholders of approximately 9% primarily due to a decrease of approximately $2.3 million in selling, general, and administrative expenses, partially offset by an increase in non-cash compensation of approximately $0.7 million. There were no goodwill impairment charges during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to an impairment charge of approximately $1.3 million recorded at December 31, 2019.
The following table sets forth our sources of revenues, cost of revenues and gross margins for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Gross Margin Analysis:
Net revenues consist primarily of service fees from transaction processing. Net revenues were approximately $65.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to approximately $65.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cost of revenues represents direct costs of generating revenues, including commissions, mobile operator fees, interchange expense, processing and non-processing fees. Cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $55.9 million as compared to approximately $54.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cost of revenues in 2020 as compared to 2019 of approximately $1.1 million was in line with the increase in net revenues for our North American Transaction Solutions segment.
Gross Margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $9.8 million, or 15.0% of net revenue, as compared to approximately $10.3 million, or 15.8% of net revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary reason for the decrease in the gross margin percentage was primarily the result of the competitive pressure in our industry, relating to costs that cannot be passed through to our merchants.
Operating Expenses Analysis:
Total operating expenses were approximately $14.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to total operating expenses of approximately $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Total operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of selling, general and administrative expenses of approximately $7.0 million, non-cash compensation of approximately $2.7 million, bad debt expense of approximately $1.6 million, and depreciation and amortization expense of approximately $3.0 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, total operating expenses consisted of general and administrative expenses of approximately $9.3 million, non-cash compensation of approximately $2.1 million, bad debt expense of approximately $1.4 million, and depreciation and amortization expense of approximately $3.1 million.
The components of our selling, general and administrative expenses are reflected in the table below.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 consisted of operating expenses not otherwise delineated in the accompanying audited consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, as follows:
The total decrease of approximately $2.3 million in selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year was primarily due to the staffing reductions necessary and the reduction of compensation of certain employees and executives of the Company, including independent consultants and other professionals, due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations.
The following table represents salaries, benefits, taxes and contractor payments by operating segment and the category corporate expenses and eliminations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following table represents professional fees by operating segment and the category corporate expenses and eliminations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Other Income and Expenses Delineated in the Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss:
Non-cash Compensation Analysis:
Non-cash compensation expense was $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to approximately $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. A summary of 2020 and 2019 non-cash compensation activity follows:
2020 Non-Cash Compensation Activity:
2019 Non-Cash Compensation Activity:
Bad Debt Expense:
We reflected a bad debt expense on the accompanying consolidated statements of operations, which represents uncollected fees of approximately $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $1.4 million for the year ended 2019. The increase of approximately $200,000 from the previous comparable period was primarily due to billing adjustments relating to chargebacks made by our processors due to the to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our merchants.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense:
Depreciation and amortization expense consists primarily of the amortization of merchant portfolios in connection with residual buyout arrangements and client acquisition costs. Depreciation and amortization expense was approximately $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $3.1 million for the year ended 2019.
Interest Expense:
Interest expense was approximately $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to approximately $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of approximately $300,000 primarily due to the increase in debt borrowings during 2020 as compared to the prior year.
Other Income (Expenses):
Other income of approximately $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to recognizing a non-recurring charge to other income of approximately $1.1 million relating to merchant reserves recorded in a previous year deemed not to be a legal obligation by management.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Total assets at December 31, 2020 were approximately $26.2 million compared to approximately $23.0 million at December 31, 2019. The primary reasons for the net increase in total assets was the result of cash provided by operations and from ESOUSA in exchange for Common Stock pursuant to the ESOUSA Agreement, and the increase in the operating lease right-of-use asset.
At December 31, 2020, we had total current assets of approximately $13.3 million as compared to approximately $8.7 million at December 31, 2019. The primary reason for the increase in current assets was the result of cash provided by operations and from financing activity primarily related to proceeds from indebtedness.
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. We sustained a net loss of approximately $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and have an accumulated deficit of $184.7 million and a negative working capital of $1.7 million at December 31, 2020.
During the first quarter of 2020, our Company evaluated its liquidity position, future operating plans, and its labor force, which included a reduction in the labor force and compensation to executives and other employees, in order to maintain current payment processing functions, capabilities, and continued customer service to its merchants. We are also seeking sources of capital to pay our contractual obligations as they come due, in light of these uncertain times. Management believes that its operating strategy will provide the opportunity for us to continue as a going concern as long as we are able to obtain additional financing. At this time, due to our continuing losses from operations, negative working capital, and the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot predict the impact of these conditions on our ability to obtain financing necessary for the Company to fund its future working capital requirements. Our Company has also decided to explore strategic alternatives and potential options for its business, including sale of the Company or certain assets, licensing of technology, spin-offs, or a business combination. There can be no assurance, at this time, regarding the eventual outcome of our planned strategic alternative. In most respects, it is still too early in the COVID-19 pandemic to be able to quantify or qualify the longer-term ramifications on our merchant processing business, our merchants, our planned strategic alternatives to enhance current shareholder value, our current investors, and/or future potential investors.
As part of our Company's plan to obtain capital to fund future operations, on March 27, 2020, our Company entered into a Master Exchange Agreement (the “ESOUSA Agreement”) with ESOUSA Holdings, LLC ("ESOUSA"), a related party. Prior to entering into the ESOUSA Agreement, ESOUSA agreed to acquire an existing promissory note that had been previously issued by the Company, of up to $2,000,000 in principal amount outstanding and unpaid interest due to RBL Capital Group, LLC ("RBL"). Pursuant to the ESOUSA Agreement, the Company has the right, at any time prior to March 27, 2021, to request ESOUSA, and ESOUSA agreed upon each such request, to exchange this promissory note in tranches on the dates when the Company instructs ESOUSA, for such number of shares of the Company’s common stock (“Common Stock”) as determined under the ESOUSA Agreement based upon the number of shares of Common Stock (already in ESOUSA’s possession) that ESOUSA sold in order to finance its purchase of such tranche of the promissory note from RBL. ESOUSA will purchase each tranche of the promissory note equal to 88% of the gross proceeds from the shares of Common Stock sold by ESOUSA to finance the purchase of such exchange amount from RBL. Each such tranche shall be $148,000 unless otherwise agreed to by the Company and ESOUSA.
On April 23, 2020 and August 3, 2020, the Company entered into certain amendments to the ESOUSA Agreement, which together increased from $2,000,000 to $15,000,000 the principal amount and unpaid interest of one or more promissory notes of the Company or its direct or indirect subsidiaries that ESOUSA either purchased in whole or has an irrevocable right to purchase in tranches from RBL in connection with the ESOUSA Agreement.
On March 27, 2020, the Company received its first tranche of RBL promissory notes in the aggregate amount of $148,000, less any fees, from ESOUSA to be exchanged for Common Stock pursuant to the ESOUSA Agreement. Concurrently with this transaction, the Company received an equivalent aggregate amount of $148,000 from RBL under the Loan and Security Agreement (“Credit Facility”) with RBL. See Note 8. "Notes Payable" in the condensed consolidated unaudited financial statements contained in Part I, Item 1 of this Report for more information regarding the terms of the Credit Facility.
On April 28, 2020, the Company received its second tranche of RBL promissory notes in the aggregate amount of $143,000, less any fees, from ESOUSA to be exchanged for Common Stock pursuant to the ESOUSA Agreement. The Company issued 65,862 shares of Common Stock to ESOUSA in connection with this exchange. Concurrently with this transaction, the Company received an equivalent aggregate amount of $143,000 from RBL under the Credit Facility. \
On August 11, 2020, the Company received its third tranche of RBL promissory notes in the aggregate amount of $707,000, less any fees, from ESOUSA to be exchanged for Common Stock pursuant to the ESOUSA Agreement. The Company issued 66,190 shares of Common Stock to ESOUSA in connection with this exchange. Concurrently with this transaction, the Company received an equivalent aggregate amount of $707,000 from RBL under the Credit Facility.
On August 21, 2020, the Company received its fourth tranche of RBL promissory notes in the aggregate amount of $401,000, less any fees, from ESOUSA to be exchanged for Common Stock pursuant to the ESOUSA Agreement. The Company issued 45,654 shares of Common Stock to ESOUSA in connection with this exchange. Concurrently with this transaction, the Company received an equivalent aggregate amount of $401,000 from RBL under the Credit Facility.
On September 25, 2020, the Company received its fifth tranche of RBL promissory notes in the aggregate amount of $426,000, less any fees, from ESOUSA to be exchanged for Common Stock pursuant to the ESOUSA Agreement. The Company issued 50,000 shares of Common Stock to ESOUSA in connection with this exchange. Concurrently with this transaction, the Company received an equivalent aggregate amount of $426,000 from RBL under the Credit Facility.
On December 30, 2020, the Company received its sixth tranche of RBL promissory notes in the aggregate amount of $1,960,000, less any fees, from ESOUSA to be exchanged for Common Stock pursuant to the ESOUSA Agreement. In January 2021, the Company issued 200,000 shares of Common Stock to ESOUSA in connection with this exchange. Concurrently with this transaction, the Company received an equivalent aggregate amount of $1.960,000 from RBL under the Credit Facility.
On May 7, 2020, the Company entered into a promissory note (the “Note”) evidencing an unsecured loan (the “Loan”) in the amount of $491,493 made to the Company under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”). The Note matures on May 7, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 1% per annum. Beginning December 7, 2020, the Company is required to make 17 monthly payments of principal and interest, with the principal component of each such payment based upon the level amortization of principal over a two-year period from May 7, 2020. Pursuant to the terms of the CARES Act and the PPP, the Company may apply to the Lender for forgiveness for the amount due on the Loan. The amount eligible for forgiveness is based on the amount of Loan proceeds used by the Company (during the eight-week period after the Lender makes the first disbursement of Loan proceeds) for the payment of certain covered costs, including payroll costs (including benefits), interest on mortgage obligations, rent and utilities, subject to certain limitations and reductions in accordance with the CARES Act and the PPP. No assurance can be given, at this time, that the Company will obtain forgiveness of the Loan in whole or in part.
On May 18, 2020, the Company entered into a promissory note in the amount of $159,899 made to the Company by the U.S. Small Business Administration under the Economic Injury Disaster Loan program.
On August 4, 2020, our Company entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with Mullen Technologies, Inc., a California corporation (“Mullen”), and Mullen Acquisition, Inc., a California corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”). Pursuant to, and on the terms and subject to the conditions of, the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub will be merged with and into Mullen (the “Merger”), with Mullen continuing as the surviving corporation in the Merger. After Mullen’s completion and delivery to our Company, of the audited financial statements for Mullen and its subsidiaries and affiliates required to be included in a registration statement, the Company intends to prepare and file with the Commission a registration statement on Form S-4 (together with all amendments thereto, the “Registration Statement”) in which the proxy statement will be included as a part of the prospectus, in connection with the registration under the Securities Act of the shares of Parent Shares to be issued in connection with the transactions contemplated in the Merger Agreement. The Merger Agreement contains termination rights for each of the Company and Mullen, including, among others, (i) in the event that the Merger has not been consummated by December 31, 2020, (ii) in the event that the requisite approval of the Company’s stockholders is not obtained upon a vote thereon, (iii) in the event that any governmental authority shall have taken action to restrain, enjoin or prohibit the consummation of the Merger, which action shall have become final and non-appealable and (iv) in the event that there is a breach by the other party of any of its representations, warranties, covenants or agreements, which breach is sufficiently material and not timely cured or curable. In addition, Mullen may terminate the Merger Agreement if, prior to receipt of the requisite approval of the Company’s stockholders, the Company’s board of directors shall have changed their recommendation in respect of the Merger. Further, the Company may terminate the Merger Agreement prior to receipt of the requisite approval of the Company’s stockholders to enter into a definitive agreement with respect to a Superior Proposal (as such term is defined in the Merger Agreement).
As contemplated by the Merger Agreement, on August 11, 2020, our Company as lender, borrowed an additional $500,000 from RBL and entered into an unsecured Promissory Note, dated August 11, 2020 (the “Note”), with Mullen. Pursuant to the Note, Mullen borrowed from the Company $500,000. Prior to maturity of the loan, the principal amount of the loan will carry an interest rate of 14% per annum compounded monthly and payable upon demand. This loan will mature on the earlier of (i) the date that the Merger Agreement is terminated for any reason by any party thereto and (ii) the Merger Effective Time (as defined in the Merger Agreement).
On December 29, 2020, the Company entered into the First Amendment (the “Amendment”) to the Merger Agreement with Mullen and the Merger Sub. Prior to the parties’ execution and delivery of the Amendment, Section 8.1(b) of the Merger Agreement provided that the Merger Agreement may be terminated and the merger contemplated in the Merger Agreement (the “Merger”) and other transactions contemplated in the Merger Agreement may be abandoned at any time prior to the merger effective time, notwithstanding any requisite approval and adoption of Merger Agreement and the transactions contemplated in the Merger Agreement by the shareholders of Mullen and/or the stockholders of the Company, by either Company or Mullen if the merger effective time shall not have occurred on or before December 31, 2020 (the “Outside Date”). Pursuant to the Amendment, the Company, Mullen and Merger Sub amended Section 8.01(b) of the Merger Agreement to extend the Outside Date to March 31, 2021.
In addition, pursuant to the Amendment, the Company, Mullen and Merger Sub agreed that, if the registration statement on Form S-4 (with the merger proxy statement included as part of the prospectus) is not filed with the SEC on or prior to January 15, 2021, then Mullen will pay the Company an agreed sum of $13,333 per day (the “Late Fee”) until the such registration statement (with the merger proxy statement included as part of the prospectus) is filed with the SEC. All accumulated Late Fees will be due and payable by Mullen on the 5th day of each calendar month commencing February 5, 2021 and on the 5th day of each month thereafter until the above-refenced filing has occurred.
On March 30, 2021, the Company entered into the Second Amendment (the “Second Amendment”) to Agreement and Plan of Merger dated as of August 4, 2020, as amended by the First Amendment dated as of December 29, 2020 (the “Merger Agreement”) with Mullen Technologies, Inc., a California corporation (“Mullen”), Mullen Acquisition, Inc., a California corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”). Prior to the parties’ execution and delivery of the Second Amendment, Section 8.1(b) of the Merger Agreement, as amended, provided that the Merger Agreement may be terminated and the merger contemplated in the Merger Agreement (the “Merger”) and other transactions contemplated in the Merger Agreement may be abandoned at any time prior to the merger effective time, notwithstanding any requisite approval and adoption of this Agreement and the transactions contemplated in the Merger Agreement by the shareholders of Mullen and/or the stockholders of the Company, by either Company or Mullen if the merger effective time shall not have occurred on or before March 31, 2021 (the “Outside Date”). Pursuant to the Second Amendment, the Company, Mullen and Merger Sub amended Section 8.01(b) of the Merger Agreement to extend the Outside Date to April 30, 2021.
The foregoing description of the Second Amendment does not purport to be complete and is subject to, and qualified in its entirety by, the full text of such agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit 2.10 and incorporated herein by reference.
At March 31, 2021, the Company is also owed approximately $1 million from Mullen in connection with Late Fees, as previously discussed..
Consummation of the Merger, the Divestiture, the Private Placement and the other transactions contemplated in the Merger Agreement, is subject to customary conditions including, among others, the approval of the Company’s stockholders. There is no guarantee that the Merger, the Divestiture, the Private Placement or the other transactions contemplated in the Merger Agreement will be completed. For additional information, see the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 5, 2020, as amended.
As of the filing date of this Report with the SEC, management expects that our cash flows from operations will not be sufficient to fund our current operations through 2021. We will require additional capital in order to continue our existing business operations and to fund our obligations. The recent COVID-19 pandemic is currently impacting countries, communities, supply chains and global financial markets, as well as the largest industry group serviced by our Company, which is restaurants. To date, COVID-19 has not had a material impact on the Company. However, the Company cannot predict whether COVID-19 will have a material impact on our future financial condition and results of operations due to understaffing in the service sector particularly from restaurants, which is the largest industry group serviced by our Company, and any possible future government ordinances that may further restrict restaurant and other service or retail sector operations. The exact extent of the impact from COVID-19 will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. In most respects, it is too early in the COVID-19 pandemic to be able to quantify or qualify the longer-term ramifications on our business, our merchants, and our potential investors.
Our company re-evaluated its operating plans in order to maintain current payment processing functions, capabilities, and continued customer service to its merchants, and is also seeking sources of capital to pay our contractual obligations as they come due, in light of these uncertain times. Management believes that upon re-evaluating its operating strategy it will provide the opportunity for us to continue as a going concern as long as we are able to obtain additional financing. At this time, due to our continuing losses from operations, negative working capital, and the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot predict the impact of these conditions on our ability to obtain financing necessary for the Company to fund its working capital requirements.
Further, at this time, we cannot determine the capital we will need to finance our continuing operations over the next 12 months, due to an inability to be able to quantify or qualify the longer-term ramifications on our business, our merchants, and our potential investors due to COVID-19. We may raise additional funds through debt financing and/or the issuance of equity securities, there being no assurance that any type of financing on terms satisfactory to us will be available or otherwise occur. Debt financing must be repaid regardless of whether we generate revenues or cash flows from operations and may be secured by substantially all of our assets. Any equity financing or debt financing that requires the issuance of equity securities or warrants to the lender would cause the percentage ownership by our current stockholders to be diluted, which dilution may be substantial. Also, any additional equity securities issued may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing stockholders. If such financings are not available when required or are not available on acceptable terms, we may be unable to continue servicing our current merchants, implement a restructured business plan, or take advantage of business opportunities, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and/or prospects and may ultimately require us to suspend or cease operations, which could cause investors to lose the entire amount of their investment.
These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
We have a cash balance at December 31, 2020 of approximately $4.4 million..
Operating activities provided approximately $3.0 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to approximately $2.2 million of cash used for the year ended December 31, 2019. Positive operating cash flow for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of cash provided by operations and an increase in the Company’s accounts payables and accrued expenses.
Investing activities used approximately $1.8 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to approximately $2.5 million of cash used for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cash used by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the the Company not acquiring any recurring cash flows portfolios during the year ended 2020
Financing activities provided approximately $3.0 of cash for the year ending December 31, 2020 of which approximately $2.3 million was proceeds from borrowings, net of repayments. Financing activities provided approximately $3.5 of cash for the year ending December 31, 2019 of which approximately $3.0 million was proceeds from borrowings.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
At December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a) (4) of Regulation S-K.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
The information contained in Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements concerning a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including our expected dates of adoption and the estimated effects on our results of operations and financial condition, is incorporated by reference herein.