ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward- looking statements as a result of many factors, including but not limited to those under the heading “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Report. Certain amounts in this section may not foot due to rounding.
In connection with the Merger Agreement (as defined below), and as disclosed in our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on November 12, 2021, our fiscal year end has changed from December 31 to September 30, effective for our fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. As a result, and unless otherwise indicated, references to our fiscal year 2021 and prior years mean the fiscal year ended on September 30 of such year.
Basis of Presentation
As a pre-revenue company with no commercial operations, our activities to date have been limited and were conducted primarily in the United States and our historical results are reported under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("GAAP" or "U.S. GAAP") and in United States ("U.S.") dollars. Upon commencement of commercial operations, we expect to expand our operations substantially into the European Union ("E.U.") and, as a result, we expect our future results to be sensitive to foreign currency transaction and translation risks and other financial risks that are not reflected in our historical financial statements. As a result, we expect that the financial results our reports for periods after we begin commercial operations will not be comparable to the financial results included in this Annual Report.
Components of Results of Operations
We are an early-stage company, and our historical results may not be indicative of our future results for reasons that may be difficult to anticipate. Accordingly, the drivers of our future financial results, as well as the components of such results, may not be comparable to our historical or projected results of operations.
Revenues
We have not begun commercial operations and do not currently generate any revenue. Once we commence production and commercialization of our vehicles, we expect that the significant majority of our revenue will be initially derived from direct sales of Sport Utility Vehicles ("SUVs") and, subsequently, from flexible leases of our electric vehicles ("EVs").
Cost of Goods Sold
To date, we have not recorded cost of goods sold, as we have not recorded commercial revenue. Once we commence the commercial production and sale of our EVs, we expect cost of goods sold to include mainly vehicle components and parts, including batteries, direct labor costs, amortized tooling costs, and reserves for estimated warranty expenses.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses include all non-production expenses incurred by us in any given period. This includes expenses such as professional fees, salaries, rent, repairs and maintenance, utilities and office expense, employee benefits, depreciation and amortization, advertising and marketing, settlements and penalties, taxes, licenses and other expenses. Advertising costs are expensed as incurred and are included in G&A expenses. We expense advertising costs as incurred in accordance with ASC 720-35, “Other Expenses - Advertising Cost.”
Research and Development Expense
To date, our research and development expenses have consisted primarily of external engineering services in connection with the design of our initial EV and development of the first prototype. As we ramp up for commercial operations, we anticipate that research and development expenses will increase for the foreseeable future as we expand our hiring of engineers and designers and continues to invest in new vehicle model design and development of technology.
Income Tax Expense / Benefit
Our income tax provision consists of an estimate for U.S. federal and state income taxes based on enacted rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities, and changes in the tax law. We maintain a valuation allowance against the full value of our U.S. and state net deferred tax assets because we believe the recoverability of the tax assets is not more likely than not.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended September 30, 2021 to the Year Ended September 30, 2020
The following table sets forth our historical operating results for the periods indicated:
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $8.8 million or 84.8% from $10.4 million in the twelve months ended September 30, 2021 to $19.4 million in the twelve months ended September 30, 2021, primarily due to increases in professional services, marketing, and payroll related expenses with the growth of personnel and resources.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $1.3 million or 80.5% from $1.7 million through the twelve months ended September 30, 2020 to $3.0 million through the twelve months ended September 30, 2021. During the year, there was minimal activity due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Research and Development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses primarily consist of the Mullen FIVE EV show car development and are primarily comprised of personnel-related costs for employees and consultants.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $4.6 million or 25.6% from $18.1 million through the twelve months ended September 30, 2020 to $22.7 million through the twelve months ended September 30, 2021, primarily due to an increase in convertible debt.
Gain on extinguishment of debt
During November 2020, the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) approved the CARES Act loan forgiveness amount of $875,426 in principal and accrued interest on November 20, 2020.
Net Loss
Net loss was $44.2 million for the twelve months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $14 million or 46.2% from $30.2 million in the twelve months ended September 30, 2020, mainly for the reasons discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of the date of this Annual Report, we have yet to generate any revenue from our business operations. To date, we have funded our capital expenditure and working capital requirements through equity and debt capital, as further discussed below. Our ability to successfully commence commercial operations and expand our business will depend on many factors, including our working capital needs, the availability of equity or debt financing and, over time, our ability to generate cash flows from operations.
As of September 30, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents amounted to $0.04 million and our total debt amounted to $39.5 million, of which $3.8 million is owed to the IRS and other tax jurisdictions related to payroll taxes and sales and use taxes.
We agreed to sell $20 million of Series C Preferred with warrants to an unaffiliated investor immediately prior to the Effective Time of the Merger at a per share exercise price of $0.6877, subject to adjustment in accordance with the terms of the Merger Agreement. Mullen and the investor are negotiating an amendment to such agreement whereby such amount may be increased to an aggregate of $60 million by mutual agreement of Mullen and the investor. In addition, we entered into an agreement with ESOUSA to provide us with a $30.0 million equity line of credit on September 1, 2021 and a $15 million note receivable with CEOcast, Inc. on October 8, 2021.
We received $7.4 million in net proceeds from the Net Element merger transaction. We also received an additional $10.6 million in convertible notes from TDR Capital and JADR Consulting Group Pty Limited.
As part of our agreement with NASDAQ, the Company must complete a qualified offering within six months after regulatory approval. Additionally, the Company has committed to file a registration statement for the Series B and Series C shares, which are expected to result in the increase of common shares outstanding and enhance market capitalization.
We expect our capital expenditures and working capital requirements to increase substantially in the near term, as we seek to produce our initial EVs, develop our customer support and marketing infrastructure and expand our research and development efforts. We may need additional cash resources due to changed business conditions or other developments, including unanticipated delays in negotiations with OEMs and tier-one automotive suppliers or other suppliers, supply chain challenges, disruptions due to COVID-19, competitive pressures, and regulatory developments, among other developments. To the extent that our current resources are insufficient to satisfy our cash requirements, we may need to seek additional equity or debt financing. If the financing is not available, or if the terms of financing are less desirable than we expect, we may be forced to decrease our level of investment in product development or scale back our operations, which could have an adverse impact on our business and financial prospects. See Note 1 to the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Debt
To date, our current working capital and development needs have been primarily funded through the issuance of convertible indebtedness and Common Stock. Short-term debt comprises a significant component of our funding needs. Short-term debt is generally defined as debt with principal maturities of one-year or less. Long-term debt is defined as principal maturities of one year of more.
Short and Long-Term Debt
The short-term debt classification primarily is based upon loans due within twelve-months from the balance sheet date, in addition to loans that have matured and remain unpaid. Management plans to renegotiate matured loans with creditors for favorable terms, such as reduce interest rate, extend maturities, or both; however, there is no guarantee favorable terms will be reached. Until negotiations with creditors are resolved, these matured loans remain outstanding and will be classified within short-term debt on the balance sheet. Interest and fees on loans are being accounted for within accrued interest. The loans are secured by substantially all the Company’s assets. Several principal shareholders have provided loans to and hold convertible debt of the Company and are related parties.
The following is a summary of our debt as of September 30, 2021:
The following is a summary of our debt as of September 30, 2020:
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of Mullen’s cash flow data for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020:
Cash Flows used in Operating Activities
Our cash flow used in operating activities to date has been primarily comprised of costs related to research and development, payroll and other general and administrative activities. As we continue to ramp up hiring ahead of starting commercial operations, we expect our cash used in operating activities to increase significantly before we starts to generate any material cash flow from our business.
Net cash used in operating activities was $17.5 million in the twelve months ended September 30, 2021, an increase from $10.8 million net cash used in the twelve months ended September 30, 2020.
Cash Flows used in Investing Activities
Our cash flows used in investing activities, to date, have been comprised mainly of purchases of equipment and have not been material. We expect these costs to increase substantially in the near future as we ramp up activity ahead of commencing commercial operations.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.2 million in the year ended September 30, 2021, a decrease from $0.6 million used in investing activities the year ended September 30, 2020.
Cash Flows provided by Financing Activities
Through September 30, 2021, we have financed our operations primarily through the issuance of convertible notes and equity securities.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $17.7 million for the year ended September 30, 2021 primarily due to issuance of notes payable, as compared to $9.2 million net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended September 30, 2020, which included (i) $12.8 million net proceeds from issuance of notes payable; (ii) $4.8 million in net proceeds from issuance of Common Stock which was partially offset by $.6 million of payments of notes payable; (iii) $.7 million in proceeds to issue preferred C shares.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following tables summarizes our contractual obligations and other commitments for cash expenditures as of September 30, 2021, and the years in which these obligations are due:
Operating Lease Commitments
We currently lease our headquarters space in the Los Angeles area under a single lease classified as an operating lease expiring in March 2026. We have not executed any binding agreement for leases beyond 2026.
Scheduled Debt Maturities
The following are scheduled debt maturities as of September 30, 2021:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In the preparation of these financial statements, our managemnet is required to use judgment in making estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Management considers an accounting judgment, estimate or assumption to be critical when (1) the estimate or assumption is complex in nature or requires a high
degree of judgment and (2) the use of different judgments, estimates and assumptions could have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 3 to the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Because we are a pre-revenue company without commercial operations, management believes it does not currently have any critical accounting policies or estimates. Management believes that the accounting policies most likely to become critical in the near future are those described below.
Stock-Based Compensation and Common Stock Valuation
We recognize the cost of share-based awards granted to employees and directors based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards. Cost is recognized on a straight-line basis over the service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. Our management reverses previously recognized costs for unvested options in the period that forfeitures occur. Mullen determines the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which is impacted by the following assumptions:
● Expected Term-We use the simplified method when calculating the expected term due to insufficient historical exercise data.
● Expected Volatility-As our shares were not actively traded during the periods presented, the volatility is based on a benchmark of comparable companies within the automotive and energy storage industries.
● Expected Dividend Yield-The dividend rate used is zero as we have never paid any cash dividends on Common Stock and does not anticipate doing so in the foreseeable future.
● Risk-Free Interest Rate-The interest rates used are based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with an equivalent remaining term equal to the expected life of the award.
Common Stock Valuations
The grant date fair value of our Common Stock (pre-merger with Net Element) was typically be determined by our board of directors with the assistance of management and a third-party valuation specialist. Given our pre-revenue stage of development, management believed that an Option Pricing Model (“OPM”) was the most appropriate method for allocating enterprise value to determine the estimated fair value of our Common Stock. Application of the OPM involved the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses, and cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies, and the probability of future events. Once Mullen’s stock became publicly traded, the Board of Directors elected to determine the fair value of our post-merger Common Stock based on the closing market price the day before the date of grant.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In May 2021, the FASB issued ASU No. 2021-04, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt - Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40). The ASU will be effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, (December 15, 2023 for smaller reporting companies). We have issued debt and equity instruments, the accounting for which could be impacted by this update. Company management is evaluating the impact this guidance on our financial condition and results of operations.
In July 2021, the FASB issued ASU No. 2021-05, Lessors - Certain Leases with Variable Lease Payments (Topic 842). The amendments in this update affect lessors with lease contracts that have (1) have variable lease payments that do not depend on a reference index or a rate, and (2) would have resulted in the recognition of a selling loss at lease commencement if classified a sales-type or direct financing. The ASU will be effective for fiscal years beginning after
December 15, 2021. Company management is evaluating the impact this guidance will have on our consolidated financial statements.