ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on November 5, 2018 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the private units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Our entire activity since inception relates to our formation, to prepare for our IPO, which was consummated on March 7, 2019, searching for a business combination candidate, and activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of Microvast.
Recent Developments
Microvast Business Combination
On February 1, 2021, Tuscan entered into the Merger Agreement with Microvast and Merger Sub. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub will merge with and into Microvast and Microvast will survive the merger and become a wholly owned subsidiary of Tuscan. Under the Merger Agreement, all of the equity interests of Microvast will be converted into an aggregate of 210,000,000 shares of common stock. The Microvast shareholders and the investors in Microvast’s majority-owned subsidiary, MPS, will also have the ability to earn an additional 20,000,000 shares of common stock if the daily volume weighted average price of the common stock is greater than or equal to $18.00 for any 20 trading days within a 30 trading day period (or a change of control occurs that results in the holders of common stock receiving a per share price equal to or in excess of $18.00), during the period commencing on the closing date and ending on the third anniversary of the closing date. Concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, Tuscan and Microvast will jointly acquire 100% ownership of MPS and will discharge certain convertible loans of MPS.
The Merger will be accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). Under this method of accounting, Tuscan will be treated as the “acquired” company for accounting purposes and the Business Combination will be treated as the equivalent of Microvast issuing stock for the net assets of Tuscan, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of Tuscan will be stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded.
Additionally, the Merger Agreement provides that Tuscan will issue an aggregate of 6,736,111 shares of common stock in connection with the Bridge Note Conversion.
Further, on February 1, 2021, Tuscan, the Sponsor, Microvast and certain stockholders of Tuscan entered into the Sponsor Support Agreement, pursuant to which the Sponsor Group agreed, among other things, to vote all equity interests of Tuscan held by such member of the Sponsor Group in favor of the approval and adoption of the proposed business combination with Microvast. Additionally, such members of the Sponsor Group have agreed not to (a) transfer any of their equity interests in the Company (or enter into any arrangement with respect thereto) other than as set forth therein or (b) exercise any conversion rights of any equity interests held by such member of the Sponsor Group in connection with the approval of the proposed business combination.
The Sponsor also agreed that, to the extent that certain expenses of Tuscan are in excess of $46,000,000 (unless such expenses shall have been approved by Microvast), the Sponsor will either (i) pay any such excess amount in cash or (ii) forfeit to Tuscan such number of shares of common stock held by the Sponsor that would have a value equal to such excess. The Sponsor also agreed to amend the escrow agreement to make certain adjustments to the terms of the escrow of its shares of common stock as set forth in the Sponsor Support Agreement.
Contemporaneously with the execution of the Merger Agreement, certain investors entered into Subscription Agreements pursuant to which such investors subscribed for an aggregate value of $482,500,000, representing 48,250,000 shares of Tuscan common stock at a purchase price of $10.00 per share in a private placement to be consummated immediately prior to the consummation of the Transactions. Affiliates of InterPrivate, a co-sponsor of Tuscan, subscribed to purchase 6.5 million shares in the PIPE Financing for an aggregate purchase price of $65 million.
Immediately following the Closing, the former equityholders of Microvast will hold approximately 69.9% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock and the current stockholders of Tuscan will hold approximately 9.2% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock, which pro forma ownership (1) assumes no Public Stockholder exercises its conversion rights in connection with the business combination, and (2) reflects the issuance of an aggregate of 48,250,000 shares of Common Stock in the PIPE Financing and 6,736,111 shares of common stock in the Bridge Notes Conversion, but does not include the effect of any other financing of Tuscan. If the maximum number of Public Shares are converted into cash such that Microvast does not have the right to terminate the Merger Agreement (i.e., Tuscan has at least $5,000,001 of net tangible assets immediately prior to or upon consummation of the business combination), such percentages will be approximately 76.8% and 0.2%, respectively.
Extension Amendment
On December 3, 2020, Tuscan received stockholder approval to extend the date by which it must complete an initial business combination from December 7, 2020 to April 30, 2021. In connection with such extension, holders of 3,198 Public Shares exercised their right to convert their shares into cash at a conversion price of approximately $10.22 per share, for an aggregate conversion amount of approximately $32,684.
On March 12, 2021, Tuscan filed a preliminary proxy statement seeking approval from its stockholders to amend Tuscan’s charter to further extend the date by which Tuscan is required to complete its initial business combination from April 30, 2021 to July 31, 2021 and to hold an annual meeting for the election of directors in accordance with Nasdaq listing rules.
Loan Commitment
On February 12, 2021, the Sponsor extended a loan to Tuscan in the aggregate principal amount totaling $1.2 million, of which $400,000 was drawn upon on such date. This loan was in addition to the previous $200,000 drawn upon the $300,000 convertible note that was committed by the Sponsor on April 21, 2020. As a result of the February 12, 2021 commitment, the Sponsor had committed to the Company a total of $1.5 million, of which a total of $600,000 has been drawn upon, with $400,000 of the drawn amount pursuant to the February 12, 2021 note. The Sponsor intends to convert the $1.5 million total loan balance into 150,000 Units immediately prior to the closing of the proposed business combination with Microvast. Such Units will have terms identical to the terms of the Company’s Private Units and will consist of (i) 150,000 shares of common stock and (ii) warrants to purchase 150,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment.
Nasdaq Notification
On January 6, 2021, we received a notice from the Listing Qualifications Department of The Nasdaq Stock Market stating that we failed to hold an Annual Meeting of stockholders within 12 months after our fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, as required by Nasdaq Listing Rule 5620(a). In accordance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(2)(G), we submitted a plan to regain compliance on February 4, 2021. Nasdaq accepted our plan and granted us an extension through June 29, 2021 to hold an annual meeting. Nasdaq’s decision is subject to certain conditions, including that we provide periodic updates with respect to our proposed business combination with Microvast. While we expect to comply with such requirements, there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from November 5, 2018 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to consummate the IPO, described below, and, after the IPO, searching for a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net income of $1,375,461, which consisted of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $2,654,140 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $9,750 offset by operating costs of $921,665 and a provision for income taxes of $366,764.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, income earned on the investment held in the trust account decreased $2,258,206, or 46.0% to $2,654,140 from $4,912,346 for the year ended December 31, 2019. As a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, the average annual yield on the investment held in the trust account dropped to 0.10% in the second quarter of 2020 down from an average of 1.73% for 2019 and the first quarter of 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had net income of $3,367,179, which consisted of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $4,912,346 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the trust account of $128,899, offset by operating costs of $778,815 and a provision for income taxes of $895,251.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 7, 2019, we consummated our IPO of 24,000,000 units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $240,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 615,000 private units to our Sponsor and EarlyBirdCapital and its designee, generating gross proceeds of $6,150,000. On March 12, 2019, in connection with the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option in full, we consummated the sale of an additional 3,600,000 units at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating total gross proceeds of $36,000,000. In addition, we also consummated the sale of an additional 72,000 private units to our Sponsor and EarlyBirdCapital and its designee at $10.00 per private unit, generating total gross proceeds of $720,000. Following the IPO, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the private units, a total of $276,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $6,059,098 in IPO related costs, including $5,520,000 of underwriting fees, and $539,098 of other costs.
As of December 31, 2020, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $282,254,978 (including approximately $6,255,000 of interest income and unrealized gains less interest withdrawn) consisting of U.S. treasury bills with a maturity of 180 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2020, we withdrew approximately $1,417,000 of interest earned on the Trust Account to pay our franchise and income tax obligations, of which approximately $479,000 was withdrawn during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $705,994. Net income of $1,375,461 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $2,654,140, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $9,750 and a deferred income tax benefit of $5,601. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $588,036 of cash from operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $1,634,432. Net income of $3,367,179 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $4,912,346, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our trust account of $128,899 and a deferred income tax provision of $27,069. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $12,565 of cash from operating activities.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, to acquire a target business and to pay our expenses relating thereto, including fees payable to EarlyBirdCapital and Morgan Stanley, upon consummation of our initial business combination for assisting us in connection with our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock is used in whole or in part as consideration to effect a business combination, the remaining funds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any operating expenses or finders’ fees which we had incurred prior to the completion of our business combination if the funds available to us outside of the trust account were insufficient to cover such expenses.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $135,961. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
On April 20, 2020, the Sponsor committed to provide us an aggregate of $500,000 in loans. The loans shall be non-interest bearing, unsecured and due upon the consummation of a business combination. In the event that a business combination does not close, the loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account to the extent such funds are available. Otherwise, all amounts loaned to us would be forgiven.
On April 21, 2020, we issued an unsecured promissory note to the Sponsor in the aggregate amount of $300,000 (the “Sponsor Note”), of which $200,000 was drawn upon on such date. The Sponsor Note is non-interest bearing and payable upon the consummation of a business combination. The Sponsor Note is convertible, at the lender’s option, into units of the post-business combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit. The units would be identical to the Private Units. If a business combination is not consummated, the Sponsor Notes will not be repaid by us and all amounts owed thereunder by us will be forgiven except to the extent that we have funds available to us outside of our Trust Account. As of December 31, 2020, there was $200,000 outstanding under the Sponsor Note.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Sponsor or our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds on a non-interest basis as may be required, except as described above. If we complete our initial business combination, we will repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of notes may be convertible into private units, at a price of $10.00 per unit. The units would be identical to the private units.
As described above, our Sponsor committed to loan us a total of $1.5 million (inclusive of amounts currently outstanding) in aggregate principal amount prior to the consummation of the proposed business combination with Microvast. We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Other than the $1.5 million loan (inclusive of amounts currently outstanding) committed to us by our Sponsor, our Sponsor, officers, directors, or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise such additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through April 30, 2021 (or July 31, 2021, if our stockholders approve an amendment to our charter), the date that we will be required to cease all operations, except for the purpose of winding up, if a business combination is not consummated. The financial statements included in this Form 10-K do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on March 5, 2019 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
We have engaged EarlyBirdCapital to act as an advisor in connection with a business combination, to assist us in holding meetings with our shareholders to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with a business combination, assist us in obtaining shareholder approval for the business combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the business combination. We will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of a business combination in an amount equal to $9,660,000 (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable); provided that up to 30% of the fee may be allocated at our sole discretion to other FINRA members that assist us in identifying and consummating a business combination.
We engaged Morgan Stanley to provide financial advisory services in connection with the Microvast business combination, and, upon consummation of the transaction with Microvast, we must pay that firm a transaction fee of $5.5 million, plus expenses. Morgan Stanley also acted as placement agent in connection with the PIPE Financing, and we are obligated to pay Morgan Stanley a placement fee equal to (i) 3.5% of the sum of (x) the aggregate gross proceeds raised in the PIPE Financing up to $300 million (not including funds from the sale of certain excluded securities) and (y) any borrowings pursuant to a bridge financing provided in connection with the proposed business combination by investors introduced by Morgan Stanley, and (ii) 2.5% of the aggregate gross proceeds raised in the PIPE Financing above $300 million.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
Our statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for common shares subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of loss per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted, for Common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the proportionate share of income on marketable securities held by the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of Common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance.
Net loss per share, basic and diluted, for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net income, adjusted for income on marketable securities attributable to Common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period.
Non-redeemable common stock includes Founder Shares and non-redeemable shares of common stock as these shares do not have any redemption features. Non-redeemable common stock participates in the income on marketable securities based on non-redeemable common stock shares’ proportionate interest.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.