Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The information set forth below should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based on our current expectations, assumptions, estimates and projections. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those indicated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those discussed in Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, entitled “Business,” under “Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, entitled “Risk Factors.” References in this discussion and analysis to “us,” “we,” “our,” or “the Company” refer collectively to Akers Biosciences, Inc.
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. These accounting principles require us to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions. We believe that the estimates, judgments and assumptions upon which we rely are reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that these estimates, judgments and assumptions are made. These estimates, judgments and assumptions can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Our financial statements would be affected to the extent there are material differences between these estimates and actual results. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We were historically a developer of rapid health information technologies but since March 2020, have been primarily focused on the development of a vaccine candidate against COVID-19. In response to the global pandemic, we are pursuing rapid development and manufacturing of our COVID-19 Vaccine Candidate, in collaboration with Premas.
Proposed Merger
On November 11, 2020, we entered into the Merger Agreement, pursuant to which we will acquire MYMD as a wholly owned subsidiary. Upon completion of the Merger, the combined company is expected to be renamed “MyMD Pharmaceuticals, Inc.”.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, upon the effectiveness of the Merger, each share of MYMD common stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time will convert into and become exchangeable for the number of pre-reverse stock split shares of our common stock equal to the number of shares of MYMD common stock multiplied by the Exchange Ratio. As a result of the issuance of the merger consideration and the merger, MYMD stockholders will receive an aggregate of approximately 68,035,360 shares of Akers common stock, without giving effect to the proposed reverse stock split contemplated by the Reverse Stock Split Proposal. Additionally, MYMD stockholders will be entitled to receive (i) an amount in cash, on a pro rata basis, equal to the aggregate cash proceeds received by Akers from the exercise of any options to purchase MYMD common stock assumed by Akers upon closing of the merger during the Option Exercise Period, such payment to occur no later than 30 days after the last day of the Option Exercise Period, and (ii) potential Milestone Payments of up to an aggregate of 68,035,360 Milestone Shares payable upon achievement of certain market capitalization milestone events during the Milestone Period.
Also pursuant to the Merger Agreement, on January 15, 2020, we and MYMD filed the S-4 Registration Statement describing the Merger and other related matters. Consummation of the Merger is conditioned upon, among other things, approval of the Merger by the stockholders of Akers (including (i) approval of the Share Issuance Proposal, (ii) approval of the Reverse Stock Split Proposal, and (iii) approval of the A&R Charter Proposal, including, among other things, changing the name of the combined company to MyMD Pharmaceuticals, Inc., among others), approval of the Merger by the stockholders of MYMD, the continued listing of Akers’ common stock on The Nasdaq Capital Market after the Merger and satisfaction of a minimum cash threshold by Akers. In addition, the Merger Agreement requires that MYMD consummate the Supera Purchase. After closing of the Merger, the operations of MYMD’s business will comprise substantially all of the combined company’s operations. There is no assurance when or if the Merger will be completed. Any delay in completing the Merger may substantially reduce the potential benefits that we expect to obtain from the Merger. Furthermore, the intended benefits of the Merger may not be realized.
Coronavirus and COVID-19 Pandemic
In December 2019, SARS-CoV-2 was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China, and on March 12, 2020, the WHO declared the global outbreak of COVID-19, the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2, to be a pandemic. In an effort to contain and mitigate the spread of COVID-19, many countries, including the United States, Canada, China, and India, have imposed unprecedented restrictions on travel, quarantines, and other public health safety measures. According to the WHO situation report, dated as of February 16, 2021, approximately 108.2 million cases were reported globally and 2.4 million of these were deadly, making the development of effective vaccines to prevent this disease a major global priority. Multiple vaccine candidates against SARS-CoV-2 are under development, and most recently, certain large, multinational pharmaceutical companies have been granted authorizations for emergency use by the FDA; however, widespread distribution of the vaccines remains limited, with the primary treatment being symptomatic and supportive therapies.
Recent Developments
Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization
On November 11, 2020, the Company, Merger Sub, and MYMD, entered the Merger Agreement, pursuant to which, among other things, subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions set forth in the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub will merge with and into MYMD, with MYMD being the surviving corporation and becoming a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. The Merger is intended to qualify for federal income tax purposes as a tax-free reorganization under the provisions of Section 368(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. In addition, in connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement, Akers agreed to advance a bridge loan of up to $3,000,000 to MYMD pursuant to the Note.
Subject to the terms and conditions of the Merger Agreement, at the Effective Time (i) each outstanding share of MYMD common stock, will be converted into the right to receive the number of shares of the Akers common stock equal to the Exchange Ratio; and (ii) each outstanding stock option of MYMD (collectively, “MYMD options”) that has not previously been exercised prior to the Effective Time, whether or not vested, will be assumed by the Company subject to certain terms contained in the Merger Agreement (including, but not limited to, the amendment of such stock option to extend the term of such stock option for a period expiring on the second-year anniversary of the Effective Time). In connection with the Merger, each holder of options is required to enter into a Lock-Up Agreement/Leak-Out Agreement with respect to the shares of Akers common stock issued upon the exercise of such option. Also, not later than 30 days after the second-year anniversary of the Effective Date, the Company will pay stockholders of MYMD on a pro rata basis an amount in cash equal to the aggregate cash proceeds received by Akers from the exercise of any MYMD options assumed by the Company prior to the second-year anniversary of the Effective Time; provided, however, the amount of such payment will not exceed the maximum amount of cash consideration that may be received by stockholders of MYMD without affecting the intended tax consequences of the Merger.
Additionally, under the terms of the Merger Agreement, the Company has agreed to pay contingent consideration to MYMD stockholders in the form of Milestone Payments. The Milestone Payments are payable in the dollar amounts set forth in the chart below upon the achievement of the milestone events set forth opposite such dollar amount during the Milestone Period as follows:
Milestone Event
Milestone Payment
Market capitalization of Akers for at least 10 trading days during any 20 consecutive trading day period during the Milestone Period is equal to or greater than $500 million (the “First Milestone Event”).
$20 million.
For every $250 million incremental increase in market capitalization of Akers after the First Milestone Event to the extent such incremental increase occurs for at least 10 trading days during any 20 consecutive trading day period during the Milestone Period, up to a $1 billion market capitalization of Akers.
$10 million per each incremental increase (it being understood, however, that, if such incremental increase results in market capitalization equal to $1 billion, such $20 million payment in respect of such incremental increase shall be payable without duplication of any amount payable in respect of a Second Milestone Event).
Market Capitalization of Akers for at least 10 trading days during any 20 consecutive trading day period is equal to or greater than $1 billion (the “Second Milestone Event”).
$25 million.
For every $1 billion incremental increase in market capitalization of Akers after the Second Milestone Event to the extent such incremental increase occurs for at least 10 trading days during any 20 consecutive trading day period during the Milestone Period.
$25 million per each incremental increase.
Each Milestone Payment will be payable in shares of common stock of Akers, with the number of Milestone Shares to be issued determined by dividing the applicable Milestone Payment amount by the volume-weighted average price of a share of Akers’ common stock during the 10 trading days immediately preceding the achievement of the milestone event; provided, however, that in no event shall the price of a share of Akers common stock used to determine the number of Milestone Shares to be issued be deemed to be less than $5.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reverse stock splits, and the like occurring after the closing date).
Notwithstanding the above, the number of Milestone Shares payable by Akers shall not exceed the number of shares of Akers common stock to be issued to MyMD stockholders at the Effective Time in connection with the Merger (as described in the following paragraph).
Under the exchange ratio formula in the Merger Agreement, and immediately upon the closing of the Merger, the former MYMD securityholders are expected to own approximately 80% of the aggregate number of shares of Akers common stock issued and outstanding immediately following the consummation of the Merger (the “Post-Closing Shares”), and the stockholders of the Company as of immediately prior to the Merger are expected to own approximately 20% of the aggregate number of Post-Closing Shares.	
Immediately prior to the Effective Time, the name of the Company will be changed from “Akers Biosciences, Inc.” to “MyMD Pharmaceuticals, Inc.” At the Effective Time, the Merger Agreement contemplates that the board of directors of the Company will consist of seven directors, with (i) Akers having the right to designate up to four members and (ii) MYMD having the right to designate up to three members. The officers of the Company immediately after the Effective Time will be elected by the board of directors of Akers.
The Merger Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants made by the Company and MYMD, including covenants relating to obtaining the requisite approvals of the stockholders of the Company and MYMD, indemnification of directors and officers, and the Company’s and MYMD’s conduct of their respective businesses between the date of signing the Merger Agreement and the closing of the Merger. Consummation of the Merger is subject to certain closing conditions, including, among other things, approval by the stockholders of Akers and MYMD.
The Merger Agreement contains certain termination rights for both the Company and MYMD, including, among other things, (a) Akers may, upon written notice, extend the originally scheduled End Date to May 15, 2021 (the “Extended Date”) so long as (i) Akers and Merger Sub are not then in material breach of any provision of the Merger Agreement and (ii) within three calendar days of the written request by MYMD, Akers makes an additional loan to MYMD of up to $600,000, which will have the same terms and conditions of the Note (such additional note “Second Note”) and (b) Akers may, upon written notice, extend the Extended Date to June 30, 2021, so long as (i) Akers and Merger Sub are not then in material breach of any provision of the Merger Agreement, (ii) on the effective date of such extension, the loan amount evidenced by the Note and the Second Note may, at the sole option of MYMD upon written notice to Akers, be converted into shares of MYMD common stock at a conversion price of $2.00 per share, subject to certain adjustments and (iii) Akers will, at MYMD’s request, either (at the option of MYMD); (A) subscribe for 300,000 shares of MYMD common stock at a subscription price of $2.00 per share, subject to certain adjustments as set forth in the Merger Agreement, or (B) make an additional loan to MYMD of up to $600,000, which will have the same terms and conditions of the Note (the “Third Note,” and all amounts outstanding under the Note, the Second Note and the Third Note, the “Loan Amount”). In addition, if Akers terminates the Merger Agreement under certain circumstances specified therein, the Loan Amount, if any, at the sole discretion of MYMD, will be convertible into shares of common stock of MYMD at a conversion price of $2.00 per share upon delivery of written notice by MYMD to Akers within 30 calendar days after the effective date of termination of the Merger Agreement.
The Merger Agreement also contemplates that the Company will seek approval from its stockholders to effect a reverse stock split, if applicable, at a reverse stock split ratio mutually agreed to by the Company and MYMD and within the range approved by the Company’s stockholders immediately prior to the Effective Time, which range shall be sufficient to cause the price of Akers common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market following such reverse stock split and the Effective Time to be no less than $5.00 per share. In addition, under the Merger Agreement, Akers may, in its discretion, consummate a spin-off of all or a part of its pre-closing assets and liabilities (the “Spin-Off”).
In connection with the Merger, the Company will seek the approval of its stockholders of (a) the transactions contemplated in the Merger Agreement, including the issuance of Akers common stock pursuant to the Merger and (b) the amendment of its certificate of incorporation, including for purposes of (i) effectuating a reverse split of Akers common stock at a ratio to be determined by a split ratio to be mutually agreed to by Akers and MYMD within the range approved by the Company’s stockholders immediately prior to the Effective Time and on certain terms as specifically described herein, (ii) change Akers’ name to “MyMD Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,” and (c) to the extent necessary, the Spin-Off.
In accordance with the terms of the Merger Agreement, (i) the officers and directors of Akers have each entered into a voting agreement with MYMD (the “Akers Voting Agreements”), and (ii) the officers, directors and certain affiliated stockholders of MYMD have each entered into a voting agreement with Akers (the “MYMD Voting Agreements,” together with the Akers Voting Agreements, the “Voting Agreements”). The Voting Agreements place certain restrictions on the transfer of the shares of Akers and MYMD held by the respective signatories thereto and include covenants as to the voting of such shares in favor of approving the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement and against any actions that could adversely affect the consummation of the Merger.
Concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement or prior to the closing, the officers and directors of Akers, and the officers, directors and certain stockholders of MYMD, each entered into lock-up/leak-out agreements (the “Lock-Up/Leak-Out Agreements”) pursuant to which they have agreed, among other things, not to sell or dispose of (subject to certain exceptions specified therein) any shares of Akers common stock which are or will be beneficially owned by them at the Effective Time or which are acquired thereafter, with such shares being released from such restrictions 180 days after the Effective Time. After the expiration of such initial 180-day period, such stockholders will be subject to a 180-day leak-out period during which they may not sell shares in excess of the amount permitted by the Rule 144 volume limitations (even if such stockholder is not currently subject to such provisions of Rule 144), which leak-out period shall be extended for an additional 180 days for any shares of Akers common stock issued upon the exercise of existing options or warrants.
Secured Promissory Note
As set forth above, in connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement, Akers will advance a bridge loan to MYMD in an amount of up to $3,000,000 pursuant to the Note. Advances under the Note will be made in accordance with MYMD’s cash needs pursuant to a pre-agreed operating budget for MYMD. The Note accrues interest on the outstanding principal amount at the rate of 5% per annum and matures on the earliest of (i) April 15, 2022, (ii) upon demand of Akers in the event the Merger is consummated, or (iii) the date on which MYMD’s obligations under the Note are accelerated in accordance with the terms of the Note. As set forth above, in the event the Merger Agreement is terminated by MYMD upon a change in Akers’ board of directors’ recommendations to the Akers stockholders in connection with the Merger Agreement and certain other circumstances specified in the Merger Agreement, the principal amount of the Note, and all accrued and unpaid interest thereon, shall be converted into shares of MYMD common stock at a conversion price of $2.00 per share. MYMD may prepay the Note in whole or in part at any time or from time to time at its sole discretion. Under the terms of the Note, if, at any time after the termination or expiration of the Merger Agreement, MYMD (i) incurs any debt other than Permitted Debt (as defined in the Note), (ii) issues any equity interests, or (iii) consummates any Asset Sale or Recovery Event (each as defined in the Note) then, in each case, no later than two business days after MYMD receives the net cash proceeds of such incurrence, issuance or other action, then MYMD shall be required to prepay an amount under the Note equal to the net cash proceeds received, up to the total amount of the advances made under the Note at such time, including all accrued and unpaid interest thereon, of the Note. The payment and performance of all obligations under the Note are secured by a first priority security interest in all of MYMD’s right, title and interest in and to its assets as collateral.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had advanced MYMD $1,200,000 under the Note, which is classified as Other Receivables on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The Company advanced two additional draws of $600,000, or $1,200,000 cumulatively, on January 21, 2021 and February 25, 2021 to MYMD under this secured promissory note.
Private Placement
Concurrently with the Merger Agreement, on November 11, 2020, Akers entered into the Private Placement SPA with certain institutional and accredited investors (the “SPA Purchasers”), pursuant to which Akers agreed to issue and sell to the SPA Purchasers (i) an aggregate of 9,765,933 shares of Akers common stock, at an offering price of $1.85 per share or, at the election of each investor, Pre-Funded Warrants, and (ii) for each share of Akers common stock (or for each Pre-Funded Warrant, as applicable) purchased in the Private Placement, a common warrant (the “Investor Warrants” and, together with the Pre-Funded Warrants, the “Warrants”) to purchase one share of Akers common stock, for gross proceeds of approximately $18.1 million before the deduction of placement agent fees and expenses and estimated offering expenses. In addition, Akers also issued the Placement Agent a warrant to purchase up to 390,368 shares of Akers common stock at an exercise price of $1.85 (the “Placement Agent Warrant”). The Placement Agent Warrant will be exercisable at any time and from time to time, in whole or in part, for a term of five and a half years. The Private Placement closed on November 17, 2020, and Akers issued an aggregate of 8,725,393 shares of Akers common stock, Pre-Funded Warrants to purchase 1,040,540 shares of Akers common stock, and Investor Warrants to purchase 9,765,933 shares of Akers common stock. In February 2021, an investor exchanged 932,432 shares of common stock purchased in the Private Placement into Pre-Funded Warrants to purchase 932,432 shares of common stock.
In the Private Placement SPA, Akers agreed not to (i) issue, enter into any agreement to issue or announce the issuance or proposed issuance of, any shares of Akers common stock or any securities convertible into or exercisable or exchangeable for shares of Akers common stock at an effective price less than the exercise price of the Investor Warrants or (ii) file any registration statement or any amendment or supplement thereto, other than as contemplated under the Private Placement SPA, for a period of 90 days following the later of (x) the date the Registration Statement (as defined below) is declared effective by the SEC and (y) the record date for the Akers stockholder meeting called to approve the Merger. In addition, Akers agreed not to effect or enter into an agreement to effect any issuance of Akers common stock or common stock equivalents involving a variable rate transaction (as defined in the Private Placement SPA) from the date of the Private Placement SPA until such time as no SPA Purchaser holds any of the Investor Warrants, subject to certain exceptions (including the issuance of any of Akers common stock pursuant to the Merger Agreement).
The Private Placement SPA provides that (i) within 10 days following the date that Akers first files a proxy statement with the SEC in connection with the merger (including by means of a registration statement on Form S-4), Akers shall file a registration statement (the “Registration Statement”) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) for the resale of all of the shares of Akers common stock issued in the private placement and the shares of Akers common stock issuable upon exercise of the Warrants (the “Warrant Shares”) by the SPA Purchasers and (ii) Akers shall use commercially reasonable efforts to cause such Registration Statement to be declared effective within 60 days of the filing thereof (or 90 days in the event of a full review); provided, however, that Akers shall not be required to register any shares of Akers common stock issued in the private placement or Warrant Shares that are eligible for resale pursuant to Rule 144 under the Securities Act (assuming cashless exercise of the Warrants).
We currently intend to use the proceeds from the Private Placement in order to satisfy the closing conditions set forth in the Merger Agreement that requires the Company to have a minimum parent net cash amount equal to $25 million, less certain amounts advanced to MyMD, which shall also include any amounts to be used to payoff The Starwood Trust to repay in full the Starwood Line of Credit at the closing of the Merger, and for general working capital purposes. In addition, the Company paid $1,204,525 of the proceeds from the Private Placement to three of the former members of Cystron and recorded a liability of $602,172 to the fourth former member of Cystron pursuant to the MIPA.
In addition, we paid a cash fee of $501,500 and issued warrants to purchase an aggregate of 255,135 shares of common stock to the designees of H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (“HCW”), pursuant to a side letter by and between Akers and HCW, dated November 23, 2020, regarding certain tail fees provided in two engagement letters (one dated October 18, 2019 and the other dated April 7, 2020) entered into in connection with prior offerings by and between Akers and HCW. Such warrants issued were in the same form as the Investor Warrants except that the HCW Warrants have an exercise price of $2.3125 per share.
The Investor Warrants
Each Investor Warrant issued in the Private Placement has an initial exercise price equal to $2.06 per share of common stock. The Investor Warrants are immediately exercisable and will terminate five and a half years following issuance. The exercise price and number of shares of Akers common stock issuable upon exercise is subject to appropriate adjustment in the event of stock dividends, stock splits, reorganizations or similar events affecting Akers common stock and the exercise price.
If, at any time following the six-month anniversary of November 17, 2020, there is no effective registration statement registering, or the prospectus contained therein is not available for the issuance of the shares underlying the Investor Warrants (the “Investor Warrant Shares”) to the holder, then the Investor Warrants may also be exercised, in whole or in part, at such time by means of a “cashless exercise” in which the holder shall be entitled to receive a number of Investor Warrant Shares according to a formula set forth in the Investor Warrants.
A holder (together with its affiliates) may not exercise any portion of the Investor Warrant to the extent that the holder would own more than 4.99% (or, at the election of a holder prior to the date of issuance, 9.99%) of the outstanding Akers common stock immediately after exercise; provided, however, that upon notice to Akers, the holder may increase or decrease the beneficial ownership limitation, provided that in no event shall the beneficial ownership limitation exceed 9.99% and any increase in the beneficial ownership limitation will not be effective until 61 days following notice of such increase from the holder to Akers.
In the event of a fundamental transaction, as described in the Investor Warrants and generally including any reorganization, recapitalization or reclassification of Akers common stock, the sale, transfer or other disposition of all or substantially all of Akers’ properties or assets, Akers’ consolidation or merger with or into another person, the acquisition of more than 50% of Akers outstanding common stock, or any person or group becoming the beneficial owner of 50% of the voting power represented by Akers’ outstanding common stock, the holders of the Investor Warrants will be entitled to receive upon exercise of such warrants the kind and amount of securities, cash or other property that the holders would have received had they exercised the Investor Warrants immediately prior to such fundamental transaction. The Merger shall not be deemed a fundamental transaction as defined in the Investor Warrants.
The Pre-Funded Warrants
At the request of an investor, in lieu of Akers common stock, certain investors received Pre-Funded Warrants. The Pre-Funded Warrants are exercisable at any time immediately upon issuance and until such warrant is exercised in full. The exercise price of the Pre-Funded Warrants is $0.001 per share of Akers common stock, and, in lieu of making the cash payment otherwise contemplated to be made to Akers upon such exercise in payment of the aggregate exercise price, the holder may elect instead to receive upon such exercise (either in whole or in part) the net number of shares of Akers common stock determined according to a formula set forth in the Pre-Funded Warrants.
A holder (together with its affiliates) may not exercise any portion of the Pre-Funded Warrants to the extent that the holder would own more than 4.99% (or, at the election of a holder prior to the date of issuance, 9.99%) of the outstanding Akers common stock immediately after exercise; provided, however, that upon notice to Akers, the holder may increase or decrease the beneficial ownership limitation, provided that in no event shall the beneficial ownership limitation exceed 9.99% and any increase in the beneficial ownership limitation will not be effective until 61 days following notice of such increase from the holder to Akers.
Lock-Up and Support Agreement
On November 11, 2020, Akers entered into a Lock-Up and Support Agreement (the “Support Agreement”) with substantially all of the SPA Purchasers, pursuant to which, from the date of the Support Agreement until May 31, 2021, such SPA Purchasers agreed to vote their respective shares of Akers common stock in favor of each matter proposed and recommended for approval by the Akers board of directors or management at every shareholders’ meeting. Pursuant to the Support Agreement, such SPA Purchasers also agreed to, until the earlier of (a) the termination of the Merger Agreement or (b) the date that the SPA Purchasers vote their respective shares of Akers common stock in support of the merger and all matters related to the merger, will not, directly or indirectly, without Akers’ prior written consent, transfer, assign or dispose of their rights to vote the shares of Akers common stock issued in the private placement or otherwise take any act that could restrict or otherwise affect their legal power, authority or right to vote all of their shares of Akers common stock issued in the private placement in the manner required by the Support Agreement.
Katalyst Securities LLC Engagement Letter
On October 31, 2020, Akers entered into an engagement letter with Katalyst Securities LLC (the “Placement Agent” or “Katalyst”), pursuant to which the Placement Agent agreed to serve as the non-exclusive placement agent for Akers, on a reasonable best efforts basis, in connection with the Private Placement. Akers agreed to pay the Placement Agent an aggregate cash fee equal to 6.5% of the gross proceeds received in the Private Placement and reimburse the Placement Agent’s expenses in the Private Placement up to $25,000. In addition, Akers agreed to grant to Katalyst the Placement Agent Warrant, which was issued upon closing of the Private Placement. The Placement Agent Warrant is exercisable at any time and from time to time, in whole or in part, following the date of issuance and for a term of five and a half years.
Results of Operations
As discussed in Note 3 and Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the results of operations presented below exclude our screening and testing products business due to its classification as discontinued operations.
Summary of Statements of Operations for the Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
As previously disclosed, in light of the unfavorable factors persistent in our rapid, point-of-care screening and testing product business and the progress the Company has made in its partnership with Premas, the Company conducted a strategic review of the screening and testing products business. Following such review, in early July 2020, the Company ceased the production and sale of its rapid, point-of-care screening and testing products. The Company will continue to provide support for these testing products that remain in the market through their respective product expiration dates. The Company had been experiencing declining sales revenue and production backlogs for these products and, as it previously reported, had eliminated its sales force for such products. The Company intends to devote its attention to its partnership with Premas for the development of its COVID-19 Vaccine Candidate and transactions that the Company believes will increase shareholder value. In connection with the ceasing production and sale of its existing product line, on July 16, 2020, the Company decided to close the Thorofare Facility and exercised the early termination option under the Thorofare Lease, which provided for a 150-day notice to terminate the lease. Pursuant to the early termination option, the Thorofare Lease matured on December 13, 2020. The lease terminated on November 30, 2020, at the lessor’s request, and the property was handed over to the property manager on November 30, 2020.
The Company determined that the discontinuation of the production and distribution of the Company’s screening and testing products constituted a strategic shift in the Company’s business and as a result the elimination of the product lines should be presented as discontinued operations under FASB ASC 205-20 Presentation of Financial Statements, Discontinued Operations.
Revenue
We had no revenue from continuing operations during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Administrative Expenses
Administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, totaled $4,299,062 which was a 27% increase as compared to $3,372,103 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The table below summarizes our administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 as well as the percentage of change year-over-year:
Personnel expenses increased by 57% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019 on account of the addition of an executive staff member.
Professional service costs increased 115% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019, principally due to increased accounting and audit, legal and general consulting fees.
Stock market and investor fees decreased 37% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in these fees was principally due to our delisting from the London Stock Exchange during the first half of 2019 and the avoidance of the costs associated with a presence on the London Stock Exchange.
Other administrative expenses decreased by 5%, principally due to a decrease in bad debt expense, decreases in legal settlements, license and permit fees and travel expenses which were offset by increases in board, building, business insurance and computer expenses.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $22,963 which was an 8% decrease compared to $25,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $7,963,678 as compared to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019, principally reflecting our current focus on the development of the COVID-19 Vaccine Candidate.
Other Income and Expense
Other income, net of expenses, for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $133,489 as compared to other income, net of expenses of $90,808 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The table below summarizes our other income and expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 as well as the percentage of change year-over-year:
Equity investment gains increased to $54,100 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $0 for the same period in 2019. The increase was due to an increase in the fair market value of the equity investments.
Realized loss on investments was $36,714 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a gain of $3,952 for the same period in 2019. The decrease is principally due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the financial markets.
Interest and dividend income increased to $119,052 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $101,483 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was principally due to the increase in funds available for investment.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, the Company had Federal net operating loss carry forwards of approximately $100,615,000 and $79,678,000, respectively, expiring through the year ending December 31, 2037 for net operating losses originating in tax years beginning before January 1, 2018. Net operating losses recorded in tax years beginning January 1, 2018 and after are allowed for an indefinite carryforward period but limited to 80% of each subsequent year’s net income. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, the Company had New Jersey state net operating loss carry forwards of approximately $7,548,000 and $28,855,000, respectively, through the year ending December 31, 2040.
Under Section 382 of the Code, use of our NOLs will be limited if we experience a cumulative change in ownership of greater than 50% in a moving three-year period. We will experience an ownership change as a result of the Merger and therefore our ability to utilize our NOLs and certain credit carryforwards remaining at the Effective Time will be limited. The limitation will be determined by the fair market value of our common stock outstanding prior to the ownership change, multiplied by the applicable federal rate. It is expected that the Merger will impose a limitation on our NOLs. The Company has recorded a full valuation allowance for its deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. (See Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements)
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s cash and cash equivalents on hand was $18,617,955 and its marketable securities were $16,718,452. The Company has incurred net losses of $17,580,609 and $3,888,249 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectfully. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had working capital of $34,579,466 and a stockholders’ deficit of $137,163,739. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash flows used in operating activities were $11,924,941, consisting primarily of a net loss from ongoing operations of $12,152,214 and net loss from discontinued operations of $5,248,395. Since inception, the Company has met its liquidity requirements principally through the sale of its common stock in public and private placements.
Development and commercialization of the Company’s COVID-19 Vaccine Candidate will require the Company to raise significant additional funds as the project proceeds through clinical trials, the attainment of the required regulatory approvals and the commercialization of the vaccine. The timing of these events is difficult to estimate and are unlikely to be fully completed within the next twelve-months.
The Company evaluated the current cash requirements for operations in conjunction with management’s strategic plan and believes that the Company’s current financial resources as of the date of the issuance of these consolidated financial statements, are sufficient to fund its current operating budget and contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 as they fall due within the next twelve-month period, alleviating any substantial doubt raised by the Company’s historical operating results and satisfying its estimated liquidity needs for twelve months from the issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
Capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were $0.
Operating Activities
Our net cash consumed by operating activities totaled $11,924,941 during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash was consumed by the net loss from continuing operations of $12,152,214 and a net loss from discontinued operations of $5,428,395 reduced by non-cash adjustments principally consisting of $4,154,964 for stock-based compensation, $291,442 for impairment of prepaid royalties, $152,822 for impairment of intangible assets and $197,723 for inventory adjustment for net realizable value. For the year ended December 31, 2020, within changes of assets and liabilities, cash was principally provided by an increase in trade and other payables of $733,530 and decreases in trade receivables of 42,881 and prepaid expenses of $41,452.
Our net cash consumed by operating activities totaled $3,074,283 during the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash was consumed by the net loss from continuing operations of $3,381,295 and a net loss from discontinued operations of $506,954 reduced by non-cash adjustments principally consisting of $74,064 for depreciation and amortization of non-current assets, $32,980 for impairment of intangible assets, $371,997 for charge for obsolescence inventory, $105,325 for the allowance of doubtful accounts and other receivables and $400,174 for share-based compensation. For the year ended December 31, 2019, within changes of assets and liabilities, cash provided consisted principally of a decrease in trade receivables of $128,120, and a decrease in prepaid expenses of $103,152 off-set by a decrease in trade and other payables of $443,735.
Investing Activities
The Company’s net cash used in investing totaled $8,757,469, as compared to $3,940,627 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of proceeds from the sale of marketable securities of $2,314,374 offset by $9,871,843 consumed by the purchase of marketable securities. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of proceeds from the sale of marketable securities of $2,857,960 and the sale of equipment of $6,250 offset by $6,704,837 consumed by the purchase of marketable securities and $100,000 for the issuance of a short-term note receivable.
Financing Activities
The Company’s net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $38,667,827 (2019: $6,965,693). Net cash provided during the 2020 period consisted of $29,184,244 of net proceeds from the issuance of common shares, $1,743,503 of net proceeds for the issuance of prepaid equity forward contracts for the purchase of common shares and $7,740,000 of net proceeds from the exercise of warrants for common stock. Net cash provided during the 2019 period consisted of $2,147,778 of net proceeds from issuance of common stock and $4,817,857 of net proceeds from issuance of prepaid equity forward contracts for the purchase of common stock.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Future events and their effects cannot be determined with absolute certainty. Therefore, the determination of estimates requires the exercise of judgment. Actual results inevitably will differ from those estimates, and such differences may be material to the financial statements. The most significant accounting estimates inherent in the preparation of our financial statements include estimates associated with revenue recognition, impairment analysis of intangibles and stock-based compensation.
Our financial position, results of operations and cash flows are impacted by the accounting policies we have adopted. In order to get a full understanding of our financial statements, one must have a clear understanding of the accounting policies employed. A summary of our critical accounting policies is presented within the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant known off balance sheet arrangements.