Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and in our other Securities and Exchange Commission filings. The following discussion may contain predictions, estimates, and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These risks could cause our actual results to differ materially from any future performance suggested below.
Overview
We are a wearable medical robotics company, specializing in myoelectric braces, or orthotics, for people with neuromuscular disorders. We develop and market the MyoPro product line, which is a myoelectric-controlled upper limb brace, or orthosis. The orthosis is a rigid brace used for the purpose of supporting a patient’s weak or deformed arm to enable and improve functional activities of daily living, or ADLs, in the home and community. It is custom constructed by a trained professional during a custom fabrication process for each individual user to meet their specific needs. Our products are designed to help restore function in individuals with neuromuscular conditions due to brachial plexus injury, stroke, traumatic brain injury, spinal cord injury and other neurological disorders.
An increasing percentage of our revenue is derived from being a direct provider of our product to patients, which we refer to as direct billing. We utilize digital ads on various platforms to reach patients who are potential candidates for our product. Once the prospective patient contacts us or is referred to us, either our trained clinical staff or a trained O&P provider will evaluate the patient for their suitability as a candidate. Prior to obtaining authorizations from commercial insurance companies, the patient’s medical records are collected and reviewed to make sure the device is appropriate for their condition and a prescription is always obtained from a physician. Once these documents are obtained, our patient advocacy team will submit a pre-authorization request to the patient’s insurer. If we receive a pre-authorization, we will proceed to cast the patient’s arm, then fabricate the MyoPro and deliver it to the patient. We also call on hospitals and O&P practices that provide our products to their patients as well as generate indirect sales through distributors in the United States, Canada, Europe, and Australia. The MyoPro product line has been approved by the VA system for impaired veterans, and over forty VA facilities have already ordered devices for their patients.
Our myoelectric orthoses have been clinically shown in peer reviewed published research studies to help restore the ability to complete functional tasks by supporting the affected joint and enabling individuals to self-initiate and control movement of their partially paralyzed limbs by using their own muscle signals.
Our technology was originally developed at MIT in collaboration with medical experts affiliated with Harvard Medical School. Myomo was incorporated in 2004 and completed licensing of its technology from MIT in 2006.
On January 30, 2020, we effected a one-for-thirty reverse split of our shares of common stock. All share and per share amounts have been restated to give effect to the reverse split.
Other milestones our history include:
•
In 2012, we introduced the MyoPro, the primary business focus shifted during this time period, from devices which were designed for rehabilitation therapy and sold to hospitals, to providing an assistive device through O&P providers to patients who are otherwise impaired for use at home, work, and in the community that facilitates ADLs.
•
During 2015, we extended our basic MyoPro for the elbow with the introduction of the MyoPro Motion W, a multi-articulated non-powered wrist and the MyoPro Motion G, which includes a powered grasp. The MyoPro Motion W allows the user to use their sound arm to adjust the device and then, for instance, open a refrigerator door, carry a shopping bag, hold a cell phone, or stabilize themselves to avoid a fall and potential injury. The MyoPro Motion G model allows users with severely weakened or clenched hands, such as seen in certain stroke survivors, to open and close their hands and perform a large number of ADLs.
•
On June 9, 2017, we completed our initial public offering (“IPO”) and a private offering concurrent with the IPO, generating net proceeds of $6.9 million in the aggregate.
•
On July 31, 2017, we met the criteria to apply the CE Mark for the MyoPro. This has enabled us to sell the MyoPro to individuals in the European Union (the “EU”).
•
On October 24, 2017, we obtained a Medical Device License in Canada, which enabled us to sell the MyoPro in Canada.
•
In May 2018, we announced that CMS has published a favorable preliminary decision regarding our application for HCPCS “L” codes. We had filed this application in December 2017 to have the CMS establish two new Level II HCPCS codes to describe “microprocessor-controlled, custom fabricated upper extremity braces.”
•
In November 2018, we announced that the CMS had published two new codes (L8701, L8702) pursuant to our application for HCPCS codes which become effective in early 2019. The assignment of unique L-Codes, if followed by appropriate payment terms (which are still pending), would offer greater access to the MyoPro for Medicare beneficiaries.
•
On December 4, 2017, we completed a follow-on public offering, generating net proceeds of $10.4 million.
•
During 2018, an aggregate of 40,185 warrants were exercised for additional gross proceeds of $3.6 million.
•
In February 2019, we completed a follow-on public offering, generating net proceeds of $5.6 million.
•
In October 2019, we entered into a Note Purchase Agreement, Senior Note and Security Agreement (collectively the “Term Loan”) with Chicago Venture Partners, or CVP, which generated gross proceeds of $3.0 million.
Recent Developments
Underwritten Public Offerings
On February 12, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 2,143,000 shares of our common stock and pre-funded warrants at a combined price of $7.00 per share less a nominal $0.0001 per share exercise price for the pre-funded warrants. In addition, investors received a warrant to purchase one share of common stock at an exercise price of $7.50 per share. The offering was conducted pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1 (Registration No. 333-235538 as amended, the “Registration Statement”), which the SEC declared effective on February 10, 2020. The gross proceeds to us were approximately $15.0 million. After deducting the underwriting discount and other offering expenses, net proceeds were approximately $13.5 million.
Reverse Stock Split
On January 30, 2020, we filed with the State of Delaware an amendment to our Eighth Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation for a one-for-thirty reverse split of our common stock. All share and per share information has been restated retroactively, giving effect to the reverse stock split for all periods presented. There was no change to reported net loss in any period presented.
Amendment to Term Loan
On May 12, 2020, we amended our Term Loan with CVP into a convertible note (the “Amendment”) to provide for the conversion of outstanding amounts into shares of common stock in satisfaction of its repayment obligations (as amended, the convertible instrument is referred to herein as the “Note”). We agreed to pay CVP a fee of $105,000 in consideration of CVP’s agreement to make the Note convertible, with the fee being added to the outstanding balance of the Note. Among other things, the Amendment provided us the ability, subject to the terms and conditions contained therein, to satisfy certain repayment obligations through the issuance of common stock rather than in cash. Pursuant to the terms of the Note, CVP had the right to redeem up to $400,000 of the Borrowings per calendar month for the first three redemptions after the inception date, and $300,000 per calendar month thereafter by submitting a notice to us (a “Redemption Notice”). Upon receipt of a Redemption Notice, we could, at our election, either (i) pay the amount set forth in the Redemption Notice in cash within seven trading days of our receipt of such Redemption Notice, or (ii) convert the amount set forth in the Redemption Notice into shares of common stock within three trading days of our
receipt of such Redemption Notice. CVP’s per share conversion price was 91% of the lowest daily volume weighted average price per share of our common stock on the NYSE American for the ten trading days immediately preceding such conversion. We could not make redemptions in shares of common stock and were required to satisfy such redemptions in cash within three trading days of receipt of the redemption notice if there was an Equity Conditions Failure (as defined in the Amendment). We were able to defer up to three redemptions for up to thirty days on the same terms as under the Term Loan. In addition, we could not issue shares of common stock to CVP if such issuance would cause CVP to beneficially own in excess of 9.99% of our common stock outstanding on the date of such issuance. We were also prohibited from issuing shares of common stock to the extent that such issuance would exceed the amounts described in Section 713 of the NYSE American LLC Company Guide that would require the approval of our stockholders. During the fourth quarter of 2020, there was one redemption that we elected to repay in stock, which extinguished the remaining balance of the Note.
Certification as a Medicare Provider
In September 2020, we announced that CMS had certified us to be a Medicare provider. Note that CMS has not made a coverage decision or determined a fee for the MyoPro as of the filing date of the Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, we still must complete an audit to become accredited as a Medicare provider, however certification allows us to begin the process of trying to obtain contracts with commercial insurance companies and applying to be an in-network provider under certain state Medicaid plans.
China Joint Venture
On January 21, 2021, we entered into a definitive agreement with Beijing Ryzur Medical Investment Co., Ltd. (“Ryzur Medical”), a medical device manufacturer based in Beijing, to form a joint venture (the “JV”) to manufacture and sell our current and future products in greater China, including Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan (the “JV Agreement”).
Majority ownership in the JV, to be named Jiangxi Myomo Medical Assistive Appliance Co., Ltd., will be held by Ryzur Medical and Chinaleaf Capital Management Co., Ltd., a private fund based in Shanghai that invests in growth opportunities in new technologies. We will own a minimum 19.9% stake in the JV. Ryzur Medical and its partners have committed to invest a minimum of $8 million and up to $20 million in the JV over five years. The establishment of the JV is subject to governmental filings and approvals in China.
Once established, the JV Agreement contemplates that we and JV will enter into a ten-year agreement to license our intellectual property and purchase MyoPro Control System units from us (the “Technology License Agreement”). Under the Technology License Agreement, we will be entitled to receive an upfront license fee of $2.5 million. Pursuant to the JV Agreement, the JV has agreed to an escalating purchase commitment for a minimum of $10.75 million in MyoPro Control System Units during the next ten years, subject to receipt of regulatory approvals necessary to permit sales of the product in the greater China territory. Payment of the license fee and transfer of technology requires the completion of certain milestones by the parties to the JV Agreement, which are expected to be completed before the end of 2021. In addition, the JV Agreement contemplates that we and the JV will enter into a trademark license agreement to license of certain of the Company’s trademarks (the “Trademark License Agreement”).
Results of Operations
We have been growing revenues while incurring net losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception and anticipate this to continue as we focus our efforts on continuing to expand our sales and marketing efforts to expand into new geographic markets, invest in development of our MyoPro products, and the funding of clinical research studies to support our reimbursement efforts.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth our Revenue, Gross Margin and Gross Margin% for each of the years presented.
Revenues
We derive revenue primarily from providing devices directly to patients and billing insurance companies directly. We also sell our products to O&P providers, to the VA, to rehabilitation hospitals, and through distributors. Though we increasingly provide devices directly to patients, we sometimes utilize the clinical services of O&P providers for which they are paid a fee.
We expect that our revenues will continue to grow, primarily as a result of our increased direct-to-patient marketing efforts, while continuing our selling and marketing efforts through O&P channel providers, both domestically and internationally.
Total revenue in 2020 increased by approximately $3.7 million, or 98% compared to 2019. The revenue increase was driven by both a higher number of revenue units and a higher average selling price. Revenues generated in 2020 through the direct billing channel, increased to approximately $5.3 million, or 70% of revenue in 2020, compared to approximately $1.3 million, or 33% of revenue in 2019. The increase in direct billing revenues, as well as a higher volume of Motion G products sold, were the drivers for our higher average selling price in 2020.
Gross margin
Cost of revenue consists of direct costs for the manufacturing, casting, fabrication and fitting of our products, inventory reserves, warranty costs, royalties associated with licensed technologies and instruction.
Gross margin increased to 66% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 63% in the comparable period of 2019. The increase in gross margin was driven by higher average selling prices, partially offset by cost of revenues recorded in 2020 for products for which revenues will be recorded in a future period, as well as increased warranty reserves.
We expect our gross margins to vary depending on the mix of channel revenues and timing of reimbursements from certain third party payers, which impacts revenue recognition.
Operating expenses
The following table sets forth our operating expenses for each of the years presented.
Research and development
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses consist of costs for our R&D personnel, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, product development costs, and the cost of certain third-party contractors and travel expense. R&D costs are expensed as they are incurred. We intend to continue to develop additional products and enhance our existing products and expect R&D costs to increase on an annual basis, despite the delay in the launch of our pediatric device, which we refer to as MyoPal, due to the impact of COVID-19. As discussed above, certain amounts in R&D, as well as certain selling, general and administrative expenses, recorded during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, have been reclassified to cost of revenues to confirm to the current year presentation.
R&D expenses decreased by approximately $0.1 million or 5% in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease during 2020 was driven by lower payroll, consulting, and stock based compensation costs, partially offset by higher protype material costs.
Selling, general and administrative
Selling expenses consist of costs for our clinical field staff and marketing personnel, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation, commissions, costs of marketing and promotional events, clinical studies, corporate communications, product marketing and travel expenses. Sales commissions are generally earned and recorded as expense when the revenue is recognized. We expect sales and marketing expenses to increase as we expand our sales and marketing efforts.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of costs for administrative and finance personnel, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, professional fees associated with legal matters, consulting expenses, costs for pursuing insurance reimbursements for our products, and costs required to comply with the regulatory requirements of the SEC, as well as costs associated with accounting systems, insurance premiums and other corporate expenses. We expect that general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we pursue an increased number of insurance reimbursements and seek expanded payer coverage for our products, while adding administrative and accounting support structure for our growing business.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by approximately $2.4 million or 21% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increases were primarily due to higher payroll, legal, consulting, advertising, rent, and insurance costs, which were partially offset by lower travel expenses as a result of cost reductions from implementing telehealth techniques for patient evaluations and decreased business travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Payroll costs increased primarily as a result of adding headcount to support, sales, marketing and reimbursement efforts, which was partially offset by lower consulting costs. Advertising expenses increased due primarily to expansion of our digital advertising activity in order to grow our candidate pipeline. Rent expense increased due to additional space requirements to support higher headcount, as well as rent increases. Insurance costs increased primarily due to higher director and officer insurance premiums.
Depreciation expense consists of the depreciation of our property and equipment and other capitalized assets. Depreciation is calculated using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives, ranging from two to three years.
Other expense (income)
The following table sets forth our interest and other expense (income) for each of the years presented.
The change in the fair value of derivative liabilities of approximately $0.1 million was primarily due to the decrease in the fair value of the derivative liabilities for the warrants issued to our selling agents for our public offering in February 2019 and the decrease in the value of the derivative liability associated with our Note, which was extinguished in 2020.
The increase in interest and other expense of approximately $0.3 million, net and non-cash interest expense of approximately $0.1 million is primarily due to interest expense on our Term Loan that we entered into in October 2019.
Loss on extinguishment of debt of $0.7 million was recorded as a result of the write off of debt discounts due to prepaying 50% of the outstanding balance of our Term Loan concurrent with the closing our public equity offering in February 2020 and subsequent payments made in stock which resulted in extinguishment of debt.
Adjusted EBITDA
We believe that the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, provides investors with additional information about our financial results. Adjusted EBITDA is an important supplemental measure used by our board of directors and management to evaluate our operating performance from period-to-period on a consistent basis and as a measure for planning and forecasting overall expectations and for evaluating actual results against such expectations.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as earnings before interest and other income (expense), taxes, depreciation and amortization adjusted for, stock based-compensation and the impact of the change in fair value of our derivative liabilities.
Adjusted EBITDA is not in accordance with, or an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In addition, this non-GAAP measure is not based on any comprehensive set of accounting rules or principles. As a non-GAAP measure, Adjusted EBITDA has limitations in that it does not reflect all of the amounts associated with our results of operations as determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In particular:
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the amounts we paid in interest expense on our debt, including non-cash interest expense from the amortization of the debt discount;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the amounts we paid in taxes or other components of our tax provision;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not include other income (expense);
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not include depreciation expense from fixed assets;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not include the impact of stock-based compensation; and
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not include the change in fair value of our derivative liabilities.
Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures including net income (loss) and our financial results presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for each of the years indicated:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
We measure our liquidity in a number of ways, including the following:
We had working capital and stockholders’ equity of approximately $11.6 million and $11.6 million respectively, as of December 31, 2020. We have historically funded our operations through financing activities, including raising equity and debt capital. In February 2020, we completed a follow-on offering of our common stock, generating net proceeds of approximately $13.5 million. The purpose of this offering was to provide additional capital to allow us to execute on our strategy to achieve cash flow breakeven. This funding, in addition to funding of $5.0 million received under our ATM facility during the year ended December 31, 2020 is helping us to sustain our operations. Based upon our expected cash flows, we believe that our available cash will fund our operations for at least the next twelve months from the issuance date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our operating plans are primarily focused on scaling up our operations, increasing the proportion of patients covered by commercial health insurance which reimburse for the MyoPro, executing on our plans to bring our pediatric product to market as public health conditions allow and continued work with CMS and their administrative contractors regarding reimbursement of our products. Our success is dependent upon reimbursement of our products by insurance companies and government-controlled health care plans such as Medicare and Medicaid, which could prevent our revenues from growing to the level necessary to achieve cash flow breakeven. If public health restrictions on travel and patient interaction are broadly reinstated in the first quarter of 2021 due to the recent increase in COVID-19 infections in the U.S., that will have an adverse effect on our business, and it is likely that we will need to raise additional capital to sustain our operations through the first half of 2022. We believe that we have access to capital resources through payment of the technology license fee associated with our JV in China, possible public or private equity offerings, including usage of our ATM facility with B. Riley FBR, Inc, or B. Riley FBR, exercises of outstanding warrants, additional debt financings, or other means; however, we may be unable to raise sufficient additional capital when we need it or raise capital on favorable terms. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 1,181,096 shares of common stock under the ATM facility, at a weighted average sales price of approximately $4.41 per share, generating net proceeds after sales commissions of approximately $5 million. We may offer and sell shares from time to time under the ATM facility up to $15.0 million in the aggregate. We have remaining capacity under our ATM facility of approximately $9.8 million. However, due to our public float, the amount of securities we may sell from time to time under the registration statement which registered the ATM facility is subject to the limitations imposed by General Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3. The registration statement expires in July 2021. Further, additional debt financing may require us to pledge certain assets and enter into covenants that could restrict certain business activities or our ability to incur further indebtedness and may contain other terms that are not favorable to our stockholders or us.
On May 12, 2020 (the “Issuance Date”), we entered an amendment to our Term Loan with CVP to provide for the conversion of outstanding amounts into shares of common stock in satisfaction of our repayment obligations (as amended, the convertible instrument is referred to herein as the “Note”) in which we, at our option, may pay monthly redemptions in either cash or shares of common stock. If we elected to repay CVP in common stock, we were required to do so within three trading days of receipt of a redemption notice. If we made a redemption payment to CVP in shares of common stock, the number of shares issued was based on the redemption amount divided by the product of (x) 91%, and (y) the lowest daily volume weighted average price over the ten preceding trading days. The maximum amount that CVP could redeem in any month was $400,000 for the first three redemptions and $300,000 thereafter until the Note was repaid in full. In order for us to repay the Note in shares of common stock, certain conditions had to be met, including (i) shares of common stock issued to CVP must be freely tradable under SEC Rule 144; (ii) maintaining a valid listing on the NYSE American, (iii) no event of default had occurred, and (iv) aggregate shares of common stock issued to CVP could not exceed 19.99% of our outstanding common stock on the Issuance Date without prior shareholder approval. If we were not able to make a redemption payment in shares of common stock due to not meeting any of these conditions, we were required to make the redemption payment in cash within three trading days from the date of the redemption notice. If we elected to make the redemption payment in cash, payment had to be made within seven trading days. The Note also included a restriction that prevented CVP from owning more than 9.99% of our common stock at any one time. In addition, the amendment included a restructuring fee of $105,000, which was added to the outstanding balance of the Note on the Issuance Date. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued 544,526 shares of common stock to CVP to repay the Note in full, by issuing freely tradable shares to CVP in reliance of an exemption from registration of Note contained in Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act and an exemption from the issuance of registered shares to CVP under the Section 3(a)(9) of the Securities Act.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities. The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily used to fund a net loss net of non-cash items of approximately $9.9 million, including non-cash expenses in the aggregate amount of approximately $1.7 million of which approximately $0.6 million of non-cash adjustments related to stock-based compensation, and $0.7 million for loss on extinguishment of debt, and approximately $0.9 million of cash generated from changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily related to an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses and a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets, offset by increases in inventory and accounts receivable.
Investing Activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020 our cash used in investing activities of less than $0.1 million was for the acquisition of equipment.
Financing Activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020 cash provided by financing activities of approximately $16.8 million was primarily due to approximately $13.5 million of proceeds received from our public offering in February 2020, and net proceeds of approximately 5.0 million from the issuance of shares through our ATM in 2020, partially offset by $1.7 million of cash used for the repayment of debt.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements in the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America require management to make estimates and assumptions that affect certain reported amounts and disclosures. These estimates and assumptions are reviewed on an on-going basis and updated as appropriate. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Our significant estimates include the allowance for doubtful accounts, the valuation of our deferred tax valuation allowances, warranty obligations, the fair value of our derivative liabilities and reserves for slow moving inventory.
Accounts Receivable
We carry accounts receivable at invoiced amounts less an allowance for doubtful accounts. We evaluate our accounts receivable on a continuous basis, and if necessary, establish an allowance for doubtful accounts based on a number of factors, including current credit conditions and customer payment history. We do not require collateral or accrue interest on accounts receivable and credit terms are generally 30 days.
Inventories
Inventories are recorded at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using a specific identification method. We reduce the carrying value of inventory for those items that are potentially excess, obsolete or slow-moving based on changes in customer demand, technology developments or other economic factors.
Research and Development Costs
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Research and development costs primarily consist of salaries and benefits, facility and overhead costs, and outsourced research activities.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2019, we adopted the new accounting standard ASC 606 and all the related amendments (Topic 606) using the modified retrospective method for all contracts not completed as of the date of adoption. For contracts that were modified before the effective date, we reflected the aggregate effect of all modifications when identifying performance obligations and allocating transaction price in accordance with practical expedient ASC 606-10-65-1-(f)-4, which did not have a material effect on our assessment of the cumulative effect adjustment upon adoption. We recognized the cumulative effect of initially applying the new standard as an adjustment to the opening balance of accumulated deficit. Results for reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2019 are presented under Topic 606, while prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with our historic accounting under Topic 605.
Revenues under Topic 606 are required to be recognized either at a “point in time” or “over time,” depending on the facts and circumstances of the arrangement and are evaluated using a five-step model. Generally, we recognize revenue at a point in time. The adoption of Topic606 did not have a material impact on the financial statements at initial implementation.
We recognize revenue after applying the following five steps:
1)
Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer,
2)
Identification of the performance obligations in the contract, including whether they are distinct within the context of the contract
3)
Determination of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration
4)
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
5)
Recognition of revenue when, or as, performance obligations are satisfied
Revenue is recognized when control of these services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services.
Increasingly, we are deriving revenue from direct billing. We also derive revenue primarily from the sale of our products to O&P providers in the U.S. and internationally, the VA and rehabilitation hospitals. Under direct billing, we recognize revenue when we meet all of the following criteria:
(i)
Our product has been delivered to the patient, including completion of initial instruction on its use.
(ii)
Collection is deemed probable and it has been determined that a significant reversal of the revenue to be recognized is not deemed probable when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved.
(iii)
The amount to be collected is estimable using the “expected value” estimation techniques, or the “most likely amount” as defined in ASC 606.
For revenue derived from certain insurance companies where we have demonstrated sufficient payment history, we recognize revenue when we receive a pre-authorization from the insurance company and control passes to the patient upon delivery of the device in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for the device. These insurers represented approximately 40% of the direct billing channel revenue in 2020.
For revenues derived from O&P providers, the VA and rehabilitation hospitals, we recognize revenue when control passes to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those services, which may be recognized upon shipment or upon delivery, depending on the terms of the arrangement, provided that persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, there are no uncertainties regarding customer acceptance and collectability is deemed probable. In certain cases, we ship our products to O&P providers pending reimbursement from third party payers. As a result of this arrangement, elements of the revenue recognition criteria have not been met upon shipment. In this instance, we recognize revenue when payment has been received, as all of the revenue recognition criteria has been met.
We have elected to record taxes collected from customers on a net basis and do not include tax amounts in revenue or cost of revenue.
Leases
We account for leases under ASC 842. We assess whether a contract is or contains a lease at inception of the contract and recognize right-of-use assets and corresponding lease liabilities at the lease commencement date, except for short-term leases, which are under one year, and leases of low value. For these leases, we recognize the lease payments as an operating expense on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under Accounting Standards Codification 740 Income Taxes, or ASC 740. Under ASC 740, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and net operating loss and credit carryforwards using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to impact taxable income. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized.
ASC 740 requires that the tax effects of changes in tax laws or rates be recognized in the financial statements in the period in which the law is enacted.
ASC 740 also clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement process for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
Tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return are recorded in our financial statements. A tax benefit from an uncertain tax position is only recognized if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on
examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. Uncertain tax positions have had no impact on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock awards to employees and non-employees by measuring the cost of services received in exchange for the award of equity instruments based upon the fair value of the award on the date of grant. The fair value of that award is then ratably recognized as expense over the period during which the recipient is required to provide services in exchange for that award.
Net Loss per Share
Basic loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding, plus potentially dilutive common shares. Convertible debt, preferred stock, restricted stock units, stock options and warrants are excluded from the diluted net loss per share calculation when their impact is antidilutive. We reported a net loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and as a result, all potentially dilutive common shares are considered antidilutive for these years.
Recent Accounting Standards
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12 “Income Taxes (Topic 740) -- Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. This ASU modifies certain provisions of ASC 740 to simplify the accounting for income taxes. The amendments in ASU 2019-12 are effective for public business entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods therein. Early adoption of the standard is permitted, including adoption in interim or annual periods for which financial statements have not yet been issued. We are currently evaluating the accounting, transition, and disclosure requirements of the standard to determine the impact, if any, on our financial statements.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure about Market Risk
Our unrestricted cash and cash equivalents, totaling approximately $12.2 million as of December 31, 2020, was deposited in bank accounts. The cash in these accounts is held for working capital purposes and invested by the bank in overnight money market funds that invest in short-term government or government backed securities. Our primary objective is to preserve our capital for purposes of funding our operations.
JOBS Act
We qualify as an emerging growth company as defined in the JOBS Act. As an emerging growth company, we may take advantage of relief from certain specified reporting requirements and other burdens that are otherwise applicable generally to public companies. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this provision of the JOBS Act.