Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on August 14, 2020 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On February 1, 2021, the Company entered into a Merger Agreement with First Merger Sub, Second Merger Sub and PlayStudios, relating to a proposed Business Combination transaction between the Company and PlayStudios (the “Transaction”).
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, First Merger Sub will merge with and into PlayStudios, with PlayStudios surviving such merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company and immediately following the First Merger, PlayStudios will merge with and into Second Merger Sub, with Second Merger Sub being the surviving entity of the Second Merger and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Second Merger” and, together with the First Merger, the “Mergers”).
As a result of the Mergers, among other things, each outstanding share of common stock of PlayStudios (“PlayStudios Common Stock”) and each share of preferred stock of PlayStudios (“PlayStudios Preferred Stock”) issued and outstanding as of the effective time of the First Merger (the “Effective Time”) will be cancelled in exchange for the right to receive Cash Electing Share (as defined in the Merger Agreement) or New PlayStudios Class A Common Stock (as defined in the Merger Agreement).
The Transaction will be consummated subject to the deliverables and provisions as further described in the Merger Agreement.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target for our Business Combination, and activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of PlayStudios. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a Business Combination.
For the period from August 14, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $238,958, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $264,690 offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $22,174 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $3,558.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On October 27, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 20,000,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $200,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 4,333,333 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant generating gross proceeds of $6,500,000.
On November 9, 2020, we issued an additional 1,525,000 Units for total gross proceeds of $15,250,000 in connection with the underwriters’ partial exercise of their over-allotment option. Simultaneously with the partial closing of the over-allotment option, we also consummated the sale of an additional 203,334 Private Placement Warrants at $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating total proceeds of $305,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option in part, and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $215,250,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $12,363,821 in transaction costs, including $4,305,000 of underwriting fees, $7,533,750 of deferred underwriting fees and $525,071 of other costs.
For the period from August 14, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $932,462. Net loss of $238,958 was impacted by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $22,174 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities of $3,558. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $673,522 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $215,275,732. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1,061,717 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
In the event the merger with Playstudios does not close, the Company will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from its Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. The Company’s officers, directors and Sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet the Company’s working capital needs. Accordingly, the Company may not be able to obtain additional financing. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern if a Business Combination is not consummated.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, secretarial and administrative support services provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on October 22, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriter is entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $7,533,750 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Redemption
We account for our Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A Ordinary Shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Ordinary Shares (including Ordinary Shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Ordinary Shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A Ordinary Shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption, which are not currently redeemable and are not redeemable at fair value, have been excluded from the calculation of basic net loss per Ordinary Share since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the Trust Account earnings. Our net income is adjusted for the portion of income that is attributable to Ordinary Shares subject to redemption, as these shares only participate in the earnings of the Trust Account and not our income or losses.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.