ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, the following discussion and analysis includes forward-looking information that involves risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated by these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10 -K. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Form 10 -K.
Overview
We are a medical device company focusing on noninvasive biological response-activating devices that target wound healing and pain therapy and can be administered at home, without the assistance of medical professionals. Our WoundShield, PainShield and UroShield products are backed by novel technology which relates to ultrasound delivery through surface acoustic waves.
Recent Events
COVID-19
In December 2019, COVID-19 was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China, and has reached multiple other countries, resulting in government-imposed quarantines, travel restrictions and other public health safety measures in China and other affected countries. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has and may continue to adversely impact our business, as our operations are based in and rely on third parties located in countries affected by the pandemic. Our third-party manufacturer, which is based in China, temporarily shut down for sixty days during 2020 due to the pandemic and became fully operational in April 2020 which led to a significant delay in the production of goods needed to fulfill our sales orders which were scheduled to be fulfilled in our first quarter of 2020. We were able to fulfill these orders in the second quarter of 2020. Additionally, the notified regulatory body we rely on to obtain European CE approval is located in Italy and was shut down for approximately six weeks from March to April 2020, which delayed our submission for CE mark approval for the year 2020. The CE Mark approval was subsequently approved in April 2020. The various precautionary measures taken by many governmental authorities around the world in order to limit the spread of COVID-19 have had and may continue to have an adverse effect on the global markets and global economy, including on the availability and pricing of employees, resources, materials, manufacturing and delivery efforts and other aspects of the global economy. The financial downturn has compelled us to furlough or reduce working hours for much of our operating staff, and has forced our remaining staff as well as third-party contractors, to work remotely. In addition, many staff members continue to operate remotely from their homes which is continuing to result in delays in obtaining certain financial records. We also rely on third-party professionals to provide services such as the preparation of our financial statements and to conduct audits, and many of these parties have been affected by government-imposed precautionary measures, thereby delaying our receipt of these services. Such government-imposed precautionary measures may have been relaxed in certain countries or states, but there is no assurance that more strict measures will be put in place again due to a resurgence in COVID-19 cases. Therefore, the COVID-19 pandemic has and may again disrupt production and cause delays in the development, supply and delivery of our products, our operation, further divert the attention and efforts of the medical community coping with COVID-19 and disrupt the marketplace in which we operate. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19, its variants and the actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others. The COVID-19 pandemic could continue to materially disrupt our business and operations, hamper our ability to raise additional funds or sell or securities, continue to slow down the overall economy, curtail consumer spending, interrupt our sources of supply, and make it hard to adequately staff our operations.
Business Developments
Effective as of January 2020, the U.S. CMS approved our PainShield™ for reimbursement for Medicare beneficiaries on a national basis. We were notified on March 30, 2020 that our Medicare Enrollment Application was approved, and we are now an approved Medicare Supplier for DME through the National Supplier Clearinghouse, Palmetto-GBA as well as Noridian Administrative Services, LLC, the two Medicare Administrative Contractors that handle DME reimbursement nationwide. PainShield is currently available for Medicare reimbursement on a national level under new HCPCS (Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System) code K1004.
In March 2020, we signed a license agreement with Sanuwave Health, Inc. for the manufacture and delivery of our WoundShield technology. Under the terms of the agreement, we will receive warrants to purchase 127,000 shares of Sanuwave stock, a $250,000 milestone payment based on receipt of U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval, and 10% royalty on Sanuwave’s gross revenues from sales or rentals of WoundShield. In return, Sanuwave has received the worldwide, exclusive rights to our WoundShield product and technology. In addition, Sanuwave will bear the costs and clinical validation responsibilities associated with obtaining approval for WoundShield from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and other regulatory agencies around the world.
In September 2020, the U.S. FDA exercised its Enforcement Discretion to allow distribution of our UroShield device in the United States. This temporary authorization is limited to use as an extracorporeal acoustic wave generating accessory to urological indwelling catheter for use during the COVID-19 pandemic.
NASDAQ Delisting Procedure
On September 14, 2018, we received a letter from the Listing Qualifications Staff (the “Staff”) of the Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”) notifying the Company that it was no longer in compliance with the minimum stockholders’ equity requirement for continued listing on the NASDAQ Capital Market. On October 26, 2018, November 23, 2018 and January 9, 2019, we submitted a plan and supporting documentation to regain compliance with the minimum stockholders’ equity requirement and was granted an extension through March 13, 2019 to regain compliance. We were unable to complete a capital raise by March 13, 2019 and were unable to regain compliance by that date.
The Staff notified us by letter dated March 14, 2019 that it determined that we did not meet the terms of the extension because we were unable to complete an equity financing and evidence compliance with the minimum $2.5 million stockholders’ equity requirement for continued listing on the NASDAQ Capital Market by March 13, 2019, and our common stock would be subject to delisting from the NASDAQ Capital Market unless the Company timely requests a hearing before the Nasdaq Hearings Panel (the “Panel”).
We timely requested a hearing before the Panel, which request stayed any delisting action by the Staff. The hearing occurred on May 2, 2019. At the hearing, we presented our plan to evidence compliance with the minimum stockholders’ equity requirement for continued listing on the NASDAQ Capital Market, and requested an extension of time within which to do so.
By letter dated May 20, 2019, we received notice that the Panel granted our request for continued listing on the NASDAQ Capital Market. Assuming our compliance plan is executed and compliance with the $2.5 million stockholder equity requirement is demonstrated, the Panel will maintain jurisdiction thereafter for the balance of the 180-day discretionary period and imposed certain conditions and reporting requirements during that period. The Panel determined to continue the listing of our shares of common stock on the NASDAQ Capital Market, partially based upon our assurances that we had a high level of confidence that we would receive the funding needed. The Panel maintained a Panel monitor on the Company until September 2020.
On August 5, 2020, the Company received notice from the Staff indicating that the Company no longer satisfied the Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(b)(1) (the “Rule”), which requires listed companies to maintain stockholders’ equity of at least $2.5 million for continued listing on Nasdaq, and was therefore subject to delisting. In response, the Company timely requested a hearing before the Panel, which request stayed any further action by the Listing Qualifications Staff. The hearing was held on September 24, 2020.
On October 6, 2020, the Company received formal notice that the Panel had granted the Company’s request for an extension through December 15, 2020 to evidence compliance with the Rule.
On November 5, 2020, the Company received a subsequent letter from the Nasdaq indicating that, based upon the closing bid price of the Company’s common stock for the 30 consecutive business day period between September 24, 2020, through November 4, 2020, the Company did not meet the minimum bid price of $1.00 per share required for continued listing on the Nasdaq Capital Market pursuant to Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2). The letter also indicated that the Company will be provided with a compliance period of 180 calendar days, or until May 4, 2021 (the “Compliance Period”), in which to regain compliance pursuant to Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(A).
In order to regain compliance with Nasdaq’s minimum bid price requirement, the Company’s common stock must maintain a minimum closing bid price of $1.00 for at least ten consecutive business days during the Compliance Period. In the event the Company does not regain compliance by the end of the Compliance Period, the Company may be eligible for additional time to regain compliance. To qualify, the Company will be required to meet the continued listing requirement for the market value of its publicly held shares and all other initial listing standards for the Nasdaq Capital Market, with the exception of the bid price requirement, and will need to provide written notice of its intention to cure the deficiency during the second compliance period, by effecting a reverse stock split if necessary. If the Company meets these requirements, the Company may be granted an additional 180 calendar days to regain compliance. However, if it appears to Nasdaq that the Company will be unable to cure the deficiency, or if the Company is not otherwise eligible for the additional cure period, Nasdaq will provide notice that the Company’s common stock will be subject to delisting.
On January 4, 2021, the Company received formal notice that the Company has regained compliance with the equity requirement of Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(b)(1), as required by the Panel decision dated October 6, 2020. Accordingly, the Panel determined to continue the listing of the Company’s securities on The Nasdaq Stock Market.
On February 2, 2021, the Company received formal notice that the Staff had determined that for the period from January 19 to February 1, 2021, the closing bid price of the Company’s common stock had been at $1.00 per share or greater. Accordingly, the Company regained compliance with Listing Rule 5550(a)(2).
August 2020 Public Offering
On August 27, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 4,531,434 shares of common stock in an underwritten public offering, or the August 2020 Offering, at an offering price to the public of $0.75 per share. We received net proceeds from the August 2020 Offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other estimated offering expenses payable by us, of approximately $2.7 million.
September 2020 Public Offering
On September 25, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 1,794,783 shares of common stock in an underwritten public offering, or the September 2020 Offering, at an offering price to the public of $1.00 per share. We received net proceeds from the September 2020 Offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other estimated offering expenses payable by us, of approximately $1.4 million.
December 2020 Private Placement
On December 2, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors pursuant to which the Company issued and sold to such investors in a private placement an aggregate of (i) 5,914,285 shares of the Company’s common stock at an offering price of $0.70 per share and (ii) pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 2,657,144 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $0.699 per pre-funded warrant, for gross proceeds of approximately $6.0 million, and net proceeds of approximately $5.4 million.
Option Cancellation
On November 2, 2020, we entered into an option cancellation and release agreement (collectively, the “Cancellation Agreements”) with each of Brian Murphy, Christopher Fashek, Martin Goldstein, Michael Ferguson, Stephen Brown, and Thomas Mika (collectively, the “Option holders”), pursuant to which the parties agreed to cancel options to purchase an aggregate of 804,788 shares of our common stock at exercise prices ranging from $2.57 to $6.00 (the “Options”) previously granted to each of the Option holders. In exchange for the cancellation of the Options, we paid $1.00 to each Option holder.
Departure of Interim Chief Financial Officer
On October 5, 2020, we and James Cardwell, our former Interim Chief Financial Officer, agreed by mutual understanding that Mr. Cardwell’s employment as an officer and employee of the Company will cease as of October 5, 2020, in accordance with the terms of his CFO Consulting Agreement, dated June 1, 2019.
Appointment of Chief Financial Officer
On October 5, 2020, we entered into an Employment Agreement (the “Employment Agreement”) with Stephen Brown, pursuant to which we appointed Mr. Brown as Chief Financial Officer, effective October 5, 2020, with a term to continue in effect until terminated by either party. As consideration for his services as Chief Financial Officer, Mr. Brown is entitled to receive (i) an annual base salary of $200,000, less applicable payroll deductions and tax; (ii) reimbursement of any reasonable and customary, documented out-of-pocket expenses actually incurred by Mr. Brown in connection with the performance of his services under the Employment Agreement; and (iii) an annual bonus of $25,000, if earned, as determined by us in our sole discretion. Mr. Brown is also eligible to receive certain grants of incentive stock options to purchase shares of our common stock.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions. We believe that the estimates, judgments and assumptions used are reasonable based upon information available at the time they are made. These estimates, judgments and assumptions can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Functional currency
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in U.S. dollars.
We believe that the currency of the primary economic environment in which our operations are conducted is the U.S. dollar; thus the dollar is our functional currency. The majority of the proceeds from our financing activities are received in U.S. dollars, and this currency is dominant in management’s budgeting and pricing process. Although a portion of our subsidiary’s expenses are dominated in NIS (mostly salary, production expenses and facility expenses), a substantial portion of our expenses are denominated in U.S. dollars. In addition, most of our assets and liabilities are in U.S. dollars and while we do invoice and sell products in foreign currencies such as Euros, Great British Pounds and Israeli shekel, we expect that most of our revenues will be generated in U.S. dollars. Furthermore, excess cash flows are repatriated to the U.S. accounts, where they are invested by the parent entity.
Transactions and balances originally denominated in U.S. dollars are presented at their original amounts. Transactions and balances in other currencies have been remeasured into U.S. dollars in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 830, “Foreign Currency Matters.”
All translation gains and losses from the remeasurement of monetary balance sheet items denominated in non-U.S. dollar currencies are reflected in the consolidated statement of operations in financial expenses, net, as appropriate.
Revenue recognition
We generate revenues from the sale of our products to distributors and patients. Revenues from those products are recognized in accordance with ASC 606, “Revenue Recognition”, in which its core principle of Accounting Standard Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” is to recognize revenues when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that is expected to be received for those goods or services. ASU 2014-09 defines a five-step process to achieve this core principle and, in doing so, it is possible more judgment and estimates may be required within the revenue recognition process than are required under existing GAAP, including identifying performance obligations in a contract, estimating the amount of variable consideration to include in the transaction price and allocating the transaction price to each separate performance obligation.
Revenues from sales to distributors are recognized at the time the products are delivered to the distributors (“sell-in”). The Company does not grant rights of return, credits, rebates, price protection, or other privileges on its products to distributors.
Stock-based compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation” (“ASC 718”), which requires companies to estimate the fair value of equity-based payment awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model. The value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense over the requisite service periods on a straight-line method in our consolidated statement of operations.
We selected the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model as the most appropriate fair value method for our stock-options awards. The option-pricing model requires a number of assumptions, of which the most significant are the expected stock price volatility and the expected option term. Expected volatility was calculated based upon similar traded companies’ historical share price movements. The expected option term represents the period that our stock options are expected to be outstanding. We currently use the simplified method, in accordance with ASC No.718-10-S99-1 (SAB No. 110), and will continue to do so until sufficient historical exercise data supports using expected life assumptions. The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield from U.S. Treasury zero-coupon bonds with an equivalent term. The expected dividend yield assumption is based on our historical experience and expectation of no future dividend payouts. We have historically not paid cash dividends and have no foreseeable plans to pay cash dividends in the future.
We apply ASC 505-50, “Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees” with respect to options and warrants issued to non-employees which requires the use of option valuation models to measure the fair value of the options and warrants at the measurement date.
Income taxes
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act, among other things, permits NOL carryovers and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021. In addition, the CARES Act allows NOLs incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back to each of the five preceding taxable years to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes. The Company has been consistently in a loss position in the U.S. and at present does not expect that the NOL carryback provision of the CARES Act would result in a material cash benefit to the Company.
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, “Income Taxes”. This topic prescribes the use of the liability method whereby deferred tax assets and liability account balances are determined based on differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. We provide full valuation allowance, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
We implemented a two-step approach to recognize and measure uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, on an evaluation of the technical merits, the tax position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% (cumulative basis) likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement.
Warrants
We account for stock warrants held by investors as equity instruments in accordance with ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”), depending on the specific terms of the warrant agreement.
Debt Issued with Warrants
We consider guidance within ASC 470-20, Debt (ASC 470), ASC 480, and ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” when accounting for the issuance of convertible debt with detachable warrants. As described above under the caption “Warrants”, we classify stock warrants as either equity instruments or liabilities depending on the specific terms of the warrant agreement. In circumstances in which debt is issued with liability-classified warrants, the proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt are first allocated to the warrants at their full estimated fair value and established as both a liability and a debt discount. The remaining proceeds, as further reduced by discounts created by the bifurcation of embedded derivatives and a beneficial conversion feature, is allocated to the debt. We account for debt as liabilities measured at amortized cost and amortize the resulting debt discount from the allocation of proceeds, to interest expense using the effective interest method over the expected term of the debt instrument pursuant to ASC 835, “Interest”.
Recently issued accounting standards
For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our consolidated financial statements see Note 3, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our revenues were approximately $623,000 and $530,000, respectively, an increase of approximately 18%, or $93,000, between the periods. The increase was mainly attributable to increased sales from adding distributors. Our revenues may fluctuate as we add new customers or when existing distributors make large purchases of our products during one period and no purchases during another period. Our revenues by quarter may not be linear or consistent. We do not anticipate that our revenues will be impacted by inflation or changing prices in the foreseeable future.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the percentage of revenues attributable to our products was: PainShield - 92%; WoundShield - 8%; and UroShield - 0%. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, the percentage of revenues attributable to our products was: PainShield - 67% and UroShield - 33%. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the percentage of revenues attributable to our disposable products was 5% and 4.5%, respectively. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the portion of our revenues that was derived from distributors was 93% and 67.5%, respectively.
Gross Profit. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, gross profit was approximately $214,000 and $281,000, respectively, despite the increase in sales mainly due to larger royalty revenues in 2019 and a large sale to a distributor at little margin.
Gross profit as a percentage of revenues were approximately 34% and 53% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease is primarily due to increased sales in 2020 and a $112,000 sale to a distributor at approximately $18,000 loss. Additionally, in 2019 the Company entered into a licensing agreement pursuant to which the Company received a $150,000 payment which has no associated costs of sales. Our gross profit may be affected year-over-year by the mix of revenues between sales to distributors and sales directly to the end customers (where sales directly to the end customers generally have a higher margin). As a result, we are subject to year-over-year fluctuation in our gross profits.
Research and Development Expenses. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, research and development expenses were approximately $171,000 and $514,000, respectively, a decrease of approximately 67%, or $343,000 between the periods. This decrease was mainly due to no clinical trials performed during 2020, however there were two employees on payroll dedicated to research and development activities.
Research and development expenses as a percentage of total revenues were approximately 27% and 97% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This decrease was due to the lower costs as described above as well as the increase in revenues.
Our research and development expenses consist mainly of payroll expenses to employees involved in research and development activities, expenses related to subcontracting, patents, clinical trial and facilities expenses associated with and allocated to research and development activities.
Selling and Marketing Expenses. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, selling and marketing expenses were approximately $993,000 and $1,096,000, respectively, a decrease of approximately 9%, or $103, between the periods. The decrease in selling and marketing expenses was mainly due to COVID-19 restrictions which caused curtailed marketing activities, such as less travel and trade show expenses.
Selling and marketing expenses as a percentage of total revenues were approximately 159% and 207% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in our percentage was due to the increase in revenues and decrease in selling and marketing expenses.
Selling and marketing expenses consist mainly of payroll expenses to direct sales and marketing employees, stock-based compensation expenses, travel expenses, advertising and marketing expenses, rent and facilities expenses associated with and allocated to selling and marketing activities.
General and Administrative Expenses. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, general and administrative expenses were approximately $3,769,000 and $3,822,000, respectively, a decrease of approximately 1%, or $53,000, between the periods. Our general and administrative expenses consist mainly of payroll expenses for management and administrative employees, costs associated with being a publicly traded company, stock-based compensation expenses, accounting and facilities expenses associated with general and administrative activities.
Interest expense. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $147,000 and $15,000, respectively, an increase of approximately 879%, or $132,000, between the periods. The increase resulted primarily from 100,000 warrants granted with issuance of notes payable and was recorded as debt discount during 2020.
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there was a change in fair value of derivative liabilities resulting in gains of approximately $513,000 and $102,000, respectively. The gain in 2019 was derived from the valuation of derivative liabilities. The derivative liabilities in 2020 were recorded because the Company’s total potentially dilutive shares exceed the Company’s authorized share limit.
Loss on extinguishment of derivative liability. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there was a loss on extinguishment of derivative liability of approximately $0 compared to $288,000, respectively. The loss in 2019 was derived from the extinguishment of embedded derivative liabilities upon repayment of its related debt. No other derivative liabilities were extinguished during 2020.
Warrant modification expense. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, warrant modification expense was approximately $0 and $412,000, respectively. The warrant modification expense in 2019 was related to an amendment to warrants that extended the expiration date by two years. There was no warrant modification in 2020.
Income tax benefit. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our income tax (expense) and benefit was approximately ($15,000) and $17,000, respectively. Our income tax benefit for 2019 was a result of favorable adjustments due to lapses of statutes of limitations on its Israel tax positions. In 2020, there was no such adjustment.
Net Loss. Our net loss decreased by approximately $1,469,000, or 25%, to approximately $4,325,000 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 from approximately $5,794,000 during the same period in 2019. The decrease in net loss resulted primarily from the factors described above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses in the amount of approximately $4,325,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 and had negative cash flow from operating activities of $3,391,00 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Although we expect to continue to incur losses and negative cash flows from operating activities, we had a cash balance of just over $7,533,000 as of December 31, 2020 and therefore, we have sufficient resources to fund our operation for the next twelve months from the date of this filing. The Company may need to continue to raise additional capital to finance its losses and negative cash flows from operations beyond the next twelve months and may continue to be dependent on additional capital raising as long as our products do not reach commercial profitability. If we are unable to obtain stockholder ratification of certain prior issuances of our common stock and approval of an increase in the number of authorized shares of our common stock, we will be unable to issue common stock or convertible instruments. As a result, the Company will be limited in its ability to raise additional capital.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we met our short-term liquidity requirements from our existing cash reserves and proceeds from the sale of our equity securities; $9,479,000 of net proceeds from the sale of common stock in underwritten public offerings, received $200,000 through the issuance of notes payable from a related party and received $42,000 from the Paycheck Protection Program. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of our available funds will depend on many factors, including our ability to successfully commercialize our products, our development of future products and competing technological and market developments as well as our ability to overcome obstacles that may be presented due to developments caused by the coronavirus outbreak. We expect to continue to incur losses and negative flows from operations. We intend to use the proceeds generated from equity financings, or strategic alliances with third parties, either alone or in combination with equity financing to meet our short-term liquidity requirements as well as to advance our long-term plans. While we believe we have sufficient capital to execute our business plan over the next twelve months, there are no assurances that we will not need to raise additional capital at a later time, or that we would be able to raise additional capital, if required, on terms favorable to us.
We do not have any material commitments to capital expenditures as of December 31, 2020, and we are not aware of any material trends in capital resources that would impact our business.
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2019
General. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of approximately $7,533,000, compared to approximately $1,338,000 as of December 31, 2019. We have historically met our cash needs through a combination of issuance of equity, borrowing activities and sales. Our cash requirements are generally for product development, research and development cost, marketing and sales activities, general and administrative cost, capital expenditures and general working capital.
Cash used in our operating activities was approximately $3,391,000 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and approximately $3,874,000 for the same period in 2019. The decrease in our net cash used in operating activities in the amount of $483,000 is mainly attributable to the decrease in noncash expense of stock-based compensation, partially offset by deferred revenue and the increase in cash used on accounts payables.
Cash used in our investing activities was approximately $2,000 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to cash used in our investing activities was $0 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
Cash provided by financing activities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $9,522,000 which was mostly the net proceeds received from the sale of common stock in private placements completed in 2020 compared to $4,316,000 in 2019, which was the net proceeds received from the sale of Series E Preferred Stock and common stock in private placements 2019. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including our ability to successfully commercialize our products, our development of future products and competing technological and market developments.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we have no off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations, or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons that have, or may have, a material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Factors That May Affect Future Operations
We believe that our future operating results will continue to be subject to quarterly variations based upon a wide variety of factors, including the ordering patterns of our distributors, timing of regulatory approvals, the implementation of various phases of our clinical trials and manufacturing efficiencies due to the learning curve of utilizing new materials and equipment as well issues that may continue to occur due to the development of the coronavirus outbreak. While there were significant delays in the production of goods due to COVID-19 issues, presently, we are no longer experiencing such delays in the production of our products. That said, there are no assurances that if a second wave of the pandemic occurs that we will not experience significant delays in the future. Our operating results could also be impacted by a weakening of the Euro and strengthening of the New Israeli Shekel, or NIS, both against the U.S. dollar. Lastly, other economic conditions we cannot foresee may affect customer demand, such as individual country reimbursement policies pertaining to our products.