Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion highlights the principal factors that have affected our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and capital resources for the periods described. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes in Item 8, Part 2 of this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements. Please see “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for the risks, uncertainties and assumptions associated with these forward-looking statements.
OVERVIEW
Our Business, Industry and Target Market
We are a natural health and wellness company primarily engaged in the manufacture and sale of nutritional and personal care products. We are a Utah corporation with our principal place of business in Lehi, Utah, and sell our products to a sales force of independent consultants who use the products themselves or resell them to consumers.
Our independent consultants market and sell our products to customers and sponsor other independent consultants who also market our products to customers. Our sales are highly dependent upon the number and productivity of our independent consultants. Growth in sales volume generally requires an increase in the productivity of our independent consultants and/or growth in the total number of independent consultants. We seek to motivate and provide incentives to our independent consultants by offering high quality products and providing independent consultants with product support, training seminars, sales conventions, travel programs and financial incentives.
In or about December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2 "COVID-19", began aggressively spreading throughout the world, including all the primary markets where we conduct business. As COVID-19 has spread throughout the world, it has impacted our markets differently. Throughout our markets, governments issued orders to shelter in place and other restrictions that have limited the ability of our independent consultants to meet with consumers, which put downward pressure on our sales in many of our markets and added substantial uncertainties to our global supply chain. However, despite such restrictions, we experienced an increase in sales during the fourth quarter due primarily to increased demand for nutritional supplements. Although we are taking appropriate actions to mitigate the effects COVID-19 may have on our business, such actions may ultimately be insufficient to avoid substantial impact on the consolidated financial statement or material health of the Company. At this time, the duration of any business disruption and related financial impact cannot be reasonably estimated.
In 2020, we experienced an increase in our consolidated net sales of 6.3 percent (or 6.6 percent in local currencies) compared to 2019. Asia net sales increased approximately 0.1 percent (or 0.1 percent in local currencies) compared to 2019. Europe net sales increased approximately 24.3 percent (or 24.0 percent in local currencies) compared to 2019. North America net sales increased approximately 5.3 percent (or 5.4 percent in local currencies) compared to 2019. Latin America and Other net sales increased approximately 1.4 percent (or 5.1 percent in local currencies) compared to 2019.
In absolute terms, selling, general and administrative expenses increased $2.6 million during 2020, and as a percentage of net sales were 34.1 percent and 35.5 percent for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
As an international business, we have significant sales and costs denominated in currencies other than the U.S. Dollar. Sales in international markets denominated in foreign currencies are expected to continue to represent a substantial portion of our sales. Likewise, we expect foreign markets with functional currencies other than the U.S. Dollar will continue to represent a substantial portion of our overall sales and related operating expenses. Accordingly, changes in foreign currency exchange rates could materially affect sales and costs or the comparability of sales and costs from period to period as a result of translating foreign markets financial statements into our reporting currency.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and form the basis for the following discussion and analysis on critical accounting policies and estimates. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On a regular basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates and those differences could have a material effect on our financial position and results of operations. We have discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Board of Directors and our Audit Committee.
A summary of our significant accounting policies is provided in Note 1, "Nature of Operations and Significant Accounting Policies," to our Consolidated Financial Statements, in Item 8, Part 2 of this report. We believe the critical accounting policies and estimates described below reflect our more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. The impact and any associated risks on our business that are related to these policies are also discussed throughout this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” where such policies affect reported and expected financial results.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue recognition practices are discussed in Note 2, "Revenue Recognition," to our Consolidated Financial Statements, in Item 8, Part 2 of this report.
Inventories
Inventories are adjusted to lower of cost and net realizable value, using the first-in, first-out method. The components of inventory cost include raw materials, labor and overhead. To estimate any necessary adjustments, various assumptions are made in regard to excess or slow-moving inventories, non-conforming inventories, expiration dates, current and future product demand, production planning and market conditions. If future demand and market conditions are less favorable than our assumptions, additional inventory adjustments could be required.
Incentive Trip Accrual
We accrue expenses associated with our direct sales program, which rewards independent consultants with paid attendance for incentive trips, including our conventions and meetings. Expenses associated with incentive trips are accrued over qualification periods as the trips are earned. We specifically analyze incentive trip accruals based on historical and current sales trends as well as contractual obligations when evaluating the adequacy of the incentive trip accrual. Actual results could generate liabilities in amounts greater or less than the amounts recorded. We accrued incentive trip costs of approximately $6.4 million and $5.5 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which are included in accrued liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. Due to restrictions associated with COVID-19, we were unable to hold traditional incentive trips during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Contingencies
We are involved in certain legal proceedings. When a loss is considered probable in connection with litigation or non-income tax contingencies and when such loss can be reasonably estimated, we recognize a liability within a best estimate range related to the contingency. If there is no best estimate, we record the minimum of the range. As additional information becomes available, we assess the liability related to the contingency and revise the estimate. Revisions in estimates of the liabilities could materially affect our results of operations in the period of adjustment. Contingencies are discussed in further detail in Note 13, “Commitments and Contingencies,” to our Consolidated Financial Statements, in Item 8, Part 2 of this report.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and contingent reserves reflect our best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining consolidated income tax expense.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenue and expense. In evaluating our ability to recover deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations. In projecting future taxable income, we develop assumptions including the amount of future state, federal and foreign pretax operating income, the reversal of temporary differences, and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income, and are consistent with the plans and estimates that we are using to manage the underlying businesses. Valuation allowances are recorded as reserves against net deferred tax assets when it is determined that net deferred tax assets are not likely to be realized in the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had recorded valuation allowances of $15.3 million and $21.4 million, respectively, as offsets to deferred tax assets.
At December 31, 2020, foreign subsidiaries had unused operating loss carryovers for tax purposes of approximately $6.0 million. The net operating losses will expire at various dates from 2020 through 2029, with the exception of those in some foreign jurisdictions where there is no expiration. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $14.5 million of foreign tax and withholding credits. Of the $14.5 million credits, $14.1 million are foreign tax credits, most of which expire in 2024 and the majority of which are offset by valuation allowances.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions across our global operations. Income tax positions must meet a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold to be recognized.
PRESENTATION
Net sales represents gross sales including shipping and handling offset by volume rebates given to independent consultants. Volume rebates as a percentage of retail sales may vary by country, depending upon regulatory restrictions that limit or otherwise restrict rebates. We also offer reduced volume rebates with respect to certain products and promotions worldwide.
Our gross profit consists of net sales less cost of sales, which represents our manufacturing costs, the price we pay to raw material suppliers and manufacturers of our products, and duties and tariffs, as well as shipping and handling costs related to product shipments and distribution to our independent consultants.
Volume incentives are a significant part of our direct sales marketing program, and represent commission payments made to our independent consultants. These payments are designed to provide incentives for reaching higher sales levels through their own sales and the sales of independent consultants in their sales organization. Volume incentives vary slightly, on a percentage basis, by product due to our pricing policies and commission plans in place in various operations.
Selling, general and administrative expenses represent operating expenses, components of which include labor and benefits, sales events, professional fees, travel and entertainment, consultant marketing, occupancy costs, communication costs, bank fees, independent service fees paid to independent service providers in China, depreciation and amortization, and other miscellaneous operating expenses.
Most of our sales to independent consultants outside the United States are made in the respective local currencies. In preparing our consolidated financial statements, sales are translated into U.S. dollars using average exchange rates.
Additionally, the majority of our purchases from suppliers are generally made in U.S. dollars. Consequently, a strengthening of the U.S. dollar versus a foreign currency can have a negative impact on our reported sales and contribution margins and can generate transaction losses on intercompany payable balances in the local markets.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table summarizes our consolidated net income (loss) from continuing operations results as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated:
Net Sales
International operations have provided, and are expected to continue to provide, a significant portion of our total net sales. As a result, total net sales will continue to be affected by fluctuations in the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies. In order to provide a framework for assessing how our underlying businesses performed, excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations, in addition to comparing the percent change in net sales from one period to another in U.S. dollars, we present net sales excluding the impact of foreign exchange fluctuations. We compare the percentage change in net sales from one period to another period by excluding the effects of foreign currency exchange as shown below. Net sales excluding the impact of foreign exchange fluctuations is not a U.S. GAAP financial measure and removes from net sales in U.S. dollars the impact of changes in exchange rates between the U.S. dollar and the functional currencies of our foreign subsidiaries, by translating the current period net sales into U.S. dollars using the same foreign currency exchange rates that were used to translate the net sales for the previous comparable period. We believe presenting the impact of foreign currency fluctuations is useful to investors because it allows a more meaningful comparison of net sales of our foreign operations from period to period. However, net sales excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net sales in U.S. dollar measures that reflect current period exchange rates, or to other financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Throughout the last five years, foreign currency exchange rates have fluctuated significantly. See