Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “company,” “ARYA Sciences Acquisition Corp III,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to ARYA Sciences Acquisition Corp III. The following discussion and analysis of the company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on March 27, 2020 as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). Our sponsor is ARYA Sciences Holdings III, a Cayman Islands exempted limited company.
Our registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on August 6, 2020. On August 11, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 14,950,000 Class A ordinary shares (the “Public Shares”), including the 1,950,000 Public Shares as a result of the Underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option, at an offering price of $10.00 per Public Share, generating gross proceeds of $149.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $8.8 million, inclusive of approximately $5.2 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (the “private placement”) of 499,000 private placement shares, at a price of $10.00 per private placement share to our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $5.0 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the private placement, $149.5 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement were placed in a trust account, located in the United States at J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and are invested only in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market fund meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
If we have not completed a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or August 11, 2022 or with respect to any other provision relating to the rights of Public Shareholders, unless we provide the Public Shareholders with the opportunity to redeem their Class A ordinary shares in conjunction with any such amendment, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay our income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
We reviewed a number of opportunities to enter into a business combination with an operating business before entering on February 7, 2021 into the business combination agreement (“Business Combination Agreement”), by and among the company, Mako Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Merger Sub”), and Nautilus Biotechnology, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Nautilus”). We intend to finance the Business Combination through a combination of (i) shares of New Nautilus Common Stock (as defined below) issued to the equityholders of Nautilus, (ii) cash held in the trust account net of redemptions and deferred underwriting discounts and (iii) gross proceeds from the PIPE Financing (as defined below).
The issuance of additional shares in a business combination:
•
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in our initial public offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A ordinary shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
•
may subordinate the rights of holders of Class A ordinary shares if preference shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A ordinary shares;
•
could cause a change in control if a substantial number of our Class A ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
•
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
•
may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares.
Similarly, if we issue debt or otherwise incur significant debt, it could result in:
•
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
•
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
•
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
•
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
•
our inability to pay dividends on our ordinary shares;
•
using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our ordinary shares, if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
•
limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
•
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
•
limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.0 million in cash held outside of the trust account, approximately $149.5 million in cash held in the trust account. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete the Business Combination will be successful.
Proposed Nautilus Business Combination and related Proposed Transactions
The Business Combination Agreement provides for, among other things, the following transactions: (i) Nautilus will changes its name to “Nautilus Subsidiary, Inc.” (or another name mutually agreed to by us and Nautilus); (ii) we will become a Delaware corporation (the “Domestication”) and, in connection with the Domestication, (A) our name will be changed to “Nautilus Biotechnology, Inc.” (“New Nautilus”) and (B) each of our outstanding Class A ordinary shares and outstanding Class B ordinary shares will become one share of common stock of New Nautilus (the “New Nautilus Common Stock”); and (iii) following the Domestication, Merger Sub will merge with and into Nautilus, with Nautilus as the surviving company in the merger and, after giving effect to such merger, continuing as a wholly-owned subsidiary of New Nautilus (the “Merger”). The Domestication, the Merger and the other transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement are hereinafter referred to as the “Nautilus Business Combination.”
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, outstanding shares of Nautilus (other than treasury shares and any Company Dissenting Shares (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement) will be exchanged for shares of New Nautilus Common Stock and outstanding Nautilus options to purchase shares of Nautilus (whether vested or unvested) will be exchanged for comparable options to purchase New Nautilus Common Stock, in each case, based on an implied Nautilus equity value of $900 million.
The Nautilus Business Combination is expected to close in the second quarter of 2021, following the receipt of the required approval by our shareholders and the fulfillment of other customary closing conditions.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, the company, the sponsor, and each other holder of Class B ordinary shares of ARYA (the “Other
Class B Shareholders”) and Nautilus entered into the Sponsor Letter Agreement (the “Sponsor Letter Agreement”), pursuant to which the sponsor and the Other Class B Shareholders, among other things, (i) vote in favor of each of the transaction proposals to be voted upon at the meeting of ARYA shareholders, including approval of the Business Combination Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby (including the Merger) and (ii) waive any adjustment to the conversion ratio set forth in the governing documents of the company or any other anti-dilution or similar protection with respect to the Class B ordinary shares (whether resulting from the transactions contemplated by the Subscription Agreements (as defined below) or otherwise); and (iii) be bound by certain transfer restrictions with respect to his, her or its shares in the company prior to the closing of the Nautilus Business Combination, in each case, on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Sponsor Letter Agreement.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, we entered into subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors, including, among others, Perceptive Life Sciences Master Fund Ltd., a fund managed by Perceptive Advisors, an affiliate of the sponsor, as well as certain equity holders of Nautilus and additional third party investors. Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, each investor agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and the Company agreed to issue and sell to such investors, on the Closing Date (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement) immediately prior to the Closing (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), an aggregate of 20,000,000 shares of the New Nautilus Common Stock for a purchase price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $200,000,000.
Within 24 hours of the signing of the Business Combination Agreement, certain directors, officers and stockholders of Nautilus entered into a Transaction Support Agreement with the company, pursuant to which such parties have agreed to, among other things, (i) support and vote in favor of the Business Combination Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby (including the Merger), and (ii) be bound by certain other covenants and agreements related to the Nautilus Business Combination, including a restriction on transfers with respect to his, her or its shares in Nautilus prior to the closing of the Nautilus Business Combination.
The company, the Perceptive Shareholders (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), the Other Class B Shareholders and certain Nautilus shareholders entered into an amended and restated registration rights and lock-up agreement, pursuant to which, among other things, the Perceptive Shareholders, the Other Class B Shareholders and the certain Nautilus shareholders agreed not to effect any sale or distribution of the company equity securities during the lock-up period described therein and will be granted certain customary registration rights, in each case subject to, and conditioned upon and effective as of, the effective time of the Merger.
A copy of each of the above referenced agreements is filed as exhibits with a Current Report on Form 8-K, filed with the SEC on February 8, 2021.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $523,000, which consisted of approximately $576,000 in general and administrative expenses partially offset by approximately $53,000 of net gains, dividends and interest on investments held in trust account.
Going Concern Consideration
At December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.0 million in our operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $916,000.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from our sponsor to cover certain of our offering costs in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, the loan proceeds of $200,000 from our sponsor pursuant to a note agreement (the “Note”), and the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account. We repaid the Note in full on August 11, 2020. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or our officers and directors to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On April 2, 2020, our sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain expenses and offering costs on behalf of our company in consideration of 3,593,750 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share. In July 2020, the sponsor transferred an aggregate of 90,000 founder shares to our independent directors. On August 6, 2020, we effected a share capitalization resulting in the initial shareholders holding 3,737,500 founder shares. All shares and the associated amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the share capitalization. The sponsor agreed to forfeit up to 487,500 founder shares to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the Underwriters, so that the founder shares would represent 20.0% of our issued and outstanding ordinary shares (excluding the private placement shares) after the Initial Public Offering. The Underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option on August 11, 2020; thus, these 487,500 founder shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
The initial shareholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their founder shares until the earlier to occur of: (i) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination and (ii) subsequent to the initial Business Combination, (A) if the closing price of our Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, or (B) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of the Public Shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Shares
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement of 499,000 private placement shares, at a price of $10.00 per private placement share to the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $5.0 million. The private placement shares will not be transferable or salable until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination. A portion of the proceeds from the private placement shares was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the trust account.
The sponsor and our officers and directors agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their private placement shares until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
On April 2, 2020, the sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover for expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to the Note. This loan was non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We borrowed $200,000 under the Note and fully repaid this Note on August 11, 2020.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required in the form of Working Capital Loans. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans may be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into shares of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $10.00 per share. The shares would be identical to the private placement shares. To date, we have no outstanding borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on the date the registration statement relating to our Initial Public Offering became effective through the earlier of consummation of the initial Business Combination and our liquidation, we reimburse the sponsor for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us in the amount of $10,000 per month. We incurred approximately $48,000 for these services and are included in general and administrative expenses in the accompanying statement of operations for the period from March 27, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020.
Other Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than for an agreement to pay our sponsor fees of $10,000 per month for administrative support services and as described above.
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of founder shares, private placement shares, and securities that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, if any, are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent our completion of a business combination. However, the registration and shareholder rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period, which occurs (i) in the case of the founder shares, in accordance with the letter agreement our initial shareholders entered into and (ii) in the case of the private placement shares, 30 days after the completion of our business combination. The company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the Underwriters a 45-day option from the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 1,950,000 additional public shares to cover over-allotments at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The Underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option on August 11, 2020.
The Underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of $0.20 per public share, or $3.0 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per public share, or approximately $5.2 million in the aggregate, will be payable to the Underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the Underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policy
Investment Securities Held in Trust Account
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the private placement, we were required to place net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement in a trust account, which may be invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by management, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account. Investments held in trust account are classified as trading securities, which are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of the reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of trading securities is included in investment income on trust account in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in trust account are determined using available market information, other than for investments in open-ended money market funds with published daily net asset values (“NAV”), in which case the Company uses NAV as a practical expedient to fair value. The NAV on these investments is typically held constant at $1.00 per unit.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 14,023,673 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
Net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the periods. Our statement of operations include a presentation of income (loss) per share for ordinary shares subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted, for Class A ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net gain, dividends and interest on investments held in trust account, net of applicable taxes available to be withdrawn from the trust account, resulting in net income of approximately $53,000 for the period from March 27, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 by the weighted average number of Class A ordinary shares outstanding for the period. Net loss per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class B ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net loss, less income attributable to Class A ordinary shares by the weighted average number of Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the periods.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for sale of an asset or paid for transfer of a liability, in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. GAAP establishes a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). These tiers include:
•
Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical instruments in active markets;
•
Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and
•
Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
In some circumstances, the inputs used to measure fair value might be categorized within different levels of the fair value hierarchy. In those instances, the fair value measurement is categorized in its entirety in the fair value hierarchy based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
As of December 31, 2020, the carrying values of cash, prepaid expenses and accrued expenses approximate their fair values due to the short-term nature of the instruments. The Company’s investments held in trust account is comprised of investments in U.S. Treasury securities with an original maturity of 180 days or less and are recognized at fair value. The fair value of investments held in trust account is determined using quoted prices in active markets.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We do not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material impact on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of executive compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.