Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes related to those statements, as well as the other financial information included in this Form 10-K. Some of our discussion is forward-looking and involves risks and uncertainties. For information regarding risk factors that could have a material adverse effect on our business, refer to Item 1A of this Form 10-K, “Risk Factors.”
The Company
Navidea Biopharmaceuticals, Inc. is a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of precision immunodiagnostic agents and immunotherapeutics. Navidea is developing multiple precision-targeted products based on our Manocept platform to enhance patient care by identifying the sites and pathways of undetected disease and enable better diagnostic accuracy, clinical decision-making and targeted treatment.
Navidea’s Manocept platform is predicated on the ability to specifically target the CD206 mannose receptor expressed on activated macrophages. The Manocept platform serves as the molecular backbone of Tc99m tilmanocept, the first product developed and commercialized by Navidea based on the platform. Other than Tc99m tilmanocept, which the Company has a license to distribute outside of Canada, Mexico and the United States, none of the Company’s drug product candidates have been approved for sale in any market.
We manage our business based on two primary types of drug products: (i) diagnostic substances, including Tc99m tilmanocept and other diagnostic applications of our Manocept platform, and (ii) therapeutic applications of our Manocept platform. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for more information about our business segments.
In the near term, the Company intends to continue to develop our additional imaging product candidates into advanced clinical testing with the goal of extending the regulatory approvals for use of the Tc99m tilmanocept product. We will also be evaluating potential funding and other resources required for continued development, regulatory approval and commercialization of any Manocept platform product candidates that we identify for further development, and potential options for advancing development.
Outlook
Our operating expenses in recent years have been focused primarily on support of both diagnostic and therapeutic applications of our Manocept platform, and Tc99m tilmanocept. We incurred approximately $4.9 million and $5.3 million in total on research and development activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Of the total amounts we spent on research and development during those periods, excluding costs related to our internal research and development headcount and our general and administrative staff which we do not currently allocate among the various development programs that we have underway, we incurred out-of-pocket charges by program as follows:
(a)
Certain development program expenditures were offset by grant reimbursement revenues totaling $696,000 and $611,000 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We expect to continue the advancement of our efforts with our Manocept platform during 2021. We currently expect our total research and development expenses, including both out-of-pocket charges as well as internal headcount and support costs, to be higher in 2021 than in 2020. However, the ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the global economy and may impact our operations, including the potential interruption of our clinical trial activities and our supply chain. For example, the COVID-19 pandemic may delay enrollment in our clinical trials due to prioritization of hospital resources toward the outbreak, and some patients may be unwilling to enroll in our trials or be unable to comply with clinical trial protocols if quarantines impede patient movement or interrupt healthcare services, which would delay our ability to conduct clinical trials or release clinical trial results. The spread of an infectious disease, including COVID-19, may also result in the inability of our suppliers to deliver clinical drug supplies on a timely basis or at all. In addition, hospitals may reduce staffing and reduce or postpone certain treatments in response to the spread of an infectious disease. Such events may result in a period of business disruption, and in reduced operations, or doctors and medical providers may be unwilling to participate in our clinical trials, any of which could materially affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
The extent to which the ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning the severity and spread of COVID-19, the actions taken by federal, state and local governmental authorities, both domestic and foreign, as well as private parties, to contain or treat its impact, and other events outside of our control. The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected economies and financial markets worldwide, resulting in an economic downturn that could impact our business, financial condition and results of operations, including our ability to obtain additional funding, if needed. The funding from the February 2020 transactions described below in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” was received on a delayed basis during the second and third quarters of 2020, due in part to the COVID-19 pandemic and its devastating impact on global financial markets.
Tc99m tilmanocept is approved by the EMA for use in imaging and intraoperative detection of sentinel lymph nodes draining a primary tumor in adult patients with breast cancer, melanoma, or localized squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity in the EU. We anticipate that we will incur costs related to supporting our product, regulatory, manufacturing and commercial activities related to the potential marketing registration and sale of Tc99m tilmanocept in markets other than the EU. There can be no assurance that Tc99m tilmanocept will achieve regulatory approval in any market other than the EU, or if approved in those markets, that it will achieve market acceptance in the EU or any other market. See Item 1A - “Risk Factors.”
We continue to evaluate existing and emerging data on the potential use of Manocept-related agents in the diagnosis, disease-staging and treatment of disorders in which macrophages are involved, such as RA, KS, NASH and other disease states, to define areas of focus, development pathways and partnering options to capitalize on the Manocept platform. We will also be evaluating potential funding and other resources required for continued development, regulatory approval and commercialization of any Manocept platform product candidates that we identify for further development, and potential options for advancing development. There can be no assurance of obtaining funding or other resources on terms acceptable to us, if at all, that further evaluation or development will be successful, that any Manocept platform product candidate will ultimately achieve regulatory approval, or if approved, the extent to which it will achieve market acceptance. See Item 1A - “Risk Factors.”
Results of Operations
Since our pharmaceutical product candidates are not yet generating significant commercial revenue, the discussion of our revenue focuses on the grant and other revenue and our operating variances focus on our product development programs and the supporting general and administrative expenses.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Royalty Revenue. During 2020 and 2019, we recognized royalty revenue of $8,000 and $17,000, respectively, related to our license agreement with SpePharm in Europe.
License Revenue. During 2020, we recognized license revenue of $111,000 related to net transitional sales from SpePharm in Europe. During 2019, we recognized license revenue of $10,000 related to the sublicense of NAV4694 to Meilleur.
Grant and Other Revenue. During 2020, we recognized $796,000 of grant and other revenue compared to $631,000 in 2019. Grant revenue during both periods was primarily related to SBIR grants from the NIH supporting Manocept development. Other revenue for 2020 included $100,000 from Alseres for the partial recovery of debts previously written off in 2015. Other revenue for 2019 included $20,000 related to development work performed at the request of our European and Chinese marketing partners.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses decreased $408,000, or 8%, to $4.9 million during 2020 from $5.3 million during 2019. The decrease was primarily due to net decreases in drug project expenses related to (i) decreased therapeutics development costs of $206,000, including decreased preclinical and clinical development costs; (ii) decreased Manocept diagnostic development costs of $136,000 including decreased clinical trial costs offset by increased manufacturing-related activities and license fees; and (iii) decreased Tc99m tilmanocept development costs of $94,000 including decreased license fees offset increased manufacturing-related activities; offset by (iv) increased NAV4694 development costs of $15,000 due to the reversal of certain previously accrued expenses in 2019. The net decrease in research and development expenses also included decreased regulatory consulting and travel expenses totaling $59,000, offset by increased employee compensation including incentive-based awards of $72,000.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $420,000, or 7%, to $6.7 million during 2020 from $6.3 million during 2019. The net increase was primarily due to increased legal and professional services of $335,000, increased employee compensation including incentive-based awards of $257,000, increased EMA annual fees of $132,000 following termination of the SpePharm agreement, and increased taxes of $61,000, offset by decreased travel of $95,000, decreased depreciation and amortization of $74,000, decreased losses on disposal of assets of $54,000, decreased insurance costs of $37,000, and decreased investor relations services of $35,000.
Other Income (Expense). Other expense, net, was $11,000 during 2020 compared to other income, net, of $18,000 during 2019. During 2020 and 2019, we recognized interest income of $18,000 and $33,000, respectively. During 2020 and 2019, we recorded interest expense of $7,000 and $8,000, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash balances increased $1.6 million to $2.6 million at December 31, 2020 from $1.0 million at December 31, 2019. The net increase was primarily due to net proceeds from issuance of preferred stock of $5.9 million, net proceeds from issuance of common stock of $4.3 million, and proceeds from notes payable of $366,000, offset by cash used to fund our operations of $8.2 million, principal payments on notes payable of $369,000, patent and trademark costs of $278,000, and purchases of equipment of $136,000.
Operating Activities. Cash used in operations was $8.2 million during 2020 compared to $9.4 million cash used in operations during 2019.
Stock subscriptions and other receivables increased $2.1 million to $3.0 million at December 31, 2020 from $901,000 at December 31, 2019, primarily related to stock subscriptions of $2.9 million as of December 31, 2020 offset by the receipt of stock subscriptions of $812,000 in January 2020 coupled with decreased grant revenue receivable, offset by increased license revenue receivable from SpePharm of $60,000.
Inventory increased to $170,000 at December 31, 2020 from $0 at December 31, 2019, primarily due to a net increase in finished good inventory as a result of termination of the SpePharm agreement, coupled with the reclassification of materials inventory that is now available for use in future production.
Prepaid expenses and other current assets decreased $797,000 to $170,000 at December 31, 2020 from $967,000 at December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the receipt of an alternative minimum tax credit refund coupled with the reclassification of materials inventory that is now available for use in future production, offset by a net increase in prepaid insurance.
Accounts payable increased $50,000 to $1.2 million at December 31, 2020 from $1.1 million at December 31, 2019, primarily driven by net increased payables due for Navidea Europe costs and legal and professional services, offset by net decreased payables due for Manocept development costs, therapeutics development costs, investor relations services, and manufacturing-related activities. Accrued liabilities and other current liabilities increased $362,000 to $2.5 million at December 31, 2020 from $2.2 million at December 31, 2019. Increased accruals for Manocept development costs, legal and professional services, and incentive-based compensation were offset by decreased accruals for Dr. Goldberg’s termination costs. Our payable and accrual balances will continue to fluctuate, with planned increases in development activity related to the Manocept platform and Navidea Europe offset by decreased legal fees as we work to resolve our legal disputes.
Investing Activities. Investing activities used $413,000 during 2020 compared to $770,000 provided during 2019. Investing activities during 2020 included patent and trademark costs of $278,000 and capital expenditures of $136,000, primarily for production and computer equipment. Investing activities during 2019 included maturities and sales of available-for-sale securities of $800,000, offset by patent and trademark costs of $57,000.
Financing Activities. Financing activities provided $10.2 million during 2020 compared to $6.2 million provided during 2019. The $10.2 million provided by financing activities during 2020 consisted primarily of net proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock of $5.9 million, net proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $4.3 million, and proceeds from notes payable of $366,000, offset by principal payments on notes payable of $369,000. The $6.2 million provided by financing activities in 2019 consisted primarily of proceeds from issuance of Common Stock of $7.1 million, offset by payment of Common Stock issuance costs of $572,000 and principal payments on the IPFS and First Insurance Funding notes payable of $359,000.
Registered Offerings
On February 14, 2020, we executed an agreement with an investor to purchase approximately 1.6 million shares of our Common Stock at a price of $0.85 per share for aggregate gross proceeds to Navidea of $1.4 million. The offering was made pursuant to our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-222092), which was declared effective by the SEC on December 27, 2017, including the prospectus contained therein, as well as a prospectus supplement filed with the SEC on February 18, 2020. See Notes 2 and 14 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Private Placements
On February 13, 2020, we executed a stock purchase agreement with John K. Scott, Jr. to purchase approximately 2.4 million shares of Common Stock for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $2.0 million. A registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-248404) covering the resale of the shares of Common Stock issued to Mr. Scott was declared effective by the SEC on September 16, 2020. See Notes 2 and 14 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
On August 30, 2020, the Company entered into a Common Stock Purchase Agreement with each of the Investors named therein, pursuant to which the Investors agreed to purchase shares of our Common Stock. To date we have received only $25,000 of the $5.0 million that is currently owed under the Common Stock Purchase Agreement, and we cannot assure you that we will ever receive such remaining amount. We are continuing to evaluate our rights and remedies under that agreement. See Notes 2 and 14 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Series C Preferred Stock
On May 6, 2020, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement and Letter of Investment Intent with Keystone Capital Partners, LLC (“Keystone”) pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue to Keystone 420,000 shares of newly-designated Series C Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series C Preferred Stock”) for an aggregate purchase price of $4.2 million. All $4.2 million were received and the related Series C Preferred Stock was issued during the second and third quarters of 2020. The Series C Preferred Stock was guaranteed by a portion of the proceeds of the CRG Judgment. See Notes 2 and 14 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Series D Preferred Stock
On August 31, 2020, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement and Letter of Investment Intent (the “Series D Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement”) with Keystone pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue to Keystone 150,000 shares of newly-designated Series D Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series D Preferred Stock”) for an aggregate purchase price of $15.0 million. Pursuant to the Series D Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement, Keystone agreed to purchase Series D Preferred Stock in amounts to be determined by Keystone in one or more closings during the nine-month period following the date on which the prospectus supplement to register the underlying Common Stock was filed with the SEC, provided that all of the Series D Preferred Stock must be purchased by such date. The Series D Preferred Stock will be convertible into a maximum of 5,147,000 shares of Common Stock. See Notes 2, 14 and 20(a) to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Series E Preferred Stock
On March 2, 2021, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement and Letter of Investment Intent with an existing accredited investor, John K. Scott, Jr., pursuant to which the Company issued to Mr. Scott in a private placement transaction 50,000 shares of newly-designated Series E Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series E Preferred Stock”) for an aggregate purchase price of $5.0 million. The Series E Preferred Stock will be convertible into a maximum of 2,173,913 shares of Common Stock. See Notes 2 and 20(b) to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Jubilant Memorandum of Understanding
On August 9, 2020, the Company entered into a binding memorandum of understanding (“MOU”) with Jubilant Draximage Inc., dba Jubilant Radiopharma, Radiopharmaceuticals Division (“Jubilant”). The MOU outlines the terms and framework for a potential Exclusive License and Distribution Agreement (“ELDA”) for Navidea’s Tc99m-Tilmanocept Rheumatoid Arthritis diagnostic application (“TRA”) in the United States, Canada, Mexico, and Latin America. In connection with the MOU, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement with Jubilant, pursuant to which Jubilant purchased $1.0 million in shares of the Company’s Common Stock in exchange for exclusivity of negotiations while due diligence efforts are completed.
The MOU outlines certain terms that are expected to be included in the ELDA, including:
●
Jubilant to provide Navidea with an additional $19.0 million in the form of stock purchases and license fees, subject to the achievement of certain milestones, to be used to fund Navidea’s upcoming NAV3-32 (Phase 2b) and NAV3-33 (Phase 3) trials.
●
Jubilant will pay license fees and sales-based royalties to Navidea based on revenue generated from the sale of TRA in the licensed territory.
●
Jubilant will serve as the exclusive commercial and distribution partner for TRA in the United States, Canada, Mexico, and Latin America. Jubilant will be responsible for all commercialization efforts within the licensed territory.
The execution of the ELDA is subject to certain conditions, including negotiation of a definitive agreement in mutually acceptable form and Jubilant’s completion of its due diligence. See Notes 2 and 14 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was enacted on March 27, 2020. Among the provisions contained in the CARES Act was the creation of the Payroll Protection Program (“PPP”) that provides for Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Section 7(a) loans for qualified small businesses. PPP loan proceeds are available to be used to pay for payroll costs, including salaries, commissions, and similar compensation, group health care benefits, and paid leaves; rent; utilities; and interest on certain other outstanding debt. On May 18, 2020, Fifth Third Bank (the “Lender”) funded a PPP loan to the Company in the amount of $366,000 (the “PPP Loan”). In accordance with the loan forgiveness requirements of the CARES Act, the Company used the proceeds from the PPP Loan primarily for payroll costs, rent and utilities. On February 23, 2021, the Lender notified the Company that the entire PPP Loan amount of $366,000 has been forgiven. See Notes 2 and 11 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Platinum Litigation
See Notes 2 and 13 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Goldberg Agreement and Litigation
See Notes 2, 9 and 13 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Summary
Our future liquidity and capital requirements will depend on a number of factors, including the ability of our distribution partners to achieve market acceptance of our products, our ability to complete the development and commercialization of new products, our ability to obtain milestone or development funds from potential development and distribution partners, regulatory actions by the FDA and international regulatory bodies, the ability to procure required financial resources, the outcome of any pending litigation, and intellectual property protection.
We plan to focus our resources during 2021 primarily on development of products based on the Manocept platform. Although management believes that it will be able to achieve this objective, it is subject to a number of variables beyond our control, including the nature and timing of any partnering opportunities, the ability to modify contractual commitments made in connection with these programs, and the timing and expense associated with suspension or alteration of clinical trials, and consequently we may need to seek additional financing in order to support our planned development programs.
We will continue to evaluate our timelines, strategic needs, and balance sheet requirements. If we attempt to raise additional capital through debt, royalty, equity or otherwise, we may not be successful in doing so on terms acceptable to the Company, if at all. Further, we may not be able to gain access and/or be able to secure new sources of funding, identify new development opportunities, successfully obtain regulatory approval for and commercialize new products, achieve significant product revenues from our products, or achieve or sustain profitability in the future.
The Company is currently engaged in litigation with Dr. Goldberg, CRG and Platinum-Montaur. In addition, the Company has experienced recurring net losses and has used significant cash to fund its operations. The Company has considerable discretion over the extent of development project expenditures and has the ability to curtail the related cash flows as needed. The Company also has funds remaining under outstanding grant awards, and continues working to establish new sources of funding, including collaborations, potential equity investments, and additional grant funding that can augment the balance sheet. However, the COVID-19 pandemic may negatively impact the Company’s operations, including possible effects on its financial condition, ability to access the capital markets on attractive terms or at all, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce. The spread of COVID-19 has impacted our operations, including the interruption of our clinical trial activities in Europe. For example, the COVID-19 outbreak has delayed enrollment in our NAV3-32 clinical study in the United Kingdom due to national COVID-19-related shutdowns. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected economies and financial markets worldwide, resulting in an economic downturn that could impact our business, financial condition and results of operations, including our ability to obtain additional funding, if needed. The funding from the February 2020 transactions described above was received on a delayed basis during the second and third quarters of 2020, due in part to the COVID-19 pandemic and its devastating impact on global financial markets. The Company will continue to evaluate the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic could have on the operations, financial position, and the results of operations and cash flows during fiscal year 2021 and beyond.
The Company has experienced recurring net losses and has used significant cash to fund its operations. The Company has considerable discretion over the extent of development project expenditures and has the ability to curtail the related cash flows as needed. The Company also has funds remaining under outstanding grant awards, and continues working to establish new sources of funding, including collaborations, potential equity investments, and additional grant funding that can augment the balance sheet. Based on our committed equity investments, current working capital, and our projected cash burn, management believes that the Company will be able to continue as a going concern for at least twelve months following the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and Item 1A - “Risk Factors.”
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Standards
See Notes 1(q) and 1(r) to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Revenue Recognition. We currently generate revenue primarily from grants to support various product development initiatives. We generally recognize grant revenue when expenses reimbursable under the grants have been paid and payments under the grants become contractually due.
We also earn revenues related to our licensing and distribution agreements. The consideration we are eligible to receive under our licensing and distribution agreements typically includes upfront payments, reimbursement for research and development costs, milestone payments, and royalties. Each licensing and distribution agreement is unique and requires separate assessment in accordance with current accounting standards.
Research and Development. Research and development (“R&D”) expenses include both internal R&D activities and external contracted services. Internal R&D activity expenses include salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation, as well as travel, supplies, and other costs to support our R&D staff. External contracted services include clinical trial activities, chemistry, manufacturing and control-related activities, and regulatory costs. R&D expenses are charged to operations as incurred. We review and accrue R&D expenses based on services performed and rely upon estimates of those costs applicable to the stage of completion of each project.
Series C and Series D Convertible Preferred Stock. The Company evaluated the provisions of the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, ASC 470, Debt, and Accounting Series Release (“ASR”) 268, Presentation in Financial Statements of “Redeemable Preferred Stocks.” Based on this evaluation, the Company determined that the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock are not mandatorily redeemable financial instruments and any obligation to issue a variable number of shares of Common Stock is not unconditional. Accordingly, the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock should be classified as equity. Neither the embedded conversion options nor the embedded call options meet the criteria to be separated from the Series C and Series D Preferred stock and thus these features should not be bifurcated and accounted for as derivatives. Additionally, the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock each contain a beneficial conversion feature (“BCF”) that results in an increase to additional paid-in capital and a discount on the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock. The discounts on the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock are considered to be fully amortized at the date of issuance because the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock is immediately convertible. This results in a deemed dividend at the date of issuance for the amount of the BCF. Finally, the Company determined that the conversion features of the Series C Preferred Stock could result in the Company being required to redeem a portion of the shares converted, thus the Series C Preferred Stock should be classified in mezzanine equity. The Series D Preferred Stock does not include such features and should not be classified in mezzanine equity.
Use of Estimates. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base these estimates and assumptions upon historical experience and existing, known circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Specifically, management may make significant estimates in the following areas:
●
Stock-Based Compensation. Stock-based payments to employees and directors, including grants of stock options and restricted stock, are recognized in the statements of operations based on their estimated fair values on the date of grant, subject to an estimated forfeiture rate. The fair value of each option award with time-based vesting provisions is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value such stock-based payments and the portion that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as compensation expense over either (1) the requisite service period or (2) the estimated performance period. The determination of fair value using the Black-Scholes option pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables, including expected stock price volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected dividends and projected employee stock option behaviors. The fair value of each option award with market-based vesting provisions is estimated on the date of grant using a Monte Carlo simulation to value such stock-based payments and the portion that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as compensation expense over either (1) the requisite service period or (2) the estimated performance period. The determination of fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables, including expected stock price volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected dividends and projected employee stock option behaviors.
We estimate the expected term based on the contractual term of the awards and employees' exercise and expected post-vesting termination behavior. Restricted stock awards are valued based on the closing stock price on the date of grant and amortized ratably over the estimated life of the award.
Since stock-based compensation is recognized only for those awards that are ultimately expected to vest, we have applied an estimated forfeiture rate to unvested awards for the purpose of calculating compensation cost. These estimates will be revised, if necessary, in future periods if actual forfeitures differ from estimates. Changes in forfeiture estimates impact compensation cost in the period in which the change in estimate occurs.
●
Fair Value of Warrants. We estimate the fair value of warrants using the Black-Scholes model, which is affected by our stock price and warrant exercise price, as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables, including expected stock price volatility and risk-free interest rate.