Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section contains forward-looking statements pertaining to, among other things, the commercialization of our product and product candidates, the expected continuation of our collaborative agreements, the receipt of research and development payments thereunder, the future achievement of various milestones in product development and the receipt of payments related thereto, the potential receipt of royalty payments, preclinical testing and clinical trials of potential products, the period of time that our existing capital resources will meet our funding requirements, and our financial results of operations. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various risks and uncertainties, including those set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K under the heading “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” See “Forward-Looking Statements” in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a neuroscience-focused, biopharmaceutical company dedicated to discovering, developing and delivering life-changing treatments for people with serious, challenging and under-addressed neurological, endocrine and psychiatric disorders. Our diverse portfolio includes United States Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, approved treatments for tardive dyskinesia, Parkinson’s disease, endometriosis*, uterine fibroids* and clinical programs in multiple therapeutic areas. For nearly three decades, we have specialized in targeting and interrupting disease-causing mechanisms involving the interconnected pathways of the nervous and endocrine systems. (*in collaboration with AbbVie Inc.)
We launched INGREZZA® (valbenazine) in the U.S. with our specialty sales force in May 2017, after receiving FDA approval for INGREZZA as the first FDA-approved drug for the treatment of tardive dyskinesia in April 2017. In September 2020, we launched ONGENTYS® (opicapone) in the U.S. leveraging our existing INGREZZA commercial infrastructure after receiving FDA approval for ONGENTYS for Parkinson's disease in April 2020. INGREZZA net product sales represent the significant majority of our total net product sales.
Our partner AbbVie Inc., or AbbVie, launched ORILISSA® (elagolix) in the U.S. and Canada in August and November 2018, respectively, after receiving FDA and Health Canada approval for ORILISSA for endometriosis in July and October 2018, respectively. In June 2020, AbbVie launched ORIAHNNTM (elagolix, estradiol, and norethindrone acetate; elagolix) in the U.S. after receiving FDA approval for ORIAHNN for uterine fibroids in May 2020. We receive royalties at tiered percentage rates on any net sales of ORILISSA and ORIAHNN.
In addition, we have a rapidly expanding pipeline of potential treatments and gene therapies for diseases such as Huntington’s disease, or HD, Parkinson’s disease, epilepsy, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, or CAH, schizophrenia and depression. Refer to Part I, Item 1, “Business” for more information about our exclusive and partnered commercial products, clinical development pipeline and research programs.
Highlights:
•INGREZZA net product sales for 2020 increased $240.2 million, or 31.9%, to $993.1 million, primarily reflecting strong refill and persistency rates for existing INGREZZA patients.
•We launched ONGENTYS in the U.S. in September 2020, after receiving FDA approval for ONGENTYS as an adjunctive therapy to levodopa/DOPA decarboxylase inhibitors in adult Parkinson's disease patients in April 2020.
•AbbVie launched ORIAHNN in the U.S. in June 2020, after receiving FDA approval for ORIAHNN as the first FDA-approved non-surgical, oral medication option for the management of heavy menstrual bleeding associated with uterine fibroids in pre-menopausal women in May 2020. We recognized a $30.0 million event-based milestone as revenue in the second quarter of 2020.
•Completed strategic partnerships with Idorsia Pharmaceuticals Ltd, or Idorsia, and Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, or Takeda, to expand clinical pipeline for epilepsy and psychiatry disorders. Recognized
in-process research and development, or IPR&D, expense for 2020 of $164.5 million, related to upfront payments.
•Total debt outstanding decreased by $136.2 million to $381.3 million after repurchase of approximately 26% of our debt outstanding in December 2020. The total aggregate repurchase price of $186.9 million was paid in cash and resulted in an $18.4 million loss.
•At December 31, 2020, in part because we achieved three years of cumulative pretax income, management determined that there is sufficient positive evidence to conclude that it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets of $319.4 million are realizable. We therefore reduced the valuation allowance accordingly.
Pipeline Highlights:
•Crinecerfont (NBI-74788): In July 2020, we initiated the CAHtalyst study, a global registrational Phase III, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of crinecerfont in 165 adult patients with classic CAH, followed by an open-label treatment period.
•NBI-827104 (ACT-709478): In November 2020, we initiated a Phase II clinical study for NBI-827104 in a rare pediatric epileptic encephalopathy known as Continuous Spike and Wave During Sleep.
•INGREZZA: In February 2021, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharmaceutical Company, or MTPC, reported positive top-line results from the J-KINECT Phase III study, designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of valbenazine in tardive dyskinesia. Detailed results from this trial will be presented at a future medical conference. With positive data in hand, a marketing authorization with the Ministry of Health and Welfare is planned for 2021 in Japan. In addition, MTPC submitted filings for marketing authorizations in South Korea, Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia, and Malaysia in 2020.
•NBIb-1817 (VY-AADC): On February 2, 2021, we notified Voyager Therapeutics, Inc., or Voyager, of our termination of the NBIb-1817 for Parkinson’s disease program. The effective date of this termination will be August 2, 2021. The termination does not apply to any other development program other than NBIb-1817 for Parkinson’s disease, and our collaboration and license agreement with Voyager will otherwise continue in effect.
COVID-19
The global COVID-19 pandemic has dramatically changed the ways in which we live and interact with one another. While we adapt to this new shared reality, our mission remains unchanged: to discover and develop life-changing treatments for people with serious, challenging and under-addressed disorders.
While we are unable to reliably estimate the duration or extent of any potential business disruption or financial impact during this time, including any impacts on INGREZZA product sales or R&D expense, we remain committed to (1) prioritizing the safety, health and well-being of patients, their caregivers, healthcare providers and our employees; (2) ensuring patients with tardive dyskinesia are well supported and have continued uninterrupted access to INGREZZA, for which we currently do not expect any supply disruption; and (3) advancing ongoing clinical studies. As part of this commitment, we implemented a “Work from Home Policy” in early March 2020 for employees not involved in business-critical activities. For employees involved in business-critical activities, we implemented safety measures designed to comply with federal, state and local guidelines.
Due to the impact of COVID-19, we initially paused enrollment of new patients in several of our clinical trials. Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, we began enrolling patients in our HD and CAH studies. To date, we have not experienced any interruption of our supply of drug products needed to support our ongoing clinical studies, but we expect that completion and data readouts for several of our ongoing and planned studies will be delayed.
We continue to believe that existing funds, cash generated from operations, and existing sources of and access to financing are adequate to satisfy our needs for working capital, capital expenditures, debt service requirements and other business development initiatives that we plan to strategically pursue. However, should the COVID-19 pandemic and any associated recession or depression continue for a prolonged period, our results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows could be materially impacted by lower revenues and profitability and a lower likelihood of effectively and efficiently developing new medicines.
Results of Operations
Revenues
The following table presents revenues by category.
Product Sales, net. Net product sales were $994.1 million for 2020, $752.9 million for 2019 and $409.6 million for 2018.
Collaboration Revenues. Collaboration revenues reflect the achievement of certain event-based milestones, royalties earned at tiered percentage rates on any net sales of ORILISSA and ORIAHNN and license fees earned under our collaboration agreements with AbbVie and MTPC.
In the second quarter of 2020, we recognized a $30.0 million event-based milestone as revenue upon FDA-approval of AbbVie’s ORIAHNN for uterine fibroids. In the third quarter of 2019, we recognized a $20.0 million event-based milestone as revenue upon the FDA’s acceptance of AbbVie’s new drug application, or NDA, submission of elagolix for uterine fibroids. In the third quarter of 2018, we recognized a $40.0 million event-based milestone as revenue upon FDA-approval of AbbVie’s ORILISSA for the treatment of moderate to severe pain associated with endometriosis.
For ORILISSA and ORIAHNN, we recognized royalty revenue of $19.2 million for 2020, $14.3 million for 2019 and $1.6 million for 2018.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Sales. Cost of sales was $10.1 million for 2020, $7.4 million for 2019 and $4.9 million for 2018, primarily reflecting a higher annual volume of INGREZZA product sales since commercial launch in April 2017.
Research and Development. We support our drug discovery and development efforts through the commitment of significant resources to discovery, R&D programs and business development opportunities.
Costs are reflected in the applicable development stage based upon the program status when incurred. Therefore, the same program could be reflected in different development stages in the same reporting period. For several of our programs, the R&D activities are part of our collaborative and other relationships.
Late stage consists of costs incurred related to product candidates in Phase II registrational studies and onwards. Early stage consists of costs incurred related to product candidates in post-investigational new drug application, or IND, through Phase II non-registrational studies. Research and discovery consists of pre-IND costs. Milestone expenses reflect payments made in connection with our collaborative and other relationships. Payroll and benefits consists of costs incurred for salaries and wages, payroll taxes, benefits and share-based compensation associated with employees involved in ongoing R&D activities. Share-based compensation may fluctuate from period to period based on factors that are not within our control, such as our stock price on the dates share-based grants are issued. Facilities and other consists of indirect costs incurred in support of overall R&D activities and non-specific programs, including activities that benefit multiple programs, such as management costs, as well as depreciation, information technology and facility-based expenses. These costs are not allocated to a specific program or stage.
The following table presents R&D expense by category:
R&D expense was $275.0 million for 2020, $200.0 million for 2019 and $155.8 million for 2018. The increase in R&D expense was primarily the result of increased investment to support advancing our expanded clinical portfolio and increased personnel expenses on higher headcount.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development. IPR&D expense was $164.5 million for 2020, $154.3 million for 2019 and $4.8 million for 2018. For 2020, we recorded IPR&D expense of $46.0 million and $118.5 million in connection with the payments of the upfront fees pursuant to our collaborations with Idorsia and Takeda, respectively. For 2019, we recorded IPR&D expense of $118.1 million and $36.2 million in connection with the payments of the upfront fees pursuant to our collaborations with Voyager and Xenon Pharmaceuticals, Inc., or Xenon. For 2018, we recorded IPR&D expense of $4.8 million in connection with payment of the upfront fee to Jnana to obtain access to Jnana’s proprietary drug discovery platform.
Selling, General and Administrative. Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expense was $433.3 million for 2020, $354.1 million for 2019 and $248.9 million for 2018. The increase in SG&A expense from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to increased personnel expenses on higher headcount and continued investment in INGREZZA marketing. The increase in SG&A expense from 2018 to 2019 was primarily due to the sales force expansion completed in the third quarter of 2018, the national launch of a patient-focused disease state awareness campaign, Talk About TD, and an increase in the Branded Pharmaceutical Drug Fee expense.
Other Expense
Other expense, net, was $56.3 million for 2020, $25.8 million for 2019 and $15.0 million for 2018. Periodic fluctuations in other expense, net, primarily reflect unrealized losses recognized to adjust our equity investments in Voyager and Xenon Pharmaceuticals Inc. to fair value. For 2020, other expense, net, also reflects an $18.4 million loss on debt extinguishment recognized for the partial repurchase of the 2024 Notes in November 2020.
(Benefit from) Provision for Income Taxes
Our benefit from income taxes was $300.6 million for 2020, compared to a provision for income taxes of $9.5 million for 2019 and $0.7 million for 2018. The benefit from income taxes for 2020 included a $296.3 million benefit related to the release of substantially all of our valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets on December 31, 2020. The decision to release the valuation allowance was made after we determined that it was more likely than not the deferred tax assets, including net operating losses and tax credits, would be realized, and was based on the evaluation and weighting of both positive and negative evidence, such as our achievement of a cumulative three-year income position at December 31, 2020, as well as our consideration of forecasts of future operating results and utilization of net operating losses and tax credits prior to their expiration. The provision for income taxes for 2019 and 2018 reflected estimated current state income taxes for both periods. At December 31, 2019 and 2018, we had full valuation allowances against our net deferred tax assets as realization was uncertain. Our tax expense for 2020, 2019 and 2018 varied from the statutory tax rate primarily due to changes in our valuation allowances, net of other permanent book/tax differences, tax credits generated and impacts of changes in tax laws.
Net Income
Net income was $407.3 million, or $4.16 diluted earnings per share, for 2020, $37.0 million, or $0.39 diluted earnings per share, for 2019 and $21.1 million, or $0.22 diluted earnings per share, for 2018. The change from 2019
to 2020 was primarily the result of increased INGREZZA net product sales and a non-cash tax benefit of $296.3 million related to the release of substantially all of our valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets on December 31, 2020, offset by $164.5 million of IPR&D in connection with our collaborations with Idorsia and Takeda, ongoing support for the commercial launch of INGREZZA for tardive dyskinesia and progression of our clinical pipeline. The change from 2018 to 2019 was primarily the result of increased INGREZZA net product sales, offset by $154.3 million of IPR&D in connection with our collaborations with Voyager and Xenon, ongoing support for the commercial launch of INGREZZA for tardive dyskinesia and progression of our clinical pipeline.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash, cash equivalents and debt securities available-for-sale totaled $1.0 billion and $970.2 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $228.5 million for 2020, $147.0 million for 2019 and $101.4 million for 2018. The increase in positive cash flow from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to increased INGREZZA net product sales partially offset by incremental INGREZZA investment and progression of our clinical pipeline. The increase in positive cash flow from 2018 to 2019 was primarily due to increased INGREZZA net product sales, partially offset by incremental INGREZZA investment and upfront payments of $154.3 million in connection with our collaborations with Voyager and Xenon.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $4.1 million for 2020, compared with net cash used in investing activities of $211.1 million for 2019 and $242.9 million for 2018. Periodic fluctuations in cash flows from investing activities primarily reflect timing differences in purchases, sales and maturities of debt securities available-for-sale and changes in our portfolio-mix. Net cash used in investing activities for 2019 also reflects equity investments of $54.7 million in Voyager and $14.2 million in Xenon.
Net cash used in financing activities was $157.8 million for 2020, primarily reflecting our repurchase of $136.2 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes for an aggregate repurchase price of $186.9 million in cash in November 2020, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $32.4 million for 2019 and $29.5 million in 2018. For 2019 and 2018, periodic fluctuations in cash flows from financing activities reflect proceeds from issuances of our common stock.
Shelf Registration Statement. In February 2017, we filed an automatic shelf registration statement which immediately became effective by rule of the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC. We sold no securities under this shelf registration statement in 2020, 2019 or 2018.
Convertible Senior Notes. In May 2017, we completed a private placement of $517.5 million in aggregate principal amount of 2.25% convertible senior notes scheduled to mature on May 15, 2024, unless earlier converted, redeemed, or repurchased. We may not redeem the 2024 Notes prior to May 15, 2021. On or after this date, at our election, we may redeem all, or any portion, of the 2024 Notes under certain circumstances. The 2024 Notes do not contain any financial or operating covenants or any restrictions on the payment of dividends, the issuance of other indebtedness or the issuance or repurchase of securities by us. There are customary events of default with respect to the 2024 Notes, including that upon certain events of default, 100% of the principal and accrued and unpaid interest on the 2024 Notes will automatically become due and payable. Amounts for the 2024 Notes and related interest in the table above assume that the 2024 Notes will be held until maturity. In November 2020, we entered into separate, privately negotiated transactions with certain holders of the 2024 Notes to repurchase $136.2 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes for an aggregate repurchase price of $186.9 million in cash. At December 31, 2020, $381.3 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes remained outstanding.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon financial statements that we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses, and related disclosures. On an on-going basis, we evaluate these estimates, including those related to revenue recognition and share-based compensation. Estimates are based on historical experience, information received from third parties and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about
the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Historically, revisions to our estimates have not resulted in a material change to the financial statements. The items in our financial statements requiring significant estimates and judgments are as follows:
Product Sales, Net. Revenues from product sales are recorded net of reserves established for applicable discounts and allowances that are offered within contracts with our customers, payors and other third parties. The transaction price, which includes variable consideration reflecting the impact of discounts and allowances, may be subject to constraint and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Actual amounts may ultimately differ from our estimates. If actual results vary, we adjust these estimates, which could have an effect on earnings in the period of adjustment.
Government Rebates. We are obligated to pay rebates for mandated discounts under the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program. The liability for such rebates consists of invoices received for claims from prior quarters that remain unpaid, or for which an invoice has not been received, and estimated rebates for the current applicable reporting period, which are primarily based on actual historical rebates, estimated payor mix, state and federal regulations and related contractual terms. Estimated rebates are recorded as a reduction of revenue in the period the related sale is recognized. To date, actual government rebates have not differed materially from our estimates.
Share-Based Compensation. For purposes of calculating share-based compensation, we estimate the fair value of share-based compensation awards using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The determination of the fair value of share-based compensation awards utilizing the Black-Scholes model is affected by our stock price and a number of assumptions, including but not limited to expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards and the expected term of stock options. Our stock options have characteristics significantly different from those of traded options, and changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimates. For example, an increase in the underlying stock price results in a significant increase in the Black-Scholes option-pricing. The fair value of performance-based restricted stock units, or PRSUs, is estimated based on the closing sale price of our common stock on the date of grant. Expense recognition for PRSUs commences when attainment of the associated performance-based criteria is determined to be probable.
If factors change and we employ different assumptions, share-based compensation expense may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the past. If there is a difference between the assumptions used in determining share-based compensation expense and the actual factors which become known over time, we may change the input factors used in determining share-based compensation expense for future grants. These changes, if any, may materially impact our results of operations in the period such changes are made. For actual forfeitures, we recognize the adjustment to compensation expense in the period the forfeitures occur.
Income Taxes. Our income tax benefit (provision) is computed under the asset and liability method. Significant estimates are required in determining our income tax benefit (provision). Some of these estimates are based on interpretations of existing tax laws or regulations. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of the difference between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their respective financial reporting amounts (temporary differences) at enacted tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is established for deferred tax assets for which it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets, including net operating losses and tax credits, will not be realized. We periodically re-assess the need for a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets based on various factors including our historical earnings experience by taxing jurisdiction, and forecasts of future operating results and utilization of net operating losses and tax credits prior to their expiration. Significant judgment is required in making this assessment and, to the extent that a reversal of any portion of our valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets is deemed appropriate, a tax benefit will be recognized against our income tax provision in the period of such reversal. Prior to 2020, we recorded a valuation allowance that fully offset our deferred tax assets. On December 31, 2020, based on our evaluation of various factors, such as our achievement of a cumulative three-year income position as of December 31, 2020, as well as our consideration of forecasts of future operating results and utilization of net operating losses and tax credits prior to their expiration, we released substantially all of our valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets and recorded
a corresponding income tax benefit. We continue to maintain a valuation allowance against our California state deferred tax assets.
Additional Information
Refer to Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for information on accounting pronouncements that have impacted or are expected to materially impact our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
Factors That May Affect Future Financial Condition and Liquidity
The funding necessary to execute our business strategies is subject to numerous uncertainties, which may adversely affect our liquidity and capital resources. Marketing of approved pharmaceuticals and completion of clinical trials may take several years or more, but the length of time generally varies substantially according to the type, complexity, novelty and intended use of a product candidate. It is also important to note that if a clinical candidate is identified, the further development of that candidate can be halted or abandoned at any time due to a number of factors. These factors include, but are not limited to, funding constraints, safety or a change in market demand.
The nature and efforts required to develop our product candidates into commercially viable products include research to identify a clinical candidate, preclinical development, clinical testing, FDA approval and commercialization. In the pharmaceutical industry, total R&D spend for a drug candidate that successfully completes all stages of R&D and is commercialized may exceed $2 billion. Further, it can take in excess of ten years to complete all stages of R&D for a drug candidate.
We test our potential product candidates in numerous preclinical studies to identify disease indications for which our product candidates may show efficacy. We may conduct multiple clinical trials to cover a variety of indications for each product candidate. As we obtain results from trials, we may elect to discontinue clinical trials for certain product candidates or for certain indications in order to focus our resources on more promising product candidates or indications. The duration and the cost of clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of differences arising during the clinical trial protocol, including, among others, the following:
•we or the FDA or similar foreign regulatory authorities may suspend the trials;
•we may discover that a product candidate may cause harmful side effects;
•patient recruitment and enrollment may be slower or more difficult than expected; and
•patients may drop out of the trials.
For each of our programs, we periodically assess the scientific progress and merits of the programs to determine if continued R&D is economically viable. Certain of our programs have been terminated due to the lack of scientific progress and lack of prospects for ultimate commercialization. Because of the uncertainties associated with R&D of these programs, we may not be successful in achieving commercialization. As such, the ultimate timeline and costs to commercialize a product cannot be accurately estimated.
Our in-license, research and clinical development agreements are generally cancellable with written notice within 180 days or less. We may be required to pay up to $8.5 billion in milestone payments, plus sales royalties, in the event that all scientific research, development and commercialization milestones under these agreements are achieved.
Other than INGREZZA, which has been FDA-approved for the treatment of tardive dyskinesia; ONGENTYS, which has been FDA-approved as an adjunctive therapy to levodopa/DOPA decarboxylase inhibitors in adult Parkinson’s disease patients; ORILISSA (partnered with AbbVie), which has been FDA-approved for the management of moderate to severe endometriosis pain in women; and ORIAHNN (partnered with AbbVie), which has been FDA-approved for the management of heavy menstrual bleeding associated with uterine fibroids in pre-menopausal women, our product candidates have not yet achieved FDA regulatory approval, which is required before we can market them as therapeutic products in the U.S. In order to proceed to subsequent clinical trial stages and to ultimately achieve regulatory approval, the FDA must conclude that our clinical data establish safety and efficacy. We must satisfy the requirements of similar regulatory authorities in foreign countries in order to market products in those countries. The results from preclinical testing and early clinical trials may not be predictive of results in later
clinical trials. It is possible for a candidate to show promising results in clinical trials, but subsequently fail to establish sufficient safety and efficacy data necessary to obtain regulatory approvals.
As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, among others, the duration and completion costs of our R&D projects, clinical trials, and post-marketing studies are difficult to estimate and are subject to considerable variation. Our inability to complete our R&D projects in a timely manner or our failure to enter into collaborative agreements, when appropriate, could significantly increase our capital requirements and could adversely impact our liquidity. These uncertainties could force us to seek additional, external sources of financing from time to time in order to continue with our business strategy. Our inability to raise additional capital, or to do so on terms reasonably acceptable to us, would jeopardize the future success of our business.
We currently have limited experience in marketing and selling pharmaceutical products. If we fail to maintain successful marketing, sales, and reimbursement capabilities, or fail to enter into successful arrangements with third parties, our product revenues may suffer. We also may be required to make further substantial expenditures if unforeseen difficulties arise in other areas of our business. In particular, our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the commercial success of INGREZZA, ONGENTYS, ORILISSA, and/or ORIAHNN;
•debt service obligations on the 2024 Notes;
•continued scientific progress in our R&D and clinical development programs;
•the magnitude and complexity of our research and development programs;
•progress with preclinical testing and clinical trials;
•the time and costs involved in obtaining regulatory approvals;
•the costs involved in filing and pursuing patent applications, enforcing patent claims, or engaging in interference proceedings or other patent litigation;
•competing technological and market developments;
•the establishment of additional strategic alliances;
•developments related to any future litigation;
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business;
•the cost of commercialization activities and arrangements, including manufacturing of our product candidates; and
•the cost of product in-licensing and any possible acquisitions.
We believe that our existing capital resources, funds generated by anticipated INGREZZA net product sales and investment income will be sufficient to satisfy our current and projected funding requirements for at least the next twelve months. However, we cannot guarantee that our existing capital resources and anticipated revenues will be sufficient to conduct and complete all of our research and development programs or commercialization activities as planned.
The spread of COVID-19, which has caused a broad impact globally, may materially affect us economically. While the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of, the COVID-19 pandemic may be difficult to assess or predict, the pandemic is currently resulting in disruption of global financial markets. This disruption, if sustained or recurrent, could make it more difficult for us to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. In addition, a recession or market correction resulting from the spread of COVID-19 could materially affect our business and the value of our common stock.
We may require additional funding to continue our research and product development programs, to conduct preclinical studies and clinical trials, for operating expenses, to pursue regulatory approvals for our product candidates, for the costs involved in filing and prosecuting patent applications and enforcing or defending patent claims, if any, the cost of product in-licensing and any possible acquisitions, and we may require additional funding to establish manufacturing and marketing capabilities in the future. We may seek to access the public or private
equity markets whenever conditions are favorable. For example, we have an effective shelf registration statement on file with the SEC which allows us to issue an unlimited number of shares of our securities from time to time. In addition, we issued $517.5 million of convertible debt in May 2017 and we have previously financed capital purchases and may continue to pursue opportunities to obtain additional debt financing in the future. In November 2020, we entered into separate, privately negotiated transactions with certain holders of the 2024 Notes to repurchase $136.2 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes for an aggregate repurchase price of $186.9 million in cash. At December 31, 2020, $381.3 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes remained outstanding. We may also seek additional funding through strategic alliances or other financing mechanisms. We cannot assure you that adequate funding will be available on terms acceptable to us, if at all. In addition, COVID-19 pandemic is currently resulting in disruption of global financial markets. This disruption, if sustained or recurrent, could make it more difficult for us to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. Any additional equity financings will be dilutive to our stockholders and any additional debt may involve operating covenants that may restrict our business. If adequate funds are not available through these means, we may be required to curtail significantly one or more of our research or development programs or obtain funds through arrangements with collaborators or others. This may require us to relinquish rights to certain of our technologies, products or product candidates. To the extent that we are unable to obtain third-party funding for such expenses, we expect that increased expenses will result in increased cash flow losses from operations. We cannot assure you that we will successfully develop our products under development or that our approved products will generate revenues sufficient to enable us to earn a profit.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020.
(1) In May 2017, we completed a private placement of $517.5 million in aggregate principal amount of 2.25% convertible senior notes scheduled to mature on May 15, 2024, unless earlier converted, redeemed, or repurchased. We may not redeem the 2024 Notes prior to May 15, 2021. On or after this date, at our election, we may redeem all, or any portion, of the 2024 Notes under certain circumstances. The 2024 Notes do not contain any financial or operating covenants or any restrictions on the payment of dividends, the issuance of other indebtedness or the issuance or repurchase of securities by us. There are customary events of default with respect to the 2024 Notes, including that upon certain events of default, 100% of the principal and accrued and unpaid interest on the 2024 Notes will automatically become due and payable. Amounts for the 2024 Notes and related interest in the table above assume that the 2024 Notes will be held until maturity. In November 2020, we entered into separate, privately negotiated transactions with certain holders of the 2024 Notes to repurchase $136.2 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes for an aggregate repurchase price of $186.9 million in cash. At December 31, 2020, $381.3 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes remained outstanding.
(2) We lease our corporate headquarters, which consist of laboratory and office space located San Diego, California, under various operating lease agreements. In addition to minimum rental commitments, these operating leases may require us to pay additional amounts for taxes, insurance, maintenance and other operating expenses. The non-cancelable lease terms for these operating leases expire at various dates between 2025 and 2031 and do not include renewal options. Amounts for operating leases presented in the table above reflect future minimum rental commitments under non-cancelable operating leases as of December 31 for each of the periods presented.