ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Words such as "expects," "anticipated," "will," "may," "goals," "plans," "believes," "estimates," "concludes," determines," variations of these words, and similar expressions are intended to identify these forward-looking statements. As a result of many factors, including those set forth under the section entitled "Risk Factors" in Item 1A. and elsewhere in this report, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. Readers are cautioned that these forward-looking statements are only predictions based upon assumptions made that we believed to be reasonable at the time, and are subject to risks and uncertainties. Therefore, actual results may differ materially and adversely from those expressed in any forward-looking statements. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to revise or update publicly any forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a medical device company predominantly focused on eye care. A majority of our revenue comes from Avenova®, an FDA cleared product sold in the United States that has proven in laboratory testing to have broad antimicrobial properties as it removes foreign material including microorganisms and debris from skin around the eye, including the eyelid. Avenova is formulated with our proprietary, stable and pure form of hypochlorous acid. Avenova is available directly to consumers through our online sales channel and is also often prescribed and dispensed by eyecare professionals for blepharitis and dry-eye disease.
We continue to promote Avenova through all four of our primary distribution channels: (1) our direct-to-consumer model, allowing customers to order online and forego time-consuming doctor visits and trips to the pharmacy; (2) retail pharmacies, selling to consumers through local pharmacies across 50 states; (3) our Partner Pharmacy Program, providing a consistent patient experience at contracted pricing; and (4) our physician dispensed channel, allowing patients to buy Avenova during office visits to their preferred eye care specialist. We achieved record overall Avenova unit sales in 2020 despite the global COVID-19 pandemic and general economic conditions that challenged many businesses throughout 2020.
Avenova was launched as an over-the-counter product during the second quarter of 2019. By creating a product that does not require a doctor’s prescription, we made Avenova available to many more potential customers and broadened our addressable market. Over-the-counter Avenova also capitalizes on a trend to sell pharmaceutical products directly to consumers in response to increased cost shifting to consumers through high-deductible health plans and adds convenience by allowing customers to forego a time-consuming doctor visit and trip to the pharmacy.
The launch of over-the-counter Avenova online proved to be especially fortuitous during the COVID-19 pandemic as it allowed consumers to order Avenova on-line without a prescription and without leaving their homes.
Over-the-counter Avenova is now our leading product by unit sales and net revenue despite having a lower average net selling price than prescription Avenova. This sales performance reflects our ongoing focus and increasing spend on digital marketing and public relations initiatives to promote Avenova directly to the end consumer. Avenova is available on Amazon.com, Walmart.com, and Avenova.com. Late in 2020, we also began working with CVS, one of the nation’s largest retail chains to make Avenova available at CVS store locations throughout the U.S. and on CVS.com beginning in late February 2021.
Although we expect the online sales channel to continue to be our fastest-growing channel, support for Avenova from the medical community is important to maintaining its reputation as a preferred product. The “doctor recommended” halo effect around our brand remains strong due in part to our continued promotion of prescription Avenova.
Late in 2020, we also launched a rebranded CelleRx® into the beauty industry as CelleRx® Clinical Reset™. Prior to this rebranding, our marketing of CelleRx focused on medical professionals only. Clinical Reset is formulated with NovaBay’s patented, pure, prescription-grade hypochlorous acid (HOCl), the same molecule produced by the human body’s immune system to fight infection and heal wounds. It keeps the skin’s natural barrier intact, which when out of balance can allow acne, rosacea and infection to set in. Clinical Reset is complementary to a daily beauty regime for use on clean skin or over makeup. Prior to this relaunch, our marketing of CelleRx focused on medical professionals only. With the rebranding, we intend to leverage new consumer focused messaging and the product’s pharmaceutical pedigree in robust social media and print advertising campaigns marketing CelleRx Clinical Reset in the beauty industry.
Beyond Avenova and CelleRx, we have developed additional products containing our proprietary, stable and pure form of hypochlorous acid, including NeutroPhase® and PhaseOne® for the wound care market.
In addition to our proprietary products, we responded to the national need for protective personal equipment (PPE) in the first half of 2020 by tapping into our international supply network and launching the sale of KN95 Masks and other PPE. Although sales from the KN95 Masks were significant in the second quarter of 2020, we experienced a significant decrease in PPE sales in the third and fourth quarters as supply shortages narrowed, prices declined and distribution competition increased. As we have returned our focus to our core business in eyecare, we do not currently anticipate dedicating significant future Company resources toward the sale of PPE and we do not expect significant future revenue from PPE sales.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. In preparing these consolidated financial statements, management has made its best estimates and judgments of certain amounts, giving due consideration to materiality. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments related to revenue recognition, research and development costs, patent costs, stock-based compensation, income taxes and other contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Summary of Significant Accounting Policies), included in Part II, Item 8 of this report, we believe that the following accounting policies are most critical to fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The Company charges bad debt expense and records an allowance for doubtful accounts when management believes it to be unlikely that specific invoices will be collected. Management identifies amounts due that are in dispute and it believes are unlikely to be collected. Management recorded a nominal reserve for accounts receivable at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2019, management reserved $51 thousand based on specific amounts that were in dispute or were over 120 days past due as of that date.
Inventory
Inventory is comprised of (1) raw materials and supplies, such as bottles, packaging materials, labels, boxes and pumps; (2) goods in progress, which are normally filled but unlabeled bottles; and (3) finished goods. We utilize contract manufacturers to produce our products and the price paid to these manufacturers is included in inventory. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value determined by the first-in, first-out method. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, management had recorded an allowance for excess and obsolete inventory and lower of cost or estimated net realizable value adjustments of $236 thousand and $247 thousand, respectively.
Leases
At the inception of an arrangement, the Company determines whether the arrangement is or contains a lease based on the unique facts and circumstances present. Operating lease liabilities and their corresponding right-of-use assets are recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected lease term. The interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable. As such, the Company utilizes its incremental borrowing rate, which is the rate incurred to borrow, on a collateralized basis over a similar term, an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. Certain adjustments to the right-of-use assets may be required for items such as initial direct costs paid or incentives received.
The Company has elected to combine lease and non-lease components as a single component for all leases in which it is a lessee or a lessor. The lease expense is recognized over the expected term on a straight-line basis. Operating leases are recognized on the balance sheet as right-of-use assets, operating lease liabilities current and operating lease liabilities non-current. As a result, as of the effective date, the Company no longer recognizes deferred rent on the consolidated balance sheets.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue generated through the Company’s webstore for Avenova and KN95 Masks is recognized upon receipt by the customer through multiple third-party carriers. Shipping and handling costs are expensed as fulfillment costs are incurred and included in cost of goods sold in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We present revenue net of sales taxes and refunds.
Revenue generated through Amazon.com and Walmart.com for Avenova and other products is recognized upon fulfillment, which generally occurs upon delivery of the related products to a third-party carrier or, in the case of an Amazon/Walmart delivery, to the customer. We present revenue net of commissions and any related fulfillment and shipping fees charged by these partners. Fees paid to partners for promoting our product are expensed as incurred and are included in sales and marketing expenses within the operating expenses in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
The Company also generates Avenova product revenue through product sales to its major distribution partners. Product supply of Avenova is the only performance obligation contained in these arrangements, and the Company recognizes product revenue upon transfer of control to its major distribution partners at the amount of consideration that the Company expects to be entitled to, generally upon shipment to the distributor on a “sell-in” basis. Upon recognition of product sales, contract liabilities are recorded for invoiced amounts that are subject to significant reversal, including product revenue allowances for cash consideration paid to customers for services, discounts, rebate programs, and product returns. Because the Company did not have sufficient historical data to compute its own return rate, the return rate used to estimate the constraint on variable consideration for product returns was based on an average of peer and competitor company historical return rates through the end of the third quarter of 2020. The Company updated the return rate assumption quarterly. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company determined that it had adequate historical data to estimate future returns based on its own experience. The Company increased its return rate assumption based on historical data and recorded a $0.4 million increase in its accrual for future returns. The Company will continue to monitor and update its return rate assumption quarterly. Payment for product supply is typically due 30 days after control transfers to the distributor.
Revenue generated through the Company’s partner pharmacies is recognized when control of the product transfers to the end customer.
Bulk orders of KN95 Masks were shipped directly to the customer from a manufacturer in China. Revenue was recognized when control of the product passed to the customer, which was upon delivery of the KN95 Masks to the customer.
The following table summarizes the activity in the accounts related to product revenue allowances (in thousands):
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold includes third-party manufacturing costs, shipping and handling costs, and other costs associated with products sold. Cost of goods sold also includes any necessary allowance for excess and obsolete inventory along with lower of cost and estimated net realizable value.
Research and Development Costs
The Company charges research and development costs to expense as incurred. These costs include all costs associated with research, development and regulatory activities, including submissions to the Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”).
Advertising Costs
Advertising costs are expensed in the period in which the costs are incurred. Advertising expenses were $1.7 million, $0.5 million, and $0, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company’s stock-based compensation includes grants of stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) to employees, consultants and non-employee directors. The expense associated with these grants is recognized in the Company’s consolidated statements of stockholders’ equity based on their fair values as they are earned under the applicable vesting terms. For stock options granted, the fair value of the stock options is estimated using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. See Note 13, “Equity-Based Compensation” for further information regarding stock-based compensation expense and the assumptions used in estimating that expense. The Company accounts for RSUs issued to employees and non-employees (consultants and advisory board members) based on the fair market value of the Company’s common stock as of the date of issuance.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is recognized if it is more likely than not that some portion or the entire deferred tax asset will not be recognized.
Common Stock Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for common stock purchase warrants issued in connection with its equity offerings in accordance with the provisions of ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging.
The Company accounts for common stock purchase warrants issued in connection with share-based compensation arrangements in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718, Stock Compensation, which encompasses the provisions of ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.
The Company classifies as equity any contracts that (i) require physical settlement or net-share settlement or (ii) give the Company a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in its own shares (physical settlement or net-share settlement). The Company classifies as assets or liabilities any contracts that (i) require net-cash settlement (including a requirement to net-cash settle the contract if an event occurs and if that event is outside the control of the Company) or (ii) give the counterparty a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in shares (physical settlement or net-share settlement). Additionally, for common stock purchase warrants accounted for in accordance with ASC 718, Stock Compensation, the Company classifies as liabilities any contracts where it believes the warrants are deemed to be probable of issuance.
For warrants that are classified as liabilities, the Company records the fair value of the warrants at each balance sheet date and records changes in the estimated fair value as a non-cash gain or loss in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The fair values of these warrants are determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, the Binomial Lattice (“Lattice”) valuation model, or the Monte Carlo simulation model where deemed appropriate. These values are subject to a significant degree of management’s judgment.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report for information on recent accounting pronouncements.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Total Net Sales, Product Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit
Product revenue, net, increased by $3.4 million, or 51%, to $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in product revenue, net, is primarily the result of $3.1 million in product revenue, net, generated from the sale of KN95 Masks during the year ended December 31, 2020 with no comparable revenue during the year ended December 31, 2019. Further, Avenova revenue decreased $0.3 million in 2020 from $6.3 million in 2019 to $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was the net result of an overall decrease in the average net selling price of Avenova products which was partially offset by an overall increase in Avenova units sold. The increase in units sold reflects a higher number of non-prescription Avenova and buy-and-sell units sold, partially offset by a decrease in the number of prescription units sold. The decrease in the overall net selling price was largely due to a lower net selling price associated with over-the-counter Avenova, which was launched in June 2019.
Other revenue, net, decreased by $25 thousand, or 58%, to $18 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $43 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in other revenue was due to the Company being relieved of contract liability as a result of changes in contract terms associated with the distribution agreement with China Pioneer in the first quarter of 2019 with no comparable revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of goods sold increased by $2.2 million, or 128%, to $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was the result of the cost of KN95 Masks sold during the year ended December 31, 2020 with no comparable sales during the year ended December 31, 2019, as well as an increase in the number of Avenova units sold during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross profit increased by $1.1 million, or 23%, to $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in gross profit was primarily due to the KN95 Mask sales.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $0.1 million, or 55%, to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily the result of regulatory expenses incurred under the Microprofit Agreement as further described in Note 8, “Commitments and Contingencies”, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses decreased by $2.6 million, or 30%, to $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in sales representative headcount, and lower travel and related expenses due to the impact of COVID-19. This decrease was partly off-set by an increase in Avenova digital advertising and costs associated with the Company’s relaunch of CelleRx Clinical Reset.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $0.6 million, or 12%, to $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily a result of increased legal expenses incurred and the settlement amount paid in conjunction with a dispute with the Company’s former Interim President & Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer as further described in Note 8, “Commitments and Contingencies”, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Non-cash (loss) gain on changes in fair value of warrant liability
The adjustments to the fair value of warrant liability resulted in a loss of $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a gain of $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. For additional information regarding the warrants and their valuation, please see Note 11, “Warrant Liability”, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Non-cash gain on changes in fair value of embedded derivative liability
The adjustments to the fair value of embedded derivative liability resulted in a gain of $3 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a gain of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. For additional information, please see Note 10, “Convertible Note”, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net, was a net income of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to an expense of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded income of $0.9 million as the result of income recognized as qualifying expenses incurred under the PPP Loan. Please see Note 18, “Paycheck Protection Program”, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this report. This income was partially offset by the interest due on the Promissory Note issued in February 2019 and the amortization of discount and issuance cost related to the Convertible Note issued in March 2019.
The expense of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to interest of $0.2 million due on the Promissory Note issued in February 2019, the amortization of discount and issuance cost of $0.8 million related to the Convertible Note issued in March 2019, and the issuance cost of $0.4 million related to the issuance of warrants in August 2019. For additional information regarding the Promissory Note, please see Note 9, “Related Party Note Payable” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this report. For additional information regarding the Convertible Note, please see Note 10, “Convertible Note” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this report. For additional information regarding the issuance of common stock, Series A Preferred Stock and warrants in August 2019, please see Note 12, “Stockholders’ Equity”, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For this discussion, see the “Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 in Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents were $12.0 million, compared to $6.9 million as of December 31, 2019. Based primarily on the funds available at December 31, 2020, management believes that the Company’s existing cash and cash equivalents and cash flows generated from product sales will be sufficient to enable the Company to meet its planned operating expenses at least through March 25, 2022. However, changing circumstances may cause the Company to expend cash significantly faster than currently anticipated, and the Company may need to spend more cash than currently expected because of circumstances beyond its control. Additionally, our future results, cash expenditures and ability to obtain additional external financing could be adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and general adverse economic conditions.
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted primarily of a net loss of $11.0 million, adjusted by non-cash loss of $5.2 million on the change in fair value of warrant liability, stock-based compensation expenses of $0.5 million, issuance of RSUs for services of $0.2 million, non-cash interest expense related to amortization of debt issuance cost and debt discount of $0.2 million, and a net increase of $0.2 million in our net operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which consisted primarily of a net loss of $9.7 million, adjusted by non-cash gain of $0.7 million on the change in fair value of warrant liability, non-cash interest expense related to amortization of debt issuance cost and debt discount of $0.7 million, non-cash gain of $0.4 million on the change in fair value of embedded derivative liability, stock compensation expenses of $0.5 million, issuance of RSUs related to employee separation agreement of $0.2 million, non-cash impairment of operating lease right-of-use assets of $0.1 million, depreciation and amortization expenses of $0.1 million and issuance of warrants for service of $0.1 million, and a net increase of $1.2 million in our net operating assets and liabilities.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash used in investing activities was $26 thousand and $19 thousand, respectively, for the purchase of property and equipment.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company received net proceeds of $5.2 million from the at-the-market offering and equity program (“ATM Program”), and an additional $7.1 million from the exercise of warrants. These amounts were offset by repayments of $1.5 million on the Convertible Note issued to Iliad Research and Trading L.P. and repayment of $1.0 million on the Promissory Note, both paid using proceeds raised through the ATM program pursuant to the ATM Agreement, dated April 27, 2020, with Ladenburg.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $11.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was attributable to net proceeds of $12.1 million from several financing activities during 2019, including the private placement with three accredited investors in June 2019, issuance of common stock to Triton Funds LP in the second quarter of 2019, issuance of the Promissory Note to Pioneer Hong Kong in February 2019, issuance of the Convertible Note to Iliad Research and Trading L.P. in March 2019, issuance of common stock in a direct registered offering and warrant in a simultaneous private placement in August 2019 and issuance of the Series A Preferred Stock and warrants in a private placement in August 2019. The aggregate proceeds of $12.1 million was offset by repayments of $0.7 million on the convertible note issued to Iliad Research and Trading L.P. during the year 2019. The Company received an additional $0.3 million from the exercise of warrants and stock options during 2019.
Quarterly Results of Operations (unaudited)
The following table presents unaudited quarterly results of operations for the eight most recent quarters ending with the quarter ended December 31, 2020. This information has been derived from our unaudited consolidated financial statements and has been prepared by us on a basis consistent with our audited annual consolidated financial statements and includes all adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring adjustments, which management considers necessary for a fair presentation of the information for the periods presented.
As of December 31, 2020, we had net operating loss carryforwards for federal and state income tax purposes of $117.3 million and $96.2 million, respectively. The federal net operating loss carryforwards consist of $100.1 million generated before January 1, 2018, which will begin to expire in 2024 and $17.2 million that will carryforward indefinitely but are subject to an 80% limitation for years following December 31, 2020. The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) changed net loss carryforward provisions, allowing a full utilization of NOL carryforwards through December 31, 2020. The state net operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire in 2028. The state net operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire in 2028. As of December 31, 2020, we also had tax credit carryforwards for federal income tax purposes of $1.3 million and $0.3 million for state tax purposes. If not utilized, the federal tax credits will begin expiring in 2026. The state tax credits have an indefinite carryover period.
Current federal and California tax laws include substantial restrictions on the utilization of net operating loss carryforwards in the event of an ownership change of a corporation. Accordingly, our ability to utilize net operating loss carryforwards may be limited as a result of such ownership changes. Such a limitation could result in the expiration of carryforwards before they are utilized.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material impact on our business and operating results during the periods presented, and we do not expect it to have a material impact in the near future, although there can be no assurances that our business will not be affected by inflation in the future.
Off -Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K.
Seasonality
Consistent with our peers in the United States pharmaceutical industry, our business experiences seasonality with the first quarter of each year typically being the lowest revenue quarter. This annual phenomenon is due to consumers facing the need to satisfy health insurance deductibles and changes to copays as each new insurance year begins. In 2020, the Company experienced unusually high revenue in the quarter ended June 30, 2020 due to sales of the KN95 Masks.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual cash commitments as of December 31, 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
Our commitments as of December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of a facility operating lease and an operating lease for two copiers.
The total commitment for the facility lease as of December 31, 2020 was $0.5 million due over the lease term, compared to $0.9 million as of December 31, 2019.
We had an operating lease for 2 copiers as of December 31, 2020. The total commitment for the lease as of December 31, 2020 was $29 thousand due over the lease terms, compared to $45 thousand as of December 31, 2019.
See Note 8, “Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for further information regarding these leases.