ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements.
The purpose of this discussion is to provide an understanding of the consolidated financial results and condition of New Century Resources Corporation and to also describe the plans for future growth and expansion.
Forward-Looking Statements
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as current expectations and assumptions. From time to time, we may publish forward-looking statements, including those that are contained in this report, relating to such matters as anticipated financial performance, business prospects,
acquisition strategies, technological developments, new products, research and development activities and similar matters. The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 provides a safe harbor for forward-looking statements. In order to comply with the terms of the safe harbor, we note that a variety of factors could cause our actual results and experience to differ materially from the anticipated results or other expectations expressed in our forward-looking statements. The risks and uncertainties that may affect the operations, performance, development and results of our business include, but are not limited to, our ability to maintain sufficient working capital, adverse changes in the economy, the ability to attract and maintain key personnel, our ability to implement our business plan. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements, including those set forth elsewhere in this report. We assume no obligation to update any such forward-looking statements.
PLAN OF OPERATION
Although we were organized to engage in oil and gas exploration, we currently are a vehicle to investigate and, if such investigation warrants, acquire a target company or business seeking the perceived advantages of being a publicly held corporation. Our principal business objective for the next 12 months and beyond such time will be to achieve long-term growth potential through a combination with a business rather than immediate, short-term earnings. We will not restrict our potential candidate target companies to any specific business, industry or geographical location and, thus, may acquire any type of business.
We may consider a business which has recently commenced operations, is a developing company in need of additional funds for expansion into new products or markets, is seeking to develop a new product or service, or is an established business which may be experiencing financial or operating difficulties and is in need of additional capital. In the alternative, a business combination may involve the acquisition of, or merger with, a company which does not need substantial additional capital, but which desires to establish a public trading market for its shares, while avoiding, among other things, the time delays, significant expense, and loss of voting control which may occur in a public offering.
We do not currently engage in any business activities that provide cash flow. The costs of investigating and analyzing business combinations for the next 12 months and beyond such time will be paid with money in our treasury, if any, or with additional money contributed by our stockholders, or another source.
During the next 12 months, we anticipate incurring costs related to filing of Exchange Act reports and costs relating to consummating an acquisition. We believe we will be able to meet these costs through use of funds in our treasury and additional amounts, as necessary, to be loaned to or invested in us by our stockholders, management or other investors.
We have not had any preliminary contact or discussions with any representative of any other entity regarding a business combination with us. Any target business that is selected may be a financially unstable company or an entity in its early stages of development or growth, including entities without established records of sales or earnings. In that event, we will be subject to numerous risks inherent in the business and operations of financially unstable and early stage or potential emerging growth companies. In addition, we may effect a business combination with an entity in an industry characterized by a high level of risk, and, although our management will endeavor to evaluate the risks inherent in a particular target business, there can be no assurance that we will properly ascertain or assess all significant risks.
Our management anticipates that it will likely be able to effect only one business combination, due primarily to our limited financing, and the dilution of interest for present and prospective stockholders, which is likely to occur as a result of our management's plan to offer a controlling interest to a target business in order to achieve a tax-free reorganization. This lack of diversification should be considered a substantial risk in investing in us, because it will not permit us to offset potential losses from one venture against gains from another.
We anticipate that the selection of a business combination will be complex and extremely risky. Potentially available business combinations may occur in many different industries and at various stages of development, all of which will make the task of comparative investigation and analysis of such business opportunities extremely difficult and complex.
In light of our competitive disadvantages, our strategy for successfully identifying and completing business combinations when we are competing with entities that possess great financial, technical and managerial capabilities is as follows.
POTENTIAL TARGET COMPANIES
A business entity, if any, which may be interested in a business combination with the Company may include the following:
·a company for which a primary purpose of becoming public is the use of its securities for the acquisition of assets or businesses;
·a company which is unable to find an underwriter of its securities or is unable to find an underwriter of securities on terms acceptable to it;
·a company which wishes to become public with less dilution of its common stock than would occur upon an underwriting;
·a company which believes that it will be able to obtain investment capital on more favorable terms after it has become public;
·a foreign company which may wish an initial entry into the United States securities market;
·a special situation company, such as a company seeking a public market to satisfy redemption requirements under a qualified Employee Stock Option Plan;
·a company seeking one or more of the other perceived benefits of becoming a public company.
It is possible that a potential business opportunity may not be beneficial or desirable for our shareholders. A potential target may not be able to find an underwriter because the business opportunity is too risky, the target does not have significant operations, the target has limited history of operations or many other reasons. As a part of due diligence investigation of any potential target, the Company will assess the desirability of any identified target with regard to the risks it may present.
A business combination with a target company will normally involve the transfer to the target company of the majority of the issued and outstanding common stock of the Company, and the substitution by the target company of its own management and board of directors. No assurances can be given that the Company will be able to enter into a business combination, as to the terms of a business combination, or as to the nature of the target company.
The Company is seeking to acquire assets or shares of an entity actively engaged in business which generates revenues. The Company has no particular acquisitions in mind and has not entered into any negotiations regarding such acquisition. The Company’s officers and directors have not engaged in any substantive contact or discussions with any representative of any other company regarding the possibility of an acquisition or merger between the Company and such other company as of the date of this registration statement.
The Company does not anticipate engaging any professional firms or other individuals that specialize in business acquisitions but will rely upon the Company’s business contacts and relationships in seeking a suitable acquisition.
As part of our investigation of business opportunities, the Company's management may meet personally with management and key personnel of the firm sponsoring the business opportunity. The Company may visit and inspect material facilities, obtain independent analysis or verification of certain information provided, check references of management and key personnel, and conduct other reasonable measures.
We will generally ask to be provided with written materials regarding the business opportunity. These materials may include the following:
·descriptions of product, service and company history; management resumes;
·financial information;
·available projections with related assumptions upon which they are based;
·an explanation of proprietary products and services;
·evidence of existing patents, trademarks or service marks or rights thereto;
·present and proposed forms of compensation to management;
·a description of transactions between the prospective entity and its affiliates;
·relevant analysis of risks and competitive conditions;
·a financial plan of operation and estimated capital requirements;
·and other information deemed relevant.
We believe an acquisition or merger with the Company may be an appealing avenue for a private company seeking to enter the public company sector because the Company intends to apply for a trading symbol and quotation on the Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board and/or OTC Markets. Any private company can file their own registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission in order to become a public company. Once a registration statement is declared effective, the registrant must then provide certain information through a market maker for application for a trading symbol. Both the registration statement process and application for a trading symbol can be lengthy and expensive. Often, a private company will opt to merge with or be acquired by a company that is already public and has a trading symbol in order to reduce the time and expense required to go public on their own.
Any private company that enters a merger or acquisition transaction with the Company must provide all the information required by the Securities and Exchange Commission in a Form 10 registration statement, including audited financial statements, which will be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission in a Form 8-K Current Report within four days of closing the transaction. The private company will incur significant expense in providing the required information.
If the Company enters into a transaction with a private company, it will likely first liquidate the assets and pay off the liabilities so the private company will not receive any benefit of assets currently held by the Company.
The Company will not seek shareholder approval for any merger, acquisition or similar reorganization. Shareholder approval for this type of business opportunity is not required under Nevada law nor is it required by the Company’s Articles of Incorporation. Shareholder approval will be required if the transaction requires a name change, change in capital structure of the Company, stock splits or any other action that requires shareholder approval under Nevada law or our Articles of Incorporation. In the event shareholder approval is required for actions other than a business opportunity, the Company will prepare, file with the SEC and mail to shareholders the appropriate information statement or proxy statement, if required.
We believe the sum required to consummate our acquisition or reverse merger is not determinable until the Company knows the terms of the transaction. The amount of cash the Company had on hand as of December 31, 2020 is $0. Such acquisition or reverse merger may be costly. We currently have very limited resources with which to complete the acquisition or reverse merger and no cash. If we are able raise any capital, all of our cash may be exhausted prior to or in the process of trying to complete the acquisition or reverse merger.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
It is the intent of our management and stockholders to provide sufficient working capital necessary to support and preserve the integrity of our Company as a corporate entity. However, there is no legal obligation for either the majority Shareholder or our key officers to provide additional future funding. If our management and/or key officers ceases to provide us the needed financing and we fail to identify any alternative sources of funding, there will be substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a “going concern”.
We have no current plans, proposals, arrangements or understandings with respect to the sale or issuance of additional securities. As a result, there can be no assurance that sufficient funds will be available to us to enable us to pay the expenses related to such activities.
Regardless of whether or not our cash assets prove to be adequate to meet our operational needs, we may seek to compensate providers of services by issuances of our common stock in lieu of cash.
At December 31, 2020, we had no cash assets, $257,836 in liabilities, and an accumulated deficit of $2,030,476. Our primary source of liquidity has been from shareholder advances. As of December 31, 2020, the Company owed $24,471 in trade payables, $30,620 in notes and related interest, and $202,745 in related party advances loaned to the company.
Net cash used in operating activities was $33,358 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $33,358 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our expenses to date are comprised of professional and regulatory fees that include accounting and legal fees.
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
NET LOSS FROM OPERATIONS
The Company had net losses of $36,092 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a net loss of $34,598 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 consisted of professional and regulatory fees associated with our reporting requirements.