ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Item 6. “Selected Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” This section of the Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons of 2020 to 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons of 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 on our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors including, but not limited to, those discussed in Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
We operate on a 52- or 53-week fiscal year ending on the Tuesday closest to December 31. Fiscal years 2020 and 2019, which ended on December 29, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, contained 52 weeks. We refer to our fiscal years as 2020 and 2019. Our fiscal quarters each contained 13 operating weeks.
Overview
Noodles & Company is a restaurant concept offering lunch and dinner within the fast-casual segment of the restaurant industry. We opened our first location in 1995, offering noodle and pasta dishes, staples of many different cuisines, with the goal of delivering fresh ingredients and flavors from around the world under one roof. Today, our globally-inspired menu includes a wide variety of high quality, cooked-to-order dishes, including noodles and pasta, soups, salads and appetizers. We believe we offer our customers value with per person spend of approximately $10.12 in 2020.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in significant disruption to the restaurant industry and adversely affected our business. The greatest impact to our sales and overall financial results was during the initial stages of the pandemic, beginning the third week of March 2020 through the end of May 2020. During this period, we temporarily closed nearly all of our dining rooms and migrated to a nearly entire off-premise model, driven by local government imposed restrictions in areas where we operate our restaurants.
COVID-19 related disruption mitigated somewhat during the summer in 2020, due to more relaxed government restrictions in certain markets and seasonal weather which allowed for outdoor gatherings. Comparable sales meaningfully and progressively improved during this time compared to the initial disruption at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, during the fourth quarter, our business was further impacted due to a rise in hospitalizations and local restrictions. During this more recent period, we did not see the same level of volatility in our sales or overall financial results compared to the initial stages of the pandemic, driven in part by our investment in our off-premise model and continued safety protocols.
The health and well-being of our employees and guests was and continues to remain our top priority. We invested in safety standards and restaurant supplies to enforce a high level of cleanliness by providing sanitizers throughout the restaurants, reinforcing wellness protocols and requiring frequent handwashing. In addition, we closely followed recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and local health departments and implemented social distancing restrictions, face mask requirements, enhanced cleaning processes and enhanced sanitizing in our high-traffic areas. Collectively, these efforts give our employees and guests confidence that we remain dedicated to our commitment to keep them safe.
Our business was well-positioned for the transition to largely off-premise dining. We continued our investment in digital technology to promote our off-premise channel, including implementing direct delivery nationwide through the Noodles app and website, expanding our third party delivery services, and launching curbside delivery at all of our restaurants. The shifting demand pattern towards our off-premise offerings, including delivery, has caused a reduction in our restaurant level margins due primarily to higher delivery fees, partially offset by improved efficiencies throughout the balance of our expense profile, most notably in our labor model.
The ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our longer-term operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the availability and widespread distribution of safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines. Many of these future developments are outside of our control and all are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. As of the date of this filing,
significant uncertainty continues to exist concerning the magnitude of the impact and the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic. As of the date of this filing, substantially all of our restaurants continue to operate, and dining rooms are open in over 90% of our company-owned locations. While we cannot predict the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our business, we intend to continue to actively monitor the evolving situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our team members, customers, suppliers and shareholders. For a further discussion of the impacts that the COVID-19 pandemic has had on our financial results refer to the “Results of Operations.”
Recent Trends, Risks and Uncertainties
Comparable Restaurant Sales. In fiscal 2020, system-wide comparable restaurant sales decreased 12.0%, comprised of an 11.6% decrease for company-owned restaurants and a 14.5% decrease for franchise restaurants primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including temporary closures of restaurants. Comparable restaurant sales represent year-over-year sales comparisons for restaurants open for at least 18 full periods. For fiscal year 2020, restaurants that were temporarily closed or operating at reduced hours and dining capacity due to the COVID-19 pandemic remained in comparable restaurant sales.
Our full year comparable sales results were impacted by volatility related to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we believe that the volatility in our sales performance was offset by our strong brand positioning and ability to meet the needs of today's consumer for great tasting healthy food served conveniently where and when guests want it. Our ability to return to positive comparable sales depends, among other reasons, on (i) the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, (ii) limitations imposed by federal, state and local governments with respect to reduced seating capacity in our restaurants and other social distancing measures, (iii) our customers’ future willingness to eat at restaurants and (iv) macroeconomic conditions and the length of time required for the national and local economies to achieve economic recovery following the crisis.
Cost of Sales. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have and expect to continue to incur incremental costs of sales, including the use of additional packaging supplies to support the continued increase in to-go and off-premise orders. Despite the increased packaging costs, we have continued to work with our suppliers for ongoing supply chain savings resulting in lower cost of sales. To date, there has been minimal disruption to our supply chain network, including the supply of our ingredients, packaging or other sourced materials, though it is possible that more significant disruptions could occur if the COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the markets in which we operate. We are working closely with our distributors and contract manufacturers as the situation evolves. We intend to continue to actively monitor the situation, including the status of our supply chain, to determine the appropriate actions to minimize any interruptions.
Labor Costs. Similar to much of the restaurant industry, our base labor costs have risen in recent periods. In 2020, we were able to offset the impact of increased base labor costs through labor efficiencies such as our procedures around optimizing food preparation times. Additionally, with the increased adoption of digital ordering from our customers, we modified our labor model to reduce the number of front of house labor hours in our restaurants. Some jurisdictions in which we operate have recently increased their minimum wage and other jurisdictions are considering similar actions. Significant additional government-imposed increases could materially affect our labor costs.
Other Restaurant Operating Costs. We have and expect to continue to incur additional third-party delivery fees resulting from a significant expansion of our use of third-party delivery services due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Restaurant Development. Given an anticipated increase in favorable real estate availability, we expect to incorporate increased unit development into our strategic growth plan for 2021 and beyond. In 2021, we plan to open between ten and fifteen restaurants system-wide and develop a pipeline to support a 7% to 10% unit growth rate beginning in 2022.
In 2020, we opened four company-owned restaurants, refranchised nine restaurants and closed six company-owned restaurants, while our franchisees closed one restaurant and did not open any restaurants in 2020. As of December 29, 2020, we had 378 company-owned restaurants and 76 franchise restaurants in 29 states.
Certain Restaurant Closures. We closed six and five company-owned restaurants in 2020 and 2019, respectively, most of which were at or approaching the expiration of their leases. We currently do not anticipate significant restaurant closures for the foreseeable future; however, we may from time to time close certain restaurants, including closures at, or near, the expiration of their leases.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets. We impaired eight restaurants in 2020 and two restaurants in 2019 and wrote down the assets related to the sale of nine company-owned restaurants to a franchisee that closed in January of 2020.
Impairment is based on our current assessment of the expected future cash flows of various restaurants based on recent results and other specific market factors. Many of these restaurants we had opened in the last three to four years in newer markets where brand awareness of our restaurants was not as strong and where it had been more difficult to adequately staff our restaurants. Although impairment charges have meaningfully declined since 2017, we may recognize impairment charges in the future.
Key Measures We Use to Evaluate Our Performance
To evaluate the performance of our business, we utilize a variety of financial and performance measures. These key measures include revenue, average unit volumes (“AUVs”), comparable restaurant sales, restaurant contribution, restaurant contribution margin, EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA.
Revenue
Restaurant revenue represents sales of food and beverages in company-owned restaurants. Several factors affect our restaurant revenue in any period, including the number of restaurants in operation and per-restaurant sales.
Franchise royalties and fees represent royalty income and initial franchise fees. While we expect that the majority of our revenue and net income growth will be driven by company-owned restaurants, our franchise restaurants remain an important factor impacting our revenue and financial performance.
Seasonal factors cause our revenue to fluctuate from quarter to quarter. Our revenue per restaurant is typically lower in the first and fourth quarters due to reduced winter and holiday traffic and higher in the second and third quarters. As a result of these factors, our quarterly and annual operating results and comparable restaurant sales may fluctuate significantly.
Average Unit Volumes
AUVs consist of the average annualized sales of all company-owned restaurants for a given time period. AUVs are calculated by dividing restaurant revenue by the number of operating days within each time period and multiplying by the number of operating days we have in a typical year. This measurement allows management to assess changes in consumer traffic and per person spending patterns at our restaurants.
Comparable Restaurant Sales
Comparable restaurant sales refer to year-over-year sales comparisons for the comparable restaurant base. We define the comparable restaurant base to include restaurants open for at least 18 full periods. As of the end of 2020, 2019 and 2018, there were 368, 383 and 392 restaurants, respectively, in our comparable restaurant base for company-owned locations. This measure highlights performance of existing restaurants, as the impact of new restaurant openings is excluded. For fiscal year 2020, restaurants that were temporarily closed or operating at reduced hours and dining capacity due to the COVID-19 pandemic remained in comparable restaurant sales. Changes in comparable restaurant sales are generated by changes in traffic, which we calculate as the number of entrées sold, or changes in per-person spend, calculated as sales divided by traffic. Per-person spend can be influenced by changes in menu prices and the mix and number of items sold per person.
Measuring our comparable restaurant sales allows us to evaluate the performance of our existing restaurant base. Various factors impact comparable restaurant sales, including, but not limited to:
•consumer recognition of our brand and our ability to respond to changing consumer preferences;
•overall economic trends, particularly those related to consumer spending;
•our ability to operate restaurants effectively and efficiently to meet consumer expectations;
•pricing;
•the number of restaurant transactions, per-person spend and average check amount;
•marketing and promotional efforts;
•abnormal weather patterns;
•food safety and foodborne illness concerns;
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•local competition;
•trade area dynamics;
•introduction of new and seasonal menu items and limited time offerings; and
•opening new restaurants in the vicinity of existing locations.
Consistent with common industry practice, we present comparable restaurant sales on a calendar-adjusted basis that aligns current year sales weeks with comparable periods in the prior year, regardless of whether they belong to the same fiscal period or not. Since opening new company-owned and franchise restaurants is a part of our growth strategy and we anticipate new restaurants will be a component of our revenue growth, comparable restaurant sales are only one measure of how we evaluate our performance.
Restaurant Contribution and Restaurant Contribution Margin
Restaurant contribution represents restaurant revenue less restaurant operating costs which are cost of sales, labor, occupancy and other restaurant operating costs. Restaurant contribution margin represents restaurant contribution as a percentage of restaurant revenue. We expect restaurant contribution to increase in proportion to the number of new restaurants we open and our comparable restaurant sales growth.
We believe that restaurant contribution and restaurant contribution margin are important tools for investors and other interested parties because they are widely-used metrics within the restaurant industry to evaluate restaurant-level productivity, efficiency and performance. We also use restaurant contribution and restaurant contribution margin as metrics to evaluate the profitability of incremental sales at our restaurants, restaurant performance across periods and restaurant financial performance compared with competitors. Restaurant contribution and restaurant contribution margin are supplemental measures of the operating performance of our restaurants and are not reflective of the underlying performance of our business because corporate-level expenses are excluded from these measures.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
We define EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest expense, provision (benefit) for income taxes and depreciation and amortization. We define adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest expense, provision (benefit) for income taxes, depreciation and amortization, restaurant impairments, closure costs and asset disposals, certain litigation settlements, data breach assessments, non-recurring registration and related transaction costs, loss on extinguishment of debt, severance costs and stock-based compensation.
We believe that EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA provide clear pictures of our operating results by eliminating certain non-recurring and non-cash expenses that may vary widely from period to period and are not reflective of the underlying business performance.
The presentation of restaurant contribution, restaurant contribution margin, EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or to be superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). We use these non-GAAP financial measures for financial and operational decision making and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We believe that they provide useful information to management and investors about operating results, enhance the overall understanding of past financial performance and future prospects and allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in its financial and operational decision making.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net (loss) income to EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA:
_____________
(1)Restaurant impairments and closure costs in all periods presented above include amounts related to restaurants previously impaired or closed. Additionally, 2020 and 2019 include closure costs of six and five restaurants, respectively. Fiscal year 2020 had $4.1 million of impairment charges and 2019 had $2.6 million of impairment charges and $3.6 million write down of assets for the sale of nine company-owned restaurants to a franchisee that was completed in January of 2020. See Note 6, Restaurant Impairments, Closure Costs and Asset Disposals.
(2)Fiscal year 2019 includes expenses related to transaction and acquisition costs related to the purchase of one franchise restaurant and other refranchising costs.
(3)Fiscal year 2019 includes the loss on extinguishment of debt resulting from writing off certain remaining unamortized debt issuance costs related to our credit facility with U.S. Bank National Association (the “2018 Credit Facility”) which was amended in November 2019.
(4)Severance costs are related to departmental structural changes and the departure of certain executives.
(5)Fiscal year 2019 includes an adjustment related to the departure of Paul Murphy, our former Executive Chairman.
Key Financial Definitions
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes the direct costs associated with the food, beverage and packaging of our menu items. Cost of sales also includes any costs related to discounted menu items. Cost of sales is a substantial expense and can be expected to change proportionally as our restaurant revenue changes. Fluctuations in cost of sales are caused primarily by volatility in the cost of commodity food items and related contracts for such items. Other important factors causing fluctuations in cost of sales include seasonality, discounting activity and restaurant level management of food waste.
Labor Costs
Labor costs include wages, payroll taxes, workers’ compensation expense, benefits and incentives paid to our restaurant teams. Similar to certain other expense items, we expect labor costs to change proportionally as our restaurant revenue changes. Factors that influence fluctuations in our labor costs include minimum wage and payroll tax legislation, the frequency and severity of workers’ compensation claims, health care costs and the performance of our restaurants.
Occupancy Costs
Occupancy costs include rent, common area maintenance charges and real estate tax expense related to our restaurants and are expected to grow proportionally as we open new restaurants.
Other Restaurant Operating Costs
Other restaurant operating costs include the costs of repairs and maintenance, utilities, restaurant-level marketing, credit card processing fees, third-party delivery fees, restaurant supplies and other restaurant operating costs. Similar to certain other costs, they are expected to grow proportionally as restaurant revenue grows.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense is composed of payroll, other compensation, travel, marketing, accounting and legal fees, insurance and other expenses related to the infrastructure required to support our restaurants. General and administrative expense also includes the non-cash stock compensation expense related to our stock incentive plan.
Depreciation and Amortization
Our principal depreciation and amortization charges relate to depreciation of long-lived assets, such as property, equipment and leasehold improvements, from restaurant construction and ongoing maintenance.
Pre-Opening Costs
Pre-opening costs relate to the costs incurred prior to the opening of a restaurant. These include management labor costs, staff labor costs during training, food and supplies utilized during training, marketing costs and other pre-opening related costs. Pre-opening costs also include rent recorded between the date of possession and the opening date for our restaurants.
Restaurant Impairments, Closure Costs and Asset Disposals
Restaurant impairments, closure costs and asset disposals include the net gain or loss on disposal of long-lived assets related to retirements and replacement of equipment or leasehold improvements, restaurant closures and impairment charges.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest on our outstanding indebtedness and amortization of debt issuance costs over the life of the related debt reduced by capitalized interest.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes
Provision (benefit) for income taxes consists of federal, state and local taxes on our income.
Restaurant Openings, Closures and Relocations
The following table shows restaurants opened or closed in the years indicated:
_____________________________
(1)During 2020, we sold nine company-owned restaurants to a franchisee. During 2019 we acquired one franchise restaurant and sold five company-owned restaurants to a franchisee.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes key components of our results of operations for the periods indicated as a percentage of our total revenue, except for the components of restaurant operating costs, which are expressed as a percentage of restaurant revenue.
Fiscal Year 2020 compared to Fiscal Year 2019
The table below presents our operating results for 2020 and 2019, and the related year-over-year changes:
_____________
* Not meaningful.
Revenue
Total revenue decreased by $68.8 million, or 14.9%, in 2020 compared to 2019. This decrease was due to a decline in traffic related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, temporary store closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic, six restaurants permanently closed in 2020, as well as a $10.3 million decrease related to the refranchising of nine total restaurants, partially offset by increases in pricing and growth from the four new restaurants opened in 2020 and the opening of four new restaurants in 2019.
Average unit volumes decreased 8.9% to $1.1 million in 2020 compared to $1.2 million in 2019. System-wide comparable restaurant sales decreased 12.0% in 2020, comprised of an 11.6% decrease at company-owned restaurants and a 14.5% decrease at franchise-owned restaurants.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales decreased by $19.5 million, or 16.6%, in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to the reduction in restaurant revenue. As a percentage of restaurant revenue, cost of sales decreased to 25.1% in 2020 from 25.7% in 2019. The decrease as a percentage of restaurant revenue was primarily due to ongoing supply chain initiatives, increased menu pricing and lower discounting, partially offset by higher packaging costs associated with the shift to increased off-premise sales in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Labor Costs
Labor costs decreased by $24.1 million, or 16.0%, in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to the decline in restaurant sales associated with the COVID-19 pandemic as well as labor initiatives implemented in 2020. These initiatives included modifying our labor model to reduce the number of front of house hours in our restaurants, especially during the time that indoor dining rooms were closed. As a percentage of restaurant revenue, labor costs decreased to 32.5% in 2020 compared to 33.0% in 2019 as a result of the labor initiatives implemented.
Occupancy Costs
Occupancy costs decreased by $2.1 million, or 4.2%, in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to the favorable impact of restaurant closures since the beginning of 2019 as well as rent abatements from lease negotiations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a percentage of restaurant revenue, occupancy costs increased to 12.0% in 2020 from 10.7% in 2019, due to modest new unit growth and a reduction in restaurant revenue.
Other Restaurant Operating Costs
Other restaurant operating costs increased by $4.5 million, or 6.8%, in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to increased third-party delivery fees partially offset by lower utility costs, lower credit card fees and lower repairs and maintenance in 2020. As a percentage of restaurant revenue, other restaurant operating costs increased to 18.3% in 2020 from 14.6% in 2019, due primarily to increased third-party delivery fees resulting from a significant expansion of our use of third-party delivery services due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense decreased by $0.6 million, or 1.3%, in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to the cost savings initiatives implemented as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including position reductions, furloughs, temporary salary reductions and reduction in bonus expense, partially offset by an increase in severance and marketing expense. As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expense increased to 10.9% in 2020 compared to 9.4% in 2019, due primarily to the decline in revenue as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization decreased by $0.4 million, or 1.7%, in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to restaurants impaired or closed. As a percentage of revenue, depreciation and amortization increased to 5.5% in 2020 from 4.8% in 2019, due primarily to the decline in restaurant sales as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Pre-Opening Costs
Pre-opening costs remained relatively flat in 2020 compared to 2019.
Restaurant Impairments, Closure Costs and Asset Disposals
Restaurant impairments, closure costs and asset disposals decreased by $1.2 million, or 15.6%, in 2020 compared to 2019. In 2020, we recognized $4.1 million of impairment charges on eight restaurants. In 2019, we had $2.6 million of impairment charges on two restaurants as well as $3.6 million asset write-down related to the divestiture of company-owned restaurants to a franchisee. Both periods include ongoing equipment costs for restaurants previously impaired. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in closure costs and loss on asset disposals during 2020.
Each quarter we evaluate possible impairment of property and equipment at the restaurant level and record an impairment loss whenever we determine that the fair value of these assets is less than their carrying value. There can be no assurance that such evaluations will not result in additional impairment costs in future periods.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
In November 2019, we entered into the first amendment to the 2018 Credit Facility, (the “Amendment” or “Amended Credit Facility”). As a result, we wrote off unamortized debt issuance costs related to the 2018 Credit Facility and recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt in the amount of $0.7 million in 2019.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $0.2 million, or 6.9% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was mainly due to higher average borrowings and a higher average interest rate in 2020 compared to 2019.
Provision (Benefit) from Income Taxes
The effective tax rate was (0.4)% in 2020 compared to 5.9% in 2019. The effective tax rates in 2020 and 2019 are primarily related to changes in indefinite-lived intangibles. We will continue to maintain a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets until there is sufficient evidence to support a full or partial reversal. The reversal of a previously recorded valuation allowance will generally result in a benefit from income tax.
Quarterly Financial Data
The following table presents select historical quarterly consolidated statements of operations data and other operations data for fiscal years 2020 and 2019. Each fiscal quarter contained 13 operating weeks.
_____________
(1)Fiscal 2020 includes $1.1 million of closure costs primarily related to six restaurants closed in 2020, most of which were at or approaching the expiration of their leases and ongoing costs related to previously closed restaurants. Additionally, in 2020 we recognized $4.1 million of impairment charges.
(2)Fiscal year 2019 includes $0.4 million of closure costs primarily related to five restaurants closed in 2019, most of which were at or approaching the expiration of their leases and ongoing costs related to previously closed restaurants. Additionally, in 2019 we recognized $2.6 million of impairment charges and $3.6 million related to the write down of assets held for sale for nine restaurants subsequently sold to a franchisee.
A reconciliation of (loss) income from operations to restaurant contribution is presented below:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 29, 2020, our available cash and cash equivalents balance was $7.8 million, and $52.3 million was available for future borrowings under our Second Amended Credit Facility (defined below).
Our short-term obligations consist primarily of certain lease and other contractual commitments related to our operations, normal recurring operating expenses, working capital needs, new store development, capital improvements and maintenance of our restaurants, regular interest payments on our debt obligations and certain non-recurring expenditures (see Contractual Obligations).
Our long-term obligations consist primarily of certain lease and other contractual commitments related to our operations and principal payments on our outstanding debt obligations (see Contractual Obligations). In addition, our growth target for new store development will require capital each year which is expected to be funded by currently available cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations and our revolving credit facility.
On May 9, 2018, we entered into the 2018 Credit Facility which consists of a term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $25.0 million and a revolving line of credit of $65.0 million, which included a letter of credit subfacility in the amount of $15.0 million and a swingline subfacility in the amount of $10.0 million. The 2018 Credit Facility had a four-year term with a maturity date of May 9, 2022.
Upon execution of the 2018 Credit Facility, we repaid in full our outstanding indebtedness under our Prior Credit Facility using funds drawn on our 2018 Credit Facility. Upon repayment, the Prior Credit Facility and all related agreements were terminated.
In the third quarter of 2018, we sold shares of our common stock in a public offering for aggregate gross proceeds of $25.0 million ($23.0 million after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions, and net of transaction expenses incurred). We utilized the net proceeds from this transaction to pay down borrowings under the 2018 Credit Facility and to fund working capital obligations, including the payment of the final assessment for data breach liabilities.
In 2018, we paid approximately $5.4 million for the termination of leases related to restaurants closed in the first quarter of 2017, including related fees and expenses.
On November 20, 2019, we amended our 2018 Credit Facility by entering into that certain First Amendment to Credit Agreement (the “Amendment” or “Amended Credit Facility”). Among other things, the Amendment: (i) extended the maturity date to November 20, 2024; (ii) increased the revolving credit facility from $65.0 million to $75.0 million; (iii) delayed step downs of the Company’s leverage covenant; and (iv) increased the limit on capital expenditures to $37.0 million in 2020 and to $45.0 million in 2021 and each fiscal year thereafter.
On June 16, 2020 (the “Effective Date”), we amended our Amended Credit Facility by entering into the Second Amendment to the Credit Facility (the “Second Amendment” or the “Second Amended Credit Facility”). Beginning on the Effective Date and through the third quarter of 2021 (the “Amendment Period”), borrowings under the Second Amended Credit Facility, including the term loan facility (“Borrowings”), will bear interest at LIBOR plus 3.25% per annum. Following the Amendment Period, Borrowings will bear interest at LIBOR plus a margin of 2.00% to 3.00% per annum, based upon the consolidated total lease-adjusted leverage ratio. Among other things, the Second Amendment (i) waives the lease-adjusted leverage ratio and fixed charge ratio covenants through the first quarter of 2021; (ii) amends the Company’s lease-adjusted leverage ratio and fixed coverage ratio covenant thresholds beginning in the second quarter of 2021 through the third quarter of 2022 and the first quarter of 2022, respectively and (iii) limits capital expenditures to $12.0 million in 2020, $12.0 million plus a liquidity-based performance basket up to an additional $12.0 million in 2021, $34.0 million in 2022, $37.0 million in 2023 and $45.0 million annually thereafter. Our Second Amended Credit Facility is secured by a pledge of stock of substantially all of our subsidiaries and a lien on substantially all of our and our subsidiaries’ personal property assets.
As of December 29, 2020, we had $43.8 million of indebtedness (excluding $1.7 million of unamortized debt issuance costs) and $3.2 million of letters of credit outstanding under the Second Amended Credit Facility. The term loan requires principal payments of $187,500 per quarter through the third quarter of 2021, $375,000 through the third quarter of 2022, $531,250 through the third quarter of 2023 and $625,000 per quarter thereafter through maturity.
Availability of borrowings under the Second Amended Credit Facility is conditioned upon our compliance with the terms of the Amendment, including the financial covenants and other customary affirmative and negative covenants, such as limitations on additional borrowings, acquisitions, dividend payments and lease commitments, and customary representations and warranties. As of December 29, 2020, we were in compliance with all of our debt covenants.
We expect that we will meet all applicable financial covenants in our Second Amended Credit Facility, including the maximum consolidated total lease-adjusted leverage ratio, through at least the next four fiscal quarters. However, there can be no assurance we will meet such financial covenants. If such covenants are not met, we would be required to seek a waiver or amendment from the banks participating in the credit facility. There can be no assurance that such waiver or amendment would be granted, which could have a material adverse impact on our liquidity.
We have historically used cash to fund capital expenditures for new restaurant openings, reinvest in our existing restaurants, invest in infrastructure and information technology and maintain working capital. Our working capital position benefits from the fact that we generally collect cash from sales to customers the same day, or in the case of credit or debit card transactions, within several days of the related sale, and we typically have up to 30 days to pay our vendors.
We believe that we have sufficient liquidity to meet our liquidity needs and capital resource requirements for the next twelve months primarily through currently available cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations and undrawn capacity under our revolving credit line.
Cash Flow Analysis
Cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities are shown in the following table:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 decreased $20.9 million compared to 2019. The change in operating cash flows resulted from a decline in revenue related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, adjusted for non-cash items such as depreciation and amortization, restaurant impairments, closure costs and asset disposals and stock-based compensation as well as changes in working capital.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was primarily related to new restaurant capital expenditures for the opening of four, four and one company-owned restaurant in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, as well as information technology expenses.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $0.8 million in 2020 largely related to repayments of long-term debt similar to 2019. During 2018, the primary sources and uses of cash from financing activities included net proceeds of $23.0 million from our public offering of our common stock, net of repayments of $12.1 million on long-term debt.
Capital Resources
Future Capital Expenditure Requirements. Our capital expenditure requirements are primarily dependent upon the pace of our real estate development program and resulting new restaurant openings, costs for maintenance and remodeling of our existing restaurants, as well as information technology expenses and other general corporate capital expenditures.
Our total capital expenditures for 2020 were $11.8 million, and we expect our 2021 capital expenditures to be in the range of $20.0 million to $24.0 million, utilizing our $12.0 million performance bucket for 2021. Our capital expenditures in 2021 are expected to be related to our construction of new restaurants before any reductions for landlord reimbursements, reinvestment in existing restaurants and investments in technology. We expect such capital expenditures to be funded by a combination of cash from operations and borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
Current Resources. Our operations have not required significant working capital and, like many restaurant companies, we operate with negative working capital. Restaurant sales are primarily paid for in cash or by credit or debit card, and restaurant operations do not require significant inventories or receivables. In addition, we receive trade credit for the purchase of food, beverages and supplies, therefore reducing the need for incremental working capital to support growth.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations consist of lease obligations, purchase obligations, long-term debt and other liabilities. See Note 4 Long-Term Debt and Note 12 Leases for further discussion. We are obligated under non-cancelable leases for our restaurants, administrative offices and equipment. In addition to those lease obligations, we have legally binding minimum lease payments for leases signed but not yet commenced amounting to $6.1 million as of December 29, 2020. We enter into various purchase obligations in the ordinary course of business. As of December 29, 2020, our binding purchase obligations amounting to $44.2 million relate to volume commitments for beverage and food products, as well as binding commitments for the constructions of new restaurants. Our other liabilities of $4.7 million as of December 29, 2020 include expected payments associated with the employer payroll tax deferral under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) and our commitment under our non-qualified deferred compensation plan.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements or obligations as of December 29, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with GAAP. Preparing consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by the application of our accounting policies. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1, Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements. Critical accounting estimates are those that require application of management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. While we apply our judgment based on assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, actual results could vary from these assumptions. It is possible that materially different amounts would be reported using different assumptions. We believe the critical accounting policies described below affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review long-lived assets, such as property and equipment, right of use assets and intangibles, subject to amortization, for impairment when events or circumstances indicate the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. In determining the recoverability of the asset value, an analysis is performed at the individual restaurant level and primarily includes an assessment of historical cash flows and other relevant factors and circumstances. The other factors and circumstances include changes in the economic environment, changes in the manner in which assets are used, unfavorable changes in legal factors or business climate, incurring excess costs in construction of the asset, overall restaurant operating performance and projections for future performance. These estimates result in a wide range of variability on a year to year basis due to the nature of the criteria. Negative restaurant-level cash flow over the previous 12 periods is considered a potential impairment indicator. In such situations, we evaluate future undiscounted cash flow projections in conjunction with qualitative factors and future operating plans. Our impairment assessment process requires the use of estimates and assumptions regarding the future undiscounted cash flows and operating outcomes, which are based upon a significant degree of management’s judgment.
In performing our impairment testing, we forecast our future undiscounted cash flows by looking at recent restaurant level performance, restaurant level operating plans, sales trends and cost trends for cost of sales, labor and operating expenses. We
believe that this combination of information gives us a fair benchmark to estimate future undiscounted cash flows. We compare this cash flow forecast, excluding occupancy rent expense, to the asset’s carrying value, excluding lease liability, at the restaurant. Based on this analysis, if the carrying amount of the assets is greater than the estimated future undiscounted cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized, measured as the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the asset.
Leases
We lease all restaurant facilities, office space and certain equipment. Pursuant to FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 842, beginning on January 2, 2019, we record a net operating lease right-of-use (“ROU”) asset and operating lease liability on our Consolidated Balance Sheets for all operating leases with a contract term in excess of 12 months. Prior to the adoption of ASC Topic 842, these leases were treated as operating leases under ASC Topic 840 and therefore were not recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make future lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recorded at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. To determine the present value of lease payments not yet paid, we estimate incremental borrowing rates corresponding to the reasonably certain lease term. As most of our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use the incremental borrowing rate based on information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We recognize lease expense for these short-term leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Our leases typically contain rent escalations over the lease term. We recognize expense for these leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Additionally, tenant incentives used to fund leasehold improvements are recognized when earned and reduce the right-of-use asset related to the lease. These are amortized through the right-of-use asset as reductions of expense over the lease term. Rent expense for the period prior to the restaurant opening is reported as pre-opening expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1, Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this report.