Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements that are based on our management’s current beliefs and assumptions, which statements are subject to substantial risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed in “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report. Please also see “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements”and “Risk Factor Summary” at the beginning of this Annual Report.
Overview
We are leveraging experience with pre-clinical enhanced ultrasound devices to develop technology for increasing the capabilities of clinical diagnostic ultrasound, to broaden patient access to the safe diagnosis and treatment of a number of significant medical conditions in circumstances where expensive X-ray computed tomography (“CT”) and magnetic resonance imaging (“MRI”) technology, or other diagnostic technologies such as surgical biopsy, are unavailable or impractical.
In 2010, we began marketing and selling our Nexus 128 system, which combined light-based thermoacoustics and ultrasound to address the imaging needs of researchers studying disease models in pre-clinical applications. Building on this expertise in thermoacoustics, we have developed a next-generation technology platform - Thermo Acoustic Enhanced Ultrasound, or TAEUS - which is intended to enhance the capability of clinical ultrasound technology and support the diagnosis and treatment of a number of significant medical conditions that currently require the use of expensive CT or MRI imaging or where imaging is not practical using existing technology. We ceased production, service support and parts for our Nexus 128 system in 2019 in order to focus our resources on the development of our TAEUS technology.
Unlike the near-infrared light pulses used in our legacy Nexus 128 system, our TAEUS technology uses radio frequency (“RF”) pulses to stimulate tissues, using a small fraction (less than 1%) of the energy that would be transmitted into the body during an MRI scan. The use of RF energy allows our TAEUS technology to penetrate deep into tissue, enabling the imaging of human anatomy at depths equivalent to those of conventional ultrasound. The RF pulses are absorbed by tissue and converted into ultrasound signals, which are detected by an external ultrasound receiver and a digital acquisition system that is part of the TAEUS system. The detected ultrasound is processed into images and other forms of data using our proprietary algorithms and displayed to complement conventional gray-scale ultrasound images.
We expect that the first-generation TAEUS application will be a standalone ultrasound accessory designed to cost-effectively quantify fat in the liver and stage progression of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (“NAFLD”), which can only be achieved today with impractical surgical biopsies or MRI scans. Subsequent TAEUS offerings are expected to be implemented via a second generation hardware platform that can run multiple clinical software applications that we will offer TAEUS users for a one-time licensing fee - adding ongoing customer value to the TAEUS platform and a growing software revenue stream for our Company.
In April 2016, we entered into a Collaborative Research Agreement with General Electric Company, acting through its GE Healthcare business unit and the GE Global Research Center (collectively, “GE Healthcare”). Under the terms of the agreement, GE Healthcare has agreed to assist us in our efforts to commercialize our TAEUS technology for use in a fatty liver application by, among other things, providing equipment and technical advice, and facilitating introductions to GE Healthcare clinical ultrasound customers. In return for this assistance, we have agreed to afford GE Healthcare certain rights of first offer with respect to manufacturing and licensing rights for the target application. On December 16, 2020, we and GE Healthcare entered into an amendment to our agreement, extending its term to December 16, 2022.
Each of our TAEUS platform applications will require regulatory approvals before we are able to sell or license the application. Based on certain factors, such as the installed base of ultrasound systems, availability of other imaging technologies, such as CT and MRI, economic strength and applicable regulatory requirements, we intend to seek initial approval of our applications for sale in the European Union and the United States, followed by China.
In March 2020, we received CE mark approval for our TAEUS FLIP (Fatty Liver Imaging Probe) System. The CE marking indicates that TAEUS FLIP System complies with all applicable European Directives and Regulations in the European Union and other CE mark geographies, including the 27 EU member states.
In June 2020, we submitted a 510(k) Application to the FDA for our TAEUS FLIP System.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
No revenue has been generated by our TAEUS technology, which we have not commercially sold as of December 31, 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold
No cost of goods sold has been generated by our TAEUS technology, which we have not commercially sold as of December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses primarily include wages, fees and equipment for the development of our TAEUS technology platform and the proposed applications. Additionally, we incur certain costs associated with the protection of our products and inventions through a combination of patents, licenses, applications and disclosures.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of headcount and consulting costs, and marketing and tradeshow expenses. Currently, our marketing efforts are through our website and attendance of key industry meetings and conferences. In connection with the commercialization of our TAEUS applications, we are building a small sales and marketing team to train and support global ultrasound distributors, and expect to execute traditional marketing activities such as promotional materials, electronic media and participation in industry events and conferences. In September 2020, we hired a full-time sales representative in the United Kingdom.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related expenses for our management and personnel, and professional fees, such as for accounting, consulting and legal services.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Management makes estimates that affect certain accounts including deferred income tax assets, accrued expenses, fair value of equity instruments and reserves for any other commitments or contingencies. Any adjustments applied to estimates are recognized in the period in which such adjustments are determined.
Share-based Compensation
Our 2016 Omnibus Incentive Plan (the “Omnibus Plan”) permits the grant of stock options and other stock awards to our employees, consultants and non-employee members of our board of directors. Each January 1 the pool of shares available for issuance under the Omnibus Plan automatically increases by an amount equal to the lesser of (i) the number of shares necessary such that the aggregate number of shares available under the Omnibus Plan equals 25% of the number of fully-diluted outstanding shares on the increase date (assuming the conversion of all outstanding shares of preferred stock and other outstanding convertible securities and exercise of all outstanding options and warrants to purchase shares) and (ii) if the board of directors takes action to set a lower amount, the amount determined by the board. On January 1, 2021, the pool of shares issuable under the Omnibus Plan automatically increased by 1,599,570 shares from 5,861,658 shares to 7,461,228. As of December 31, 2020, prior to the 1,599,570 share increase, there were 3,891,521 shares of common stock remaining available for issuance under the Omnibus Plan.
We record share-based compensation in accordance with the provisions of the Share-based Compensation Topic of the FASB Codification. The guidance requires the use of option-pricing models that require the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the option’s expected life and the price volatility of the underlying stock. The fair value of each option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option valuation model which uses certain assumptions related to risk-free interest rates, expected volatility, expected life of the common stock options, and future dividends, and the resulting charge is expensed using the straight-line attribution method over the vesting period.
Stock compensation expense recognized during the period is based on the value of share-based awards that were expected to vest during the period adjusted for estimated forfeitures. The estimated fair value of grants of stock options and warrants to non-employees is charged to expense, if applicable, in the financial statements.
Debt Discount and Detachable Debt-Related Warrants
The Company accounts for debt discounts originating in connection with conversion features that are embedded in the notes related warrants in accordance with ASC Subtopic 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options. These costs are classified on the consolidated balance sheet as a direct deduction from the debt liability. The Company amortizes these costs over the term of the securities as interest expense-debt discount in the consolidated statement of operations. Debt discounts relate to the relative fair value of warrants issued in conjunction with the debt and are also recorded as a reduction to the debt balance and accreted over the expected term of the securities to interest expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the accompanying financial statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards.
Results of Operations
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
We had no revenue during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Cost of Goods Sold
We had no cost of goods sold during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses were $5,917,944 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $6,574,999 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $657,055, or 10%. The costs include primarily wages, fees and equipment for the development of our TAEUS product line. Research and development expenses decreased from the same period for the prior year as we completed development of our initial TAEUS product and began focusing our spending on commercialization of the product that has been developed.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses were $581,893 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $412,434 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $169,459, or 41%. The increase was primarily due to additional headcount and pre-selling activities for our TAEUS product line. Currently, our marketing efforts are through our website and attendance of key industry meetings. Subsequent to the period ending December 31, 2020 we began hiring and training additional staff to support our sales efforts.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $5,002,080, compared to $3,856,159 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1,145,921, or 30%. Our wage and related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2,070,747, compared to $1,878,265 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Wage and related expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020 included $215,988 for bonuses and $811,871 of stock compensation expense related to the issuance and vesting of options and RSU’s, compared to $147,915 for bonuses, $720,030 of stock compensation expense related to the issuance and vesting of options, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our professional fees, which include legal, audit, and investor relations, for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2,512,878, compared to $1,455,346 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to additional costs for investor relations related activity, and legal fees associated with our financing transactions.
Amortization of Debt Discount
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred non-cash expenses of $232,426 related to the amortization of debt discount incurred as result of our issuance of our convertible notes and warrants issued in July 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred non-cash expenses of $2,355,469 related to the amortization of debt discount incurred as result of our issuance of our convertible notes and warrants issued in July 2019.
Net Loss
As a result of the foregoing, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a net loss of $11,725,501, compared to a net loss of $13,305,964 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date we have funded our operations through private and public sales of our securities. As of December 31, 2020, we had $7,227,316 in cash. We completed the following financing events from January 2019 through December 2020:
●
In July 2019, we completed a private placement of senior secured convertible promissory notes and warrants, raising net proceeds of approximately $2.5 million after deducting offering expenses of approximately $314,500 payable by us. The promissory notes accrued interest at a rate of 10% per annum until maturity on April 26, 2020.
●
In December 2019, we completed private placements of shares of Series A Preferred Stock, shares of Series B Preferred Stock, shares of common stock and warrants, raising net proceeds of approximately $5.8 million after using approximately $1.9 million to repay debt represented by convertible promissory notes issued in July 2019 and deducting offering expenses of approximately $766,000 payable by us.
●
In March 2020, we entered into an at-the-market equity offering sales agreement (the “HCW ATM Agreement”) with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (“Wainwright”) to sell shares of our common stock for aggregate gross proceeds of up to $7.2 million, from time to time, through an “at-the-market” equity offering program under which Wainwright acts as sales agent. On September 18, 2020 we terminated the HCW ATM Agreement with H.C. Wainwright & Co. We issued an aggregate of 1,421,858 shares of our common stock in return for gross proceeds of $1,372,437 from the at-the-market facility.
●
On September 25, 2020, we entered into an at-the-market equity offering sales agreement (the “Ascendiant ATM Agreement”) with Ascendiant Capital Markets, LLC (“Ascendiant”) to sell shares of our common stock for aggregate gross proceeds of up to $6.8 million, from time to time, through an “at-the-market” equity offering program under which Ascendiant acts as sales agent. The Ascendiant ATM Agreement was terminated by the Company on December 15, 2020 after we had issued an aggregate of 583,633 shares of our common stock under the Ascendiant ATM Agreement for gross proceeds of approximately $473,000.
●
On December 18, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 7,857,286 shares of common stock for net proceeds of approximately $4.9 million pursuant to an underwriting agreement with ThinkEquity, a division of Fordham Financial Management, Inc., dated December 15, 2020. The shares issued upon the closing of the offering included 714,286 shares of common stock issued pursuant the underwriter’s option to purchase additional shares to cover over-allotments, which it exercised in full.
●
During the year ended December 31, 2020, certain holders of our warrants issued in private placements indicated to the Company that they were willing to exercise their Private Warrants at reduced exercise prices. Our board of directors approved the Company’s partially waiving the exercise prices of Private Warrants to provide for reduced exercised prices which resulted in a deemed dividend. Prices were subsequently agreed upon between the Company and each exercising warrant holder, and the Company obtaining stockholder approval for the issuance of an aggregate number of shares of the Company’s common stock upon the exercise of Private Warrants greater than 19.99% of the number of shares outstanding prior to any such issuance, in compliance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5635(d). As a result we issued an aggregate of 7,098,108 shares of its common stock upon Private Warrant exercises for net proceeds of $4,757,011.
●
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received a total of $337,084 in proceeds from loans from both First Republic Bank under the U.S. Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program and Toronto-Dominion Bank, in each case in connection with coronavirus aid legislation. Please see Note 6 to the notes accompanying the consolidated financial statements included with this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a further description of these loans.
We believe that cash on hand at December 31, 2020 will be sufficient to fund our current operations into the fourth quarter of 2021. We will need additional capital to execute our commercialization plan and if we do not raise additional capital in the next several months we will need to significantly slow or pause our business activities until such time as we are able to raise additional capital. We continue to evaluate and manage our capital needs to support our clinical, regulatory and operational activities and prepare for the results of our human studies data and EU commercialization. We are also exploring potential financing options that may be available to us, including additional sales of our common stock through our At-The-Market Issuance Sales Agreement with Ascendiant Capital Markets, LLC, dated February 19, 2021 (the “2021 Ascendiant ATM Agreement”), and by causing the mandatory exercise of outstanding warrants issued in December 2019 for cash in accordance with their terms. However, except for 2021 Ascendiant ATM Agreement, we have no commitments to obtain any additional funds, and there can be no assurance funds will be available in sufficient amounts or on acceptable terms. If we are unable to obtain sufficient additional financing in a timely fashion and on terms acceptable to us, our financial condition and results of operations may be materially adversely affected and we may not be able to continue operations or execute our stated commercialization plan.
The consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K have been prepared assuming we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred net losses of $11,725,501 and used cash in operations of $10,746,595. These and other factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for one year from the issuance of the accompanying financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $10,746,595 of cash in operating activities primarily as a result of our net loss of $11,725,501, offset by share-based compensation of $2,102,352, amortization of debt discount of $232,426, depreciation expense of $99,342, amortization of Right of Use assets of $65,907, and net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $(1,521,121).
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $8,588,851 of cash in operating activities primarily as a result of our net loss of $13,305,964 offset by share-based compensation of $1,399,547, depreciation and amortization expenses of $80,577, amortization of debt discount of $2,355,469, and net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $597,830.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company used $75,333 in investing activities related to purchases of equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company used $43,595 in investing activities related to purchase of equipment.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, financing activities provided $11,875,037, including $6,780,942 in proceeds from issuance of common stock, $4,757,011 in proceeds from warrant exercises, and $337,084 in proceeds from loans.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, financing activities provided $8,335,278, including $5,344,257 from the issuance of Series A Preferred Stock and warrants, $375,520 from the issuance of Series B Preferred Stock and warrants, $2,490,501 in proceeds from the placement of senior secured convertible promissory notes and warrants, and $125,000 from the issuance common stock and warrants.
Funding Requirements
We have not completed the commercialization of any of our TAEUS technology platform applications. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses for the foreseeable future. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we:
●
advance the engineering design and development of our NAFLD TAEUS application;
●
acquire parts and build finished goods inventory of the TAEUS FLIP system;
●
complete regulatory filings required for marketing approval of our NAFLD TAEUS application in the United States;
●
seek to hire a small internal marketing team to engage and support channel partners and clinical customers for our NAFLD TAEUS application;
●
expand marketing of our NAFLD TAEUS application;
●
advance development of our other TAEUS applications; and
●
add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development, planned commercialization efforts and our operation as a public company.
It is possible that we will not achieve the progress that we expect because the actual costs and timing of completing the development and regulatory approvals for a new medical device are difficult to predict and are subject to substantial risks and delays. We have no committed external sources of funds. We do not expect that our existing cash will be sufficient for us to complete the commercialization of our NAFLD TAEUS application or to complete the development of any other TAEUS application and we will need to raise substantial additional capital for those purposes. As a result, we will need to finance our future cash needs through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, corporate collaboration and licensing arrangements or other financing alternatives. Our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary as a result of a number of factors, including the factors discussed in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors”. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Until we can generate a sufficient amount of revenue from our TAEUS platform applications, if ever, we expect to finance future cash needs through public or private equity offerings, debt financings or corporate collaborations and licensing arrangements. Additional funds may not be available when we need them on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all. As described below, the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our business operations to some extent and is expected to continue to do so and, in light of the effect of such pandemic on financial markets, these impacts may include reduced access to capital. If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to delay, reduce the scope of or eliminate one or more of our research or development programs or our commercialization efforts or perhaps even cease the operation of our business. To the extent that we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience additional dilution, and debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants. To the extent that we raise additional funds through collaborations and licensing arrangements, it may be necessary to relinquish some rights to our technologies or applications or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. We may seek to access the public or private capital markets whenever conditions are favorable, even if we do not have an immediate need for additional capital at that time.
Coronavirus (“COVID-19”) Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has prompted governments and regulatory bodies throughout the world to issue “stay-at-home” or similar orders, and enact restrictions on the performance of “non-essential” services, public gatherings and travel.
Beginning in March 2020, we undertook precautionary measures intended to help minimize the risk of the virus to our employees, including requiring most employees to work remotely, pausing all non-essential travel worldwide for our employees, and limiting employee attendance at industry events and in-person work-related meetings, to the extent those events and meetings are continuing. As a cash-conserving measure taken in light of the adverse economic conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, in April 2020 we reduced the cash salaries of members of management by 33% for the remainder of 2020, including the salaries of our executive officers. In lieu of cash, the Company paid this portion of management salaries in the form of restricted stock units that vested over the remainder of the year. Additionally, we amended our Non-Employee Director Compensation Policy to provide that our non-employee directors’ annual retainers for the second, third and fourth fiscal quarters of 2020 would be paid in in the form of restricted stock units rather than cash. To date we do not believe these actions have had a significant negative impact on our operations. However, these actions or additional measures we may undertake may ultimately delay progress on our developmental goals or otherwise negatively affect our business. In addition, third-party actions taken to contain its spread and mitigate its public health effects of COVID-19 may negatively affect our business. The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our clinical trial activities. Patient visits in ongoing clinical trials have been delayed, for example, due to prioritization of hospital resources toward the COVID-19 outbreak, travel restrictions imposed by governments, and the inability to access sites for initiation and monitoring. COVID-19 has also had an effect on the business at the FDA and other health authorities by causing them to reallocate resources to addressing the pandemic, which has resulted in delays of reviews and approvals, including with respect to our NAFLD TAEUS application.
Nasdaq Capital Market Listing
Our common stock and our public warrants are currently traded on the Nasdaq Capital Market. The Nasdaq Capital Market imposes, among other requirements, listing maintenance standards including minimum bid price and stockholders’ equity requirements. In particular, Nasdaq rules require a listed company’s primary equity securities to have a minimum bid price of at least $1.00 per share and that a listed company maintain a minimum of $2.5 million in stockholders’ equity. On April 24, 2020, we received a notification letter from the Listing Qualifications Department of The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”) notifying us that, because the closing bid price for our common stock listed on Nasdaq was below $1.00 for 30 consecutive trading days, we no longer met the minimum bid price requirement for continued listing on The Nasdaq Capital Market under Nasdaq Marketplace Rule 5550(a)(2) (the “Bid Price Rule”). On August 19, 2020, we received a notification letter from the Listing Qualifications Staff of Nasdaq notifying us that, based on our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2020, we no longer maintained the minimum $2.5 million stockholders’ equity required for continued listing on the Nasdaq Capital Market under Marketplace Rule 5550(b)(1) (the “Equity Rule”).
On December 30, 2020, we filed a Current Report on Form 8-K to report that, following the completion of the underwritten offering of common stock on December 18, 2020, we had regained compliance with the Equity Rule. On February 2, 2021, we received written notice from the Listing Qualifications Staff Nasdaq notifying us that for at least ten consecutive business days, from January 15, 2021 to February 1, 2021, the closing bid price for our common stock was $1.00 per share or greater. Accordingly, the written notice stated that we regained compliance with the Bid Price Rule.
If we do not maintain compliance with the Bid Price Rule, Equity Rule, and other rules for continued listing on the Nasdaq, our securities may be delisted. If our securities were delisted from the Nasdaq Capital Market, it could, among other things, lead to a number of negative implications, including reduced liquidity in our common stock, the loss of federal preemption of state securities laws and greater difficulty in obtaining financing.
Off-Balance Sheet Transactions
At December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any transactions, obligations or relationships that could be considered off-balance sheet arrangements.