ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes thereto included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The information contained below includes statements of management’s beliefs, expectations, hopes, goals and plans that, if not historical, are forward-looking statements subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements. For a discussion on forward-looking statements, see the information set forth in the introductory note to this Annual Report under the caption “Forward Looking Statements”, which information is incorporated herein by reference. For discussion and analysis pertaining to 2019 overview and highlights as compared to 2018, please refer to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on February 28, 2020.
Our Company
NeoGenomics, Inc. is a high-complexity CLIA-certified clinical laboratory that specializes in cancer genetics diagnostic testing and pharma services. Our testing services include cytogenetics, fluorescence in-situ hybridization (“FISH”), flow cytometry, immunohistochemistry, anatomic pathology and molecular genetic testing. Headquartered in Fort Myers, FL, NeoGenomics operates CAP accredited and CLIA certified laboratories in Fort Myers and Tampa, Florida; Aliso Viejo, Carlsbad and San Diego, California; Houston, Texas; Atlanta, Georgia; Nashville, Tennessee; and CAP accredited laboratories in Rolle, Switzerland, and Singapore. NeoGenomics serves the needs of pathologists, oncologists, academic centers, hospital systems, pharmaceutical firms, integrated service delivery networks, and managed care organizations throughout the United States, and pharmaceutical firms in Europe and Asia.
2020 Overview and Highlights
•We increased revenues by 9% compared to 2019, including an increase in Clinical Services revenue of 6% and an increase in Pharma Services revenue of 30%;
•Pharma Services backlog increased to $209 million;
•Financial position strengthened with $322 million net convertible note and equity offerings;
•We acquired the Oncology Division assets of Human Longevity, Inc. (“HLI - Oncology”);
•Strategic collaboration and minority investment in Inivata Limited (“Inivata”) established;
•Expanding testing menu to include suite of liquid biopsy tests; and
•High-capacity COVID-19 testing lab operationalized.
Company Outlook
Advances in science and technology are driving a proliferation of oncology therapies and associated diagnostic tests. These diagnostic tools and therapies are increasing survival and enhancing quality-of-life for cancer patients. As a leading global oncology diagnostics company serving biopharmaceutical companies as well as practicing oncologists and pathologists, NeoGenomics facilitates the adoption of these advanced oncology diagnostic tools beyond the academic environment into the community setting. We are continuously enhancing and expanding our test menu to ensure that providers and patients have access to leading edge solutions such as advanced molecular testing and state-of-the art digital pathology. Moreover, our team of MDs and PhDs, along with our highly-trained oncology-focused sales team provide continuous education to our clients to ensure that they remain abreast of cutting-edge developments in oncology.
We are a leading provider of oncology-diagnostic services to biopharma companies. We will continue to work with these clients across the drug development continuum, from research and development, through clinical trials testing, to commercialization of companion diagnostic tests. We are growing our Pharma Services business through global expansion in both Europe and Asia, expansion of our test offering, including leading edge next-generation-sequencing tools, and unique capabilities for developing and commercializing companion diagnostic tests.
We are continuing to develop and broaden our informatics and data-related tools to leverage our unique market position and oncology expertise to help our stakeholders solve real-world problems such as identifying patients for clinical trials or providing clinical decision support tools for physicians and providers. We are committed to connecting patients with life altering therapies and trials. In carrying out these commitments, NeoGenomics aims to provide transparency and choice to patients regarding the handling and use of their data through our Notice of Privacy Practices, and has invested in leading technologies to ensure the data we maintain is secured at all times.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
We believe lower cost and increased value of testing is extremely important to the healthcare industry and creates a competitive advantage for our company. We will invest in information technology, automation and best practices to continually improve our processes and drive down the cost of testing. We will continue to expand our test menu and remain at the forefront of the ongoing revolution in cancer related genetic and molecular testing to achieve our vision of becoming the world’s leading cancer testing and information company.
We continue to develop our company-wide focus, which includes the following three critical success factors for 2021:
•World-Class Culture: To strengthen our world-class culture through continued training and development, programs to promote wellness and work-life balance, and enhanced communication. We are focused on our commitment to inclusion, meaningful work experiences, empowering and developing our people and teams, and managing with empathy.
•Uncompromising Quality and Exceptional Service: To provide uncompromising quality and exceptional service, with a focus on industry leading turn-around time, automation and process control, and advancing our culture of quality. We will further automate our laboratory operations to enhance quality, reduce cost, and improve turn-around time. We have established rigorous turn-around time objectives for each test modality based on customer feedback and industry benchmarks. Our goal is to ultimately achieve industry leading turn-around-time for each modality. Our laboratory teams will focus on quality by improving the Corrective and Preventative Actions (“CAPA”) process and streamlining and simplifying processes.
•Innovation and Growth: To pursue exceptional service and growth through the launch of innovative assays, informatics products and companion diagnostics as well as enhanced educational programs. To support this objective we will invest in research and development activities with a focus on expanding and enhancing our capabilities for next-generation sequencing, including liquid biopsy, and expanding our companion diagnostic offering. Our informatics and data-related tools leverage our unique market position and oncology expertise to help our stakeholders solve real-world problems. We will continue to pursue market share gains in both our Clinical Services and Pharma Services segments.
These critical success factors have been communicated throughout our Company. We have structured departmental goals around these factors and have created employee incentive plans in which every employee will have a meaningful incentive for our success.
Regulatory Environment
The FDA is currently considering changes which may include increased regulation of Laboratory Developed Tests (“LDTs”) by the FDA. In October 2014, the FDA announced its proposed framework and timetable and indicated it would move toward greater oversight of LDTs. The FDA has not finalized the framework they announced in 2014. In 2017, the FDA shifted its approach to oversight of LDTs, indicating that they would work with Congress and stakeholders on a new legislative framework and pathway for all diagnostic testing. In 2018, the FDA began limited enforcement activities on a subset of LDTs known as pharmacogenetic testing (“PGx”). NeoGenomics is a member of the American Clinical Laboratory Association (“ACLA”), which has been in active discussions with the FDA and Congress regarding FDA oversight of LDT’s. However, in August 2020, HHS, in an unsigned statement posted on its website and not published in the Federal Register, barred FDA from requiring premarket review for any LDT, including those for COVID-19, unless FDA goes through formal rulemaking procedures. At this time we cannot predict what the current administration impact will be on the oversight and regulation of LDTs or if there will be any additional changes to current rules and regulations.
We closely monitor changes in legislation and take specific actions to identify and estimate the impact of changes in legislation whenever possible as regulatory changes can affect reimbursement for clinical laboratory services. We do not anticipate significant changes to our clinical revenue in 2021 based on known changes in legislation.
Operating Segments
We report our activities in two operating segments: the Clinical Services Segment and the Pharma Services Segment. We have presented the financial information reviewed by the Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”) including revenues, cost of revenue and gross margin for each of our operating segments. Assets are not presented at the segment level as that information is not used by the CODM.
Clinical Services
The clinical cancer testing services we offer to community-based pathologists are designed to be a natural extension of, and complementary to, the services that they perform within their own practices. We believe our relationship as a non-competitive partner to community-based pathology practices, hospital pathology labs and academic centers empowers them to expand their
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
breadth of testing and provide a menu of services that matches or exceeds the level of service found in any center of excellence around the world. Community-based pathology practices and hospital pathology labs may order certain testing services on a technical component only (“TC” or “tech-only”) basis, which allows them to participate in the diagnostic process by performing the professional component (“PC”) interpretation services without having to hire laboratory technologists or purchase the sophisticated equipment needed to perform the technical component of the tests. We also support our pathology clients with interpretation and consultative services using our own specialized team of pathologists for difficult or complex cases and provide overflow interpretation services when requested by clients.
NeoGenomics is a leading provider of Molecular and next-generation sequencing (“NGS”) testing. These tests are interpreted by NeoGenomics’ team of Molecular experts and are often ordered in conjunction with other testing modalities. NGS panels are one of our fastest growing testing areas and clients can often receive a significant amount of biomarker information from very limited samples. These comprehensive panels can allow for faster treatment decisions for patients as compared to a series of single-gene molecular tests being ordered sequentially. We believe that NeoGenomics has one of the broadest Molecular menus in the industry and our targeted NeoTYPE panels include genes relevant to a particular cancer type, as well as other complementary tests such as immunohistochemistry and FISH. This comprehensive menu means that NeoGenomics can be a “one-stop shop” for our clients who can get all of their oncology testing needs satisfied by our laboratory. This is attractive to our clients as patient samples do not need to be split and then managed across several laboratories. NeoGenomics expects our Molecular laboratory and NGS capabilities to be a key growth driver in the coming years.
In addition, we directly serve oncology, dermatology and other clinician practices that prefer to have a direct relationship with a laboratory for cancer-related genetic testing services. We typically service these types of clients with a comprehensive service offering where we perform both the technical and professional components of the tests ordered. In certain instances, larger clinician practices have begun to internalize pathology interpretation services, and our tech-only service offering allows these larger clinician practices to also participate in the diagnostic process by performing the PC interpretation services on TC testing performed by NeoGenomics. In these instances, NeoGenomics will typically provide all of the more complex, molecular testing services.
Pharma Services
Our Pharma Services revenue consists of three revenue streams:
•Clinical trials and research;
•Validation laboratory services; and
•Informatics
Our Pharma Services segment supports pharmaceutical firms in their drug development programs by supporting various clinical trials and research. This portion of our business often involves working with the pharmaceutical firms (sponsors) on study design as well as performing the required testing. Our medical team often advises the sponsor and works closely with them as specimens are received from the enrolled sites. We also work on developing tests that will be used as part of a companion diagnostic to determine patients’ response to a particular drug. As studies unfold, our clinical trials team reports the data and often provides key analysis and insights back to the sponsors.
Our Pharma Services segment provides comprehensive testing services in support of our pharmaceutical clients’ oncology programs from discovery to commercialization. In biomarker discovery, our aim is to help our customers discover the right content. We help our customers develop a biomarker hypothesis by recommending an optimal platform for molecular screening and backing our discovery tools with the informatics to capture meaningful data. In other pre-clinical and non-clinical work, we can use our platforms to characterize markers of interest. Moving from discovery to development, we help our customers refine their biomarker strategy and, if applicable, develop a companion diagnostic pathway using the optimal technology for large-scale clinical trial testing.
Whether serving as the single contract research organization or partnering with one, our Pharma Services team provides significant technical expertise, working closely with our customers to support each stage of clinical trial development. Each trial we support comes with rapid turnaround time, dedicated project management and quality assurance oversight. We have experience in supporting submissions to the Federal Drug Administration (“FDA”) for companion diagnostics. Our Pharma Services strategy is focused on helping bring more effective oncology treatments to market through providing world-class laboratory services in oncology to key pharmaceutical companies in the industry.
We believe that NeoGenomics is uniquely positioned to service Pharma sponsors across the full continuum of the drug development process. Our Pharma Services team can work with them during the basic research and development phase as compounds come out of translational research departments as well as work with clients from Phase I clinical trials through Phases II and III as the sponsors work to prove the efficacy of their drugs. The laboratory biomarker tests that are developed during this process may become companion diagnostic, or CDx tests, that will be used on patients to determine if they could respond to a certain therapy. NeoGenomics is able to offer these CDx tests to the market immediately after FDA approval as
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
part of our Day 1 readiness program. This ability helps to speed the commercialization of their drug and enables Pharma sponsors to reach patients through NeoGenomics broad distribution channel in the Clinical Services segment.
We are continuing to develop and broaden our informatics and data-related tools to leverage our unique market position and oncology expertise to help our stakeholders solve real-world problems such as identifying patients for clinical trials or providing clinical decision support tools for physicians and providers. We are committed to connecting patients with life altering therapies and trials. In carrying out these commitments, NeoGenomics aims to provide transparency and choice to patients regarding the handling and use of their data through our Notice of Privacy Practices, and has invested in leading technologies to ensure the data we maintain is secured at all times.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Our management routinely makes judgments and estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. See Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a complete description of our significant accounting policies.
Our critical accounting policies are those where we have made difficult, subjective or complex judgments in making estimates, and/or where these estimates can significantly impact our financial results under different assumptions and conditions. Our critical accounting policies are:
•Revenue Recognition
•Accounts Receivable
•Stock Based Compensation
•Deferred Taxes
Revenue Recognition
We adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenues from Contracts with Customers, on January 1, 2018 using a full retrospective method of adoption. Under this method, we have restated our results for each prior reporting period presented as if ASC 606 had been effective for those periods. The adoption of this standard required us to implement new revenue policies, procedures and internal controls related to revenue recognition. In addition, the adoption resulted in enhanced financial statement disclosures surrounding the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers.
The new standard impacted each of our two reportable segments differently due to the transactional nature of the Clinical Services segment versus the generally long-term nature of our Pharma Services segment contracts. The specific effect on our reportable segments is explained further in Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Clinical Services Revenue
Our specialized diagnostic services are performed based on an online test order or a written test requisition form. The performance obligation is satisfied and revenues are recognized once the diagnostic services have been performed and the results have been delivered to the ordering physician. These diagnostic services are billed to various payers, including client direct billing, commercial insurance, Medicare and other government payers, and patients. Revenue is recorded for all payers based on the amount expected to be collected, which considers implicit price concessions. Implicit price concessions represent differences between amounts billed and the estimated consideration we expect to receive based on negotiated discounts, historical collection experience and other anticipated adjustments, including anticipated payer denials. Collection of consideration we expect to receive typically occurs within 30 to 60 days of billing for commercial insurance, Medicare and other governmental and self-pay payers and within 60 to 90 days of billing for client payers.
The following table reflects our estimate of the breakdown of net clinical revenue by type of payer for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
The change in payer mix during the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily due to client direct billing related to COVID-19 PCR testing revenue.
Pharma Services Revenue
All of our Pharma Services revenue is billed directly to clients, or the pharmaceutical sponsor. Our Pharma Services segment generally enters into contracts with pharmaceutical and biotech customers as well as other Contract Research Organizations (“CROs”) to provide research and clinical trial services ranging in duration from one month to several years. We record revenue on a unit-of-service basis based on number of units completed and the total expected contract value. The total expected contract value is estimated based on historical experience of total contracted units compared to realized units as well as known factors on a specific contract-by-contract basis. Certain contracts include upfront fees, final settlement amounts or billing milestones that may not align with the completion of performance obligations. The value of these upfront fees or final settlement amounts is usually recognized over time based on the number of units completed, which aligns with our progress towards fulfilling our obligations under the contract. We also enter into other contracts, such as validation studies, for which the sole deliverable is a final report that is sent to sponsors at the completion of contracted activities. For these contracts, revenue is recognized at a point in time upon delivery of the final report to the sponsor. Any contracts that contain multiple performance obligations and include both units-of-service and point in time deliverables are accounted for as separate performance obligations and revenue is recognized as previously disclosed. We negotiate billing schedules and payment terms on a contract-by-contract basis. While the contract terms generally provide for payments based on a unit-of-service arrangement, the billing schedules, payment terms and related cash payments may not align with the performance of services and, as such, may not correspond to revenue recognized in any given period.
Amounts collected in advance of services being provided are deferred as contract liabilities on the balance sheet. The associated revenue is recognized and the contract liability is reduced as the contracted services are subsequently performed. Contract assets are established for revenue that has been recognized but not yet billed. These contract assets are reduced once the customer is invoiced and a corresponding account receivable is recorded. Additionally, certain costs to obtain contracts, primarily for sales commissions, are capitalized when incurred and are amortized over the term of the contract. Amounts capitalized for contracts with an initial contract term of twelve months or less are classified as current assets and all others are classified as non-current assets.
Most contracts are terminable by the customer, either immediately or according to advance notice terms specified within the contracts. All contracts require payment of fees for services rendered through the date of termination and may require payment for subsequent services necessary to conclude the study or close out the contract.
Trade Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are reported for all clinical services payers based on the amount expected to be collected, which considers implicit price concessions.
For Pharma Services, we negotiate billing schedules and payment terms on a contract-by-contract basis which often includes payments based on certain milestones being achieved. Receivables are generally reported over time based on the number of units completed, which aligns with the progress towards fulfilling its obligations under the contract.
Days Sales Outstanding (“DSO”) decreased to 78 days at December 31, 2020 from 81 days at December 31, 2019 due to timing of cash receipts.
Stock Based Compensation
We recognize compensation costs for all share-based payment awards made to employees, non-employee contracted physicians and directors based upon the awards’ initial grant-date fair value. For stock options, we use a trinomial lattice option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option awards, and recognize compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the awards’ requisite service periods. The periodic expense is adjusted for actual forfeitures.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
See Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 13. Stock Compensation, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information regarding the assumptions used in our valuation of stock-based compensation.
Deferred Taxes
Our accounting for deferred tax consequences represents our best estimate of future events that can be appropriately reflected in accounting estimates. The factors included in the analysis are historical and projected future taxable income including evolving business practices of our industry. Changes in existing tax laws, regulations, rates and future operating results may impact the amount of deferred tax liabilities and deferred tax assets over time.
Management assesses the available positive and negative evidence to estimate if sufficient future taxable income will be generated to realize the existing deferred tax assets.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company determined that sufficient positive evidence did not exist to conclude that it is more likely than not that net operating losses generated by the Company's Switzerland, Singapore and China operations would be able to be utilized in future periods and has therefore established a full valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets generated by such losses.
Results of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019
The following table presents the condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations as a percentage of revenue:
Revenue
Clinical Services and Pharma Services revenue for the periods presented are as follows ($ in thousands):
Consolidated revenues increased $35.6 million, or 8.7%, year-over-year. Growth in our Clinical Services segment year-over-year, was $21.2 million, or 5.9% This increase was primarily driven by COVID-19 PCR testing revenue of $27.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Clinical testing volume(1) decreased by approximately 1.2% year-over-year reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
Pharma Services revenue increased $14.4 million, or 30.3%, year-over-year. In addition, our backlog of signed contracts has continued to grow from $130.3 million as of December 31, 2019 to $208.9 million as of December 31, 2020. We define backlog as the stated amount of signed contracts less dormant contracts with no activity for twelve months, contingencies and cancellations. We expect this backlog to result in higher revenues in future years.
We also expect to achieve continued revenue growth in our Pharma Services segment due to our expanding international presence including the opening of a laboratory in Singapore in 2019 and the expected opening of our laboratory in Suzhou, China in 2021.
The following table shows Clinical Services revenue, cost of revenue, requisitions received and tests performed for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 excluding requisitions, tests, revenue and costs of revenue for Pharma Services and COVID-19 PCR tests. Testing revenue and cost of revenue are presented in thousands below:
(1) Clinical tests exclude requisitions, tests, revenue and costs of revenue for Pharma Services and COVID-19 PCR tests.
Average revenue per test was approximately flat for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the corresponding period in 2019.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Profit
Cost of revenue includes payroll and payroll related costs for performing tests, maintenance and depreciation of laboratory equipment, rent for laboratory facilities, laboratory reagents, probes and supplies, and delivery and courier costs relating to the transportation of specimens to be tested.
Average cost per test increased 8.5% year-over-year, reflecting a volume reduction due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the fixed nature of many of our laboratory costs. In addition, we did not reduce our workforce due to temporary declines in volume related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The consolidated cost of revenue and gross profit metrics are as follows ($ in thousands):
Consolidated cost of revenue in dollars increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019. Consolidated cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue also increased year-over-year. These increases in cost of revenue are largely due to an increase in payroll related costs as well as the addition of our La Jolla, California laboratory which was acquired in the HLI - Oncology acquisition.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
Gross profit margin for 2020 was 41.8% compared to 48.1% in 2019 primarily due to the timing of Pharma Services revenue, higher costs due to the integration of Genoptix, Inc. and HLI - Oncology and additional testing capacity which was not fully utilized due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of payroll and payroll related costs for our billing, finance, human resources, information technology and other administrative personnel as well as stock-based compensation. We also allocate professional services, facilities expense, IT infrastructure costs, depreciation, amortization and other administrative-related costs to general and administrative expenses.
Consolidated general and administrative expenses for the periods presented are as follows ($ in thousands):
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $15.8 million compared to 2019, primarily reflecting higher payroll and payroll related costs due to increases in personnel to support our near and long-term growth as well as acquisition costs and incremental expenses related to the acquisition of HLI - Oncology. For the year ended December 31, 2020, acquisition and integration costs related to HLI - Oncology were approximately $1.6 million.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in total but decrease as a percentage of revenue as we add employee and compensation expenses, incur additional expenses associated with the expansion of our facilities, and continue to expand our physical and technological infrastructure to support our anticipated growth.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses relate to the cost of developing new genetic tests, including payroll and payroll-related costs, maintenance of laboratory equipment, laboratory supplies, outside consultants and experts assisting our research and development team.
Consolidated research and development expense for the periods presented are as follows ($ in thousands):
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $0.3 million, when compared to the same period in 2019. This decrease is due to the timing of project expenses.
We anticipate research and development expenditures will increase in future quarters as we invest in innovation projects and bringing new tests to market.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses are primarily attributable to employee-related costs including sales management, sales representatives, sales and marketing consultants and marketing and customer service personnel.
Consolidated sales and marketing expenses for the periods presented are as follows ($ in thousands):
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $0.5 million when compared to the same period in 2019. This increase primarily reflects the expansion of our sales team, as well as higher commissions due to our increase in revenues and continued investments in marketing. We expect higher commissions expense in the coming years as the sales representatives continue generating new business with a focus on oncology office sales. We expect our sales and marketing expenses over the long-term to align with changes in revenue.
Interest Expense, net
Net interest expense is comprised of interest incurred on our convertible debt, term loan, revolving credit facility and our equipment financing obligations offset by the interest income we earn on cash balances. Net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $3.3 million compared to the same period in 2019. These increases reflect the effective interest rate on the 2025 Convertible Notes which is 5.5%. Interest on the 2025 Convertible Notes began accruing upon issuance and is payable semi-annually. See Note 9. Debt, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further details regarding the 2025 Convertible Notes.
Other (income) expense, net
Other (income) expense, net, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was income of $11.9 million compared to expense of $4.6 million for the same period in 2019. The income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a combination of $4 million net unrealized gain due to a remeasurement of our investment in Inivata and the recognition of $7.9 million in grant income related to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) Public Health and Social Service Emergency Fund. See Note 8. Investment in Non-Consolidated Affiliate, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further details regarding the remeasurement. The Public Health and Social Service Emergency Fund payments are intended to reimburse healthcare providers for health care related expenses or lost revenues attributable to COVID-19 and are not required to be repaid provided that recipients attest to and comply with certain terms and conditions, including limitations on balance billing for COVID-19 patients. The stimulus payments were issued to partially offset losses in patient care revenue due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as reimbursement of health care related expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the reported expense was primarily related to a litigation settlement.
Net Income
The following table provides the net income for each period along with the computation of basic and diluted net income per share (in thousands, except per share amounts):
Non-GAAP Measures
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The financial results and financial guidance are provided in accordance with GAAP and using certain non-GAAP financial measures. Management believes that the presentation of operating results using non-GAAP financial measures provides useful supplemental information to investors and facilitates the analysis of the core operating results and comparison of core operating results across reporting periods. Management also uses non-GAAP financial measures for financial and operational decision making, planning and forecasting purposes and to manage the business. Management believes that these non-GAAP financial measures enable investors to evaluate the operating results and future prospects in the same manner as management. The non-GAAP financial measures do not replace the presentation of GAAP financial results and should only be used as a supplement to, and not as a substitute for, the financial results presented in accordance with GAAP. There are limitations inherent in non-GAAP financial measures because they exclude charges and credits that are required to be included in a GAAP presentation, and do not present the full measure of the recorded costs against its net revenue. In addition, the definition of the non-GAAP financial measures below may differ from non-GAAP measures used by other companies.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
Definitions of Non-GAAP Measures
Non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA
We define “Adjusted EBITDA” as net income from continuing operations before: (i) interest expense, (ii) tax expense, (iii) depreciation and amortization expense, (iv) non-cash stock-based compensation expense, and, if applicable in a reporting period, (v) acquisition and integration related expenses, (vi) non-cash impairments of intangible assets, (vii) and other significant non-recurring or non-operating (income) or expenses.
The following is a reconciliation of GAAP net income to Non-GAAP EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019 ($ in thousands):
(2) Other significant non-recurring (income) expenses includes grant income received related to the CARES Act, net unrealized gain on investment in non-consolidated affiliate, cash flow hedge termination fees, and other non-recurring items.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through cash generated from operations, public and private sales of debt and equity securities, and bank debt borrowings.
The following table presents a summary of our cash flows (used in) provided by operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 as well as the period ending cash and cash equivalents and working capital (in thousands).
(1) Defined as current assets less current liabilities.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $1.5 million, consisting of net income of $4.2 million plus net adjustments to income of $59.0 million. Included in net income was grant income of $7.9 million related to the CARES Act. This was partially offset by the cash flow impact of net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $61.7 million. The change in operating assets was primarily driven by a $20.2 million increase in funds distributed for the construction of the new headquarters facility, an increase in inventory due to higher spend on materials to mitigate the risk of potential supply chain disruptions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as inventory purchased to perform COVID-19 PCR testing, and an increase in accounts receivable due to an increase in revenue.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was $159.4 million, an increase of approximately $139.8 million compared to the same period in 2019. This use of cash was primarily due to a net investment of $67.7 million in marketable securities, $37 million for the acquisition of the HLI - Oncology, the $25.6 million investment made in Inivata and $29.1 million of cash used for capital expenditures.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $235.6 million compared to $159.5 million for the same period in 2019. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of convertible debt proceeds of $194.5 million, net of deferred finance charges, proceeds from the equity offering of $127.3 million and $20.3 million for the net issuance of common stock. This activity was primarily offset by the use of cash in amounts of $103.2 million for the net repayment of the term loan and equipment financing obligations and $3.3 million in cash flow hedge termination fees.
Liquidity Outlook
As of December 31, 2020, we had $228.7 million in unrestricted cash and cash equivalents in addition to $67.5 million of marketable securities available to support current operational liquidity needs. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, on January 11, 2021, the Company closed on concurrent underwritten public offerings of its common stock and 0.25% convertible senior notes due 2028. The net proceeds of these offerings were approximately $552.8 million after deducting the underwriting discounts, commissions and estimated offering expenses. The Company used $29 million of the net proceeds from the offerings to enter into capped call transactions. The Company intends to use the remaining net proceeds from the offerings for general corporate purposes and/or to acquire or invest in complementary businesses and technologies. See Note 21. Subsequent Events, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further details regarding these offerings.
We anticipate that the cash on hand, marketable securities and cash collections are sufficient to fund our near-term capital and operating needs for at least the next 12 months. Operating needs include, but are not limited to, the planned costs to operate our business, including amounts required to fund working capital and capital expenditures, continued research and development efforts, and potential strategic acquisitions and investments.
Related Party Transactions
See Note 19. Related Party Transactions, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our related party transactions.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 ($ in thousands):
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
(1) Amounts represent required principal debt payments on our 1.25% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025. See Note 9. Debt, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a full description of the terms of our indebtedness and the related debt service requirements.
Capital Expenditures
We forecast capital expenditures in order to execute on our business plan and maintain growth; however, the actual amount and timing of such capital expenditures will ultimately be determined by the volume of business. We currently anticipate that our capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2021 will be in the range of $45 million to $55 million. We have funded and plan to continue funding these capital expenditures with cash and financing.
Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance
See Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and accounting pronouncements pending adoption.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
On May 22, 2020, in conjunction with the Investment Agreement, the Company and Inivata entered into a five-year line of credit agreement in the amount of $15 million (the “Line of Credit”). The amounts borrowed under the Line of Credit are contractually limited to the working capital purposes of Inivata, and not towards acquisitions of companies, businesses or undertakings. In January 2021, the $15 million Line of Credit, in its entirety, was drawn by Inivata and has a maturity date of December 1, 2025. The Line of Credit bears interest at 0% per annum and the unpaid principal balance is payable on January 1, 2026. See Note 8. Investment in Non-Consolidated Affiliate, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the Line of Credit.
Effects of Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material impact on our business, revenues, or operating results during the periods presented.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.