Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein. All comparisons are with the corresponding items in the prior year.
Overview
Company Description
NEP is a growth-oriented limited partnership formed to acquire, manage and own contracted clean energy projects with stable long-term cash flows. NEP consolidates the results of NEP OpCo and its subsidiaries through its controlling interest in the general partner of NEP OpCo. At December 31, 2020, NEP owned an approximately 42.8% limited partner interest in NEP OpCo and NEE Equity owned a noncontrolling 57.2% limited partner interest in NEP OpCo. Through NEP OpCo, NEP has ownership interests in a portfolio of contracted renewable generation assets consisting of wind and solar projects and a portfolio of contracted natural gas pipeline assets. NEP's financial results are shown on a consolidated basis with financial results attributable to NEE Equity reflected in noncontrolling interests.
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, NEP acquired various projects from NEER as discussed in Note 3. In addition, in November 2019, a subsidiary of NEP acquired an equity method investment in a natural gas pipeline located in Pennsylvania from third parties. See Note 3.
In June 2018, a subsidiary of NEP completed the sale of Canadian Holdings which owned four wind generation facilities and two solar generation facilities located in Ontario, Canada with a generating capacity totaling approximately 396 MW. See Note 2 - Disposal of Canadian Holdings.
NEP is closely monitoring the global outbreak of COVID-19 and is taking steps intended to mitigate the potential risks to NEP posed by COVID-19. See Note 15 - Coronavirus Pandemic.
Results of Operations
2020 Compared to 2019
Operating Revenues
Operating revenues primarily consist of income from the sale of energy under NEP's PPAs and services provided under natural gas transportation agreements, partly offset by the amortization of intangible assets - PPAs (see Note 2 - Intangible Assets - PPAs). Operating revenues increased $62 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in renewable energy sales reflects an increase of approximately $39 million related to the projects acquired in June 2019 and an increase of $19 million primarily related to higher wind and solar resource.
Wind and solar resource levels, weather conditions and the performance of NEP's renewable energy portfolio represent significant factors that could affect its operating results because these variables impact energy sales. Additionally, project acquisitions or expansion opportunities could impact future revenues.
Operating Expenses
Operations and Maintenance
O&M expenses include interconnection costs, labor expenses, turbine servicing costs, land payments, insurance, materials, supplies, shared services and administrative expenses attributable to NEP's projects, and costs and expenses under the MSA, ASAs and O&M agreements (see Note 14). O&M expenses also include the cost of maintaining and replacing certain parts for the projects in the portfolio to maintain, over the long term, operating income or operating capacity. O&M expenses increased $27 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to increases of approximately $15 million in higher other corporate expenses, including higher IDR fees related to growth in NEP's distributions to its common unitholders, and $6 million related to the projects acquired in June 2019.
O&M expenses related to the existing portfolio are expected to remain relatively stable from year to year. However, NEP's O&M expenses are likely to increase as NEP acquires new projects.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense reflects costs associated with depreciation and amortization of NEP's assets, based on depreciable asset lives and consistent depreciation methodologies. For certain of the renewable energy projects, CITCs are recorded as a reduction in property, plant and equipment - net on the consolidated balance sheets and amortized as a reduction to depreciation and amortization expense over the estimated life of the related property. Depreciation and amortization expense also includes a provision for wind and solar facility dismantlement, asset removal costs and accretion related to asset retirement obligations and the amortization of finite-lived intangible assets.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $12 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily as a result of approximately $7 million of depreciation related to projects acquired in June 2019.
Other Income (Deductions)
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of interest under long-term debt agreements and mark-to-market gains and losses on interest rate contracts. In 2020 and 2019, interest expense also reflects approximately $67 million and $153 million, respectively, of costs including cash payments and the write-off of debt issuance costs, primarily related to the retirement of debt in the respective periods. Interest expense decreased approximately $82 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower costs associated with the retirement of debt and reduced interest expense of approximately $75 million associated with debt retired in 2019, partly offset by an increase in interest expense of $58 million related to debt incurred in 2019 and an increase in interest expense of $22 million related to unfavorable mark-to-market activity. See Note 12 and Note 5 - Financial Statement Impact of Derivative Instruments.
Equity in Earnings of Equity Method Investees
Equity in earnings of equity method investees increased $70 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to $56 million of earnings related to the investment in Meade in November 2019 (see Note 3) as well as an increase of $14 million in earnings related to Desert Sunlight primarily related to lower O&M and interest expenses.
Income Taxes
NEP recognizes in income its applicable ownership share of U.S. income taxes due to the disregarded tax status of substantially all of the U.S. projects under NEP OpCo. Net income or loss attributable to noncontrolling interests includes minimal U.S. taxes.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, NEP recorded income tax benefit of $19 million on loss before income taxes of $257 million, resulting in an effective tax rate of approximately 7%. The income tax benefit is primarily comprised of income tax benefit of approximately $54 million at the statutory rate of 21% and $3 million of state income tax benefit, partly offset by income tax expense of $41 million related to income tax attributable to noncontrolling interests. See Note 7.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, NEP recorded income tax benefit of $26 million on loss before income taxes of $430 million, resulting in an effective tax rate of approximately 6%. The income tax benefit is primarily comprised of income tax benefit of approximately $90 million at the statutory rate of 21% and $5 million of state income tax benefit, partly offset by income tax expense of $70 million related to income tax attributable to noncontrolling interests. See Note 7.
Net Loss (Income) Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests
Net loss (income) attributable to noncontrolling interests reflects the net income or loss attributable to NEE Equity's noncontrolling interest in NEP OpCo, a non-affiliated party's interest in one of the Texas pipelines, the loss allocated to differential membership interest investors, the income allocated to Class B noncontrolling ownership interests and NEER's noncontrolling ownership interest in Silver State. The decrease in losses attributable to noncontrolling interests of $145 million in 2020 is primarily related to additional Class B noncontrolling interests sold in 2019 and 2020. See Note 2 - Noncontrolling Interests and Note 13 - Class B Noncontrolling Interests.
2019 Compared to 2018
The comparison of the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 is included in Management's Discussion in NEP's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
NEP’s ongoing operations use cash to fund O&M expenses including related party fees discussed in Note 14, maintenance capital expenditures, debt service payments (see Note 12) and distributions to common unitholders and holders of noncontrolling interests (see Note 13). NEP expects to satisfy these requirements primarily with internally generated cash flow. In addition, as a growth-oriented limited partnership, NEP expects from time to time to make acquisitions and other investments (see Note 15 - Development, Engineering and Construction Commitments). These acquisitions and investments are expected to be funded with borrowings under credit facilities or term loans, issuances of indebtedness, issuances of additional NEP common units or preferred units, capital raised pursuant to other financing structures, cash on hand and cash generated from operations.
These sources of funds are expected to be adequate to provide for NEP's short-term and long-term liquidity and capital needs, although its ability to make future acquisitions, fund additional expansion or repowering of existing projects and increase its distributions to common unitholders will depend on its ability to access capital on acceptable terms.
As a normal part of its business, depending on market conditions, NEP expects from time to time to consider opportunities to repay, redeem, repurchase or refinance its indebtedness. In addition, NEP expects from time to time to consider potential investments in new acquisitions and the expansion or repowering of existing projects. These events may cause NEP to seek additional debt or equity financing, which may not be available on acceptable terms or at all. Additional debt financing, if available, could impose operating restrictions, additional cash payment obligations and additional covenants.
NEP OpCo has agreed to allow NEER or one of its affiliates to withdraw funds received by NEP OpCo or its subsidiaries and to hold those funds in accounts of NEER or one of its affiliates to the extent the funds are not required to pay project costs or otherwise required to be maintained by NEP's subsidiaries, until the financing agreements permit distributions to be made, or, in the case of NEP OpCo, until such funds are required to make distributions or to pay expenses or other operating costs. NEP OpCo will have a claim for any funds that NEER fails to return:
• when required by its subsidiaries’ financings;
• when its subsidiaries’ financings otherwise permit distributions to be made to NEP OpCo;
• when funds are required to be returned to NEP OpCo; or
• when otherwise demanded by NEP OpCo.
In addition, NEER and certain of its affiliates may withdraw funds in connection with certain long-term debt agreements and hold those funds in accounts belonging to NEER or its affiliates and provide credit support in the amount of such withdrawn funds. If NEER fails to return withdrawn funds when required by NEP's subsidiaries’ financing agreements, the lenders will be entitled to draw on any credit support provided by NEER in the amount of such withdrawn funds.
If NEER or one of its affiliates realizes any earnings on the withdrawn funds prior to the return of such funds, it will be permitted to retain those earnings.
Liquidity Position
At December 31, 2020, NEP's liquidity position was approximately $1,598 million. The table below provides the components of NEP’s liquidity position:
____________________
(a) Excludes certain credit facilities discussed below due to restrictions on the use of the borrowings. See Note 12.
(b) In February 2021, $90 million was borrowed under the NEP OpCo credit facility and the maturity date for substantially all of the NEP OpCo credit facility was extended until 2026.
(c) See Note 13 - Class B Noncontrolling Interests for a discussion of the final funding related to the sale of Class B noncontrolling interests in Genesis Holdings.
Management believes that NEP's liquidity position and cash flows from operations will be adequate to finance O&M, maintenance capital expenditures, distributions to its unitholders and liquidity commitments. Management continues to regularly monitor NEP's financing needs consistent with prudent balance sheet management.
Financing Arrangements
NEP OpCo and its direct subsidiary are parties to a $1,250 million revolving credit facility (NEP OpCo credit facility) maturing in February 2026. During 2020, $80 million was drawn under the NEP OpCo credit facility and $590 million of the outstanding borrowings under this facility were repaid. At December 31, 2020, no amounts were outstanding under the NEP OpCo credit facility. For a discussion of the NEP OpCo credit facility, see Note 12.
During 2020, NEP issued $600 million in aggregate principal amount of 0% convertible senior notes due in 2025 (see Note 12) and utilized proceeds to repay $500 million in aggregate principal amount of outstanding 4.25% senior unsecured notes due 2024 that were issued in September 2017. See Note 12.
During 2019, an indirect subsidiary of NEP entered into a credit agreement which provides $205 million under a limited-recourse senior secured variable rate term loan and provides up to $270 million under a revolving credit facility (STX Holdings revolving credit facility). Proceeds from any borrowings under the STX Holdings revolving credit facility are available exclusively to fund the cash portion of NEP's repurchase, if any, of the Class B noncontrolling interests related to STX Midstream (see Note 13 - Class B Noncontrolling Interests), subject to certain limitations. At December 31, 2020, $270 million remains available under the STX Holdings revolving credit facility.
In 2019, indirect subsidiaries of NEP entered into a credit agreement (Meade credit agreement) which provides up to $915 million under three limited-recourse senior secured variable rate term loans to finance a portion of the Meade acquisition and the expansion (see Note 3). At December 31, 2020, approximately $74 million remains available under the Meade credit agreement to fund the expansion. See Note 12.
During 2019, NEP OpCo issued $700 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.25% senior notes due July 2024 and $500 million in aggregate principal amount of 3.875% senior notes due October 2026. See Note 12.
NEP OpCo and certain indirect subsidiaries are subject to financings that contain financial covenants and distribution tests, including debt service coverage ratios. In general, these financings contain covenants customary for these types of financings, including limitations on investments and restricted payments. Certain of NEP's financings provide for interest payable at a fixed interest rate. However, certain of NEP's financings accrue interest at variable rates based on an underlying index plus a margin. Interest rate contracts were entered into for certain of these financings to hedge against interest rate movements with respect to interest payments on the related borrowings. In addition, under the project-level financings, each project will be permitted to pay distributions out of available cash so long as certain conditions are satisfied, including that reserves are funded with cash or credit support, no default or event of default under the applicable financings has occurred and is continuing at the time of such distribution or would result therefrom, and each project is otherwise in compliance with the project-level financing’s covenants. For the majority of the project-level financings, minimum debt service coverage ratios must be satisfied in order to make a distribution. For one project financing, the project must maintain a leverage ratio and an interest coverage ratio in order to make a distribution. At December 31, 2020, NEP's subsidiaries were in compliance with all financial debt covenants under their financings.
Equity Arrangements
In 2019, NEP converted approximately 9.35 million preferred units into NEP common units on a one-for-one basis. In 2020, NEP issued approximately 4.67 million NEP common units upon the conversion of the remaining preferred units on a one-for-one basis. See Note 13 - Preferred Units. Also in 2020, NEP issued approximately 5.7 million NEP common units upon the conversion of approximately $300 million principal amount of convertible notes. See Note 12.
In 2020, 2019 and 2018, NEP issued and sold noncontrolling Class B interests in certain of its subsidiaries. NEP has buyout rights, subject to certain limitations and/or extensions, under which NEP has the right to pay a portion of the buyout price in NEP non-voting common units or NEP common units, as specified in the related agreement. The Class B investors receive a specified allocation of the related subsidiaries' distributable cash, which could increase if certain minimum buyout rights are not exercised or are not exercised during a certain period. See Note 13 - Class B Noncontrolling Interests.
NEP has an at-the-market equity issuance program (ATM program) pursuant to which NEP may issue, from time to time, up to $150 million of its common units. At December 31, 2020, NEP may issue up to approximately $64 million in additional common units under the ATM program.
In July 2018, NEP filed a shelf registration statement with the SEC, which became effective upon filing, for an unspecified amount of securities. The amount of securities issuable by NEP is established from time to time by the board. Securities that may be issued under the registration statement include common units, preferred units, warrants, rights, debt securities, equity purchase contracts and equity purchase units.
Capital Expenditures
Annual capital spending plans are developed based on projected requirements for the projects. Capital expenditures primarily represent the estimated cost of capital improvements, including construction expenditures that are expected to increase NEP OpCo’s operating income or operating capacity over the long term. Capital expenditures for projects that have already commenced commercial operations are generally not significant because most expenditures relate to repairs and maintenance and are expensed when incurred. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, NEP had capital expenditures, excluding the purchase prices of acquired projects, of approximately $334 million and $93 million, respectively, primarily reflecting costs associated with the repowering of certain wind facilities and expansion projects at certain pipelines. In the third and fourth quarters of 2020, an expansion investment at one of the Texas pipelines and the repowered wind generation facilities were placed in service. NEP expects to make additional investments in CPL related to an expansion scheduled for commercial operation by mid-2022. See Note 15 - Development, Engineering and Construction Commitments. These estimates are subject to continuing review and adjustments and actual capital expenditures may vary significantly from these estimates.
Cash Distributions to Unitholders
NEP's partnership agreement requires it to distribute available cash quarterly. Generally, available cash is all cash on hand at the date of determination relating to that quarter (including any expected distributions from NEP OpCo), less the amount of cash reserves established by the board. NEP currently expects that cash reserves would be established solely to provide for the payment of income taxes by NEP, if any. Cash flow is generated from distributions NEP receives from NEP OpCo each quarter. Although, as described above, NEP currently expects that cash reserves would be established by the board solely to provide for the payment of NEP's income taxes, if any, NEP expects NEP OpCo to establish cash reserves prior to making distributions to NEP to pay costs and expenses of NEP's subsidiaries, in addition to NEP's expenses, as well as any debt service requirements and future capital expenditures.
NEP OpCo's partnership agreement requires it to distribute all of its available cash to its common and preferred unitholders, including NEP, each quarter. Generally, NEP OpCo's available cash is all cash on hand at the date of determination relating to that quarter, plus any funds borrowed, less the amount of cash reserves established by NEP OpCo GP. The majority of such available cash is expected to be derived from the operations of the projects. The cash available for distribution is likely to fluctuate from quarter to quarter, and in some cases significantly, as a result of the performance of the projects, seasonality, fluctuating wind and solar resource, maintenance and outage schedules, timing of debt service and other factors.
During 2020 and 2019, NEP distributed approximately $154 million and $115 million, respectively, to its common unitholders. In addition, NEP paid approximately $47 million in distributions to its common unitholders in February 2021.
Credit Ratings
NEP’s liquidity, ability to access credit and capital markets and cost of borrowings is dependent on its credit ratings. As of February 16, 2021, Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. (Moody’s), S&P Global Ratings (S&P) and Fitch Ratings, Inc. (Fitch) continue to assign the following credit ratings to NEP:
_________________________
(a) A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and should be evaluated independently of any other rating. The rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization.
(b) The outlook indicated by each of Moody's, S&P and Fitch is stable.
Cash Flows
The following table reflects the changes in cash flows for the comparative periods:
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
The increase in net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by distributions received associated with the equity method investments in Meade acquired in November 2019 (see Note 3) and in Desert Sunlight, as well as higher cash from operations associated with the projects acquired in June 2019 (see Note 3) and higher wind and solar resource. This increase was partly offset by higher corporate operating expenses, including higher IDR fees.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
The decrease in net cash used in investing activities during 2020 was primarily driven by lower net cash used for acquisitions in 2020 compared to 2019 (see Note 3), partly offset by higher capital expenditures in 2020 related to certain construction activities (see Capital Expenditures discussed above).
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
The change in net cash used in financing activities in 2020 compared to net cash provided by financing activities in 2019 is primarily due to lower net proceeds related to Class B noncontrolling interests (see Note 13 - Class B Noncontrolling Interests),
debt retirements in 2020 compared to debt issuances in 2019 and higher partner distributions, partly offset by higher proceeds related to differential membership interests.
The comparison of the cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 are included in Management's Discussion in NEP's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
New Accounting Rules and Interpretations
Reference Rate Reform - In March 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued an accounting standards update which provides certain options to apply GAAP guidance on contract modifications and hedge accounting as companies transition from the London Inter-Bank Offered Rate and other interbank offered rates to alternative reference rates. See Note 2 - Reference Rate Reform.
Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity - In August 2020, the FASB issued revised accounting guidance for financial instruments with the characteristics of liabilities and equity, including debt with conversion options and other equity-linked instruments. See Note 2 - Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
NEP's significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, which were prepared under generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. Critical accounting policies are those that NEP believes are both most important to the portrayal of its financial condition and results of operations, and require complex, subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates and assumptions about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. The following policies are those considered to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenue and expense. In evaluating NEP's ability to recover its deferred tax assets individually by entity and by taxing jurisdiction, NEP considers all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations. In projecting future taxable income, NEP begins with historical results and incorporates assumptions including the amount of future state, federal and foreign pretax operating income, the reversal of temporary differences and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates NEP is using to manage the underlying businesses.
ASC 740 provides that a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position will be recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits. ASC 740 also provides guidance on measurement, derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, and disclosure and transition.
NEP recognizes tax liabilities in accordance with ASC 740 and adjusts these liabilities when its judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from NEP's current estimate of the tax liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which they are determined.
See Note 7.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
NEP evaluates long-lived assets, including finite-lived intangible assets, for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is required to be recognized if the carrying value of the asset exceeds the undiscounted future net cash flows associated with that asset. The impairment loss to be recognized is the amount by which the carrying value of the long-lived asset exceeds the asset’s fair value. In most instances, the fair value is determined by discounting estimated future cash flows using an appropriate interest rate.
The amount of future net cash flows, the timing of such cash flows and the determination of an appropriate interest rate all involve estimates and judgments about future events. In particular, the aggregate amount of cash flows determines whether an impairment exists, and the timing of the cash flows is critical in determining fair value for the purposes of determining the
impairment loss to be recognized. Because each assessment is based on the facts and circumstances associated with each long-lived asset, the effects of changes in assumptions cannot be generalized.
Carrying Value of Equity Method Investments
NEP evaluates its equity method investments for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of the investment is less than the carrying value and the investment may be other than temporarily impaired.
Indicators of a potential impairment include, but are not limited to, a series of operating losses of an investee, the absence of an ability to recover the carrying amount of the investment, the inability of the investee to sustain an earnings capacity and a current fair value of an investment that may be less than its carrying value. If indicators of impairment exist, an estimate of the investment’s fair value will be calculated. Approaches for estimating fair value include, among others, an income approach using a probability-weighted discounted cash flows model and a market approach using an earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) multiple model. The probability assigned to each scenario as well as the cash flows and EBITDA multiple identified are critical in determining fair value.
An impairment loss is required to be recognized if the impairment is deemed to be other than temporary. Assessment of whether an investment is other-than-temporarily impaired involves, among other factors, consideration of the length of time that the fair value is below the carrying value, current expected performance relative to the expected performance when the investment was initially made, performance relative to peers, industry performance relative to the economy, credit rating, regulatory actions and legal and permitting challenges. If management is unable to reasonably assert that an impairment is temporary or believes that there will not be full recovery of the carrying value of its investment, then the impairment is considered to be other than temporary. Investments that are other-than-temporarily impaired are written down to their estimated fair value and cannot subsequently be written back up for increases in estimated fair value. Impairment losses, if any, would be recorded in equity in earnings (losses) of equity method investees in NEP’s consolidated statements of income.
Business Combinations
Certain assumptions and estimates are employed in determining the fair value of assets acquired, evaluating the fair value of liabilities assumed, as well as in determining the allocation of goodwill to a reporting unit. These estimates may be affected by factors such as changing market conditions, technological advances in the energy industry or changes in regulations governing that industry. Other key inputs that require judgment include discount rates, comparable market transactions, estimated useful lives and probability of future transactions. The most significant assumptions requiring the most judgment involve identifying and estimating the fair value of intangible assets and property, plant and equipment and the associated useful lives for establishing amortization periods. To finalize purchase accounting for significant transactions, NEP may utilize the services of independent valuation specialists to assist in the determination of the fair value of acquired intangible assets and property, plant and equipment. The allocation of the purchase price may be modified up to one year from the date of the acquisition if new information is obtained about the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. See Note 3.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill acquired in connection with business combinations represents the excess of consideration over the fair value of net assets acquired. For goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives, an assessment for impairment is performed annually or whenever an event indicating impairment may have occurred. NEP completes the annual impairment test for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles using an assessment date of October 1. Goodwill is reviewed for impairment by comparing the carrying value of a reporting unit’s net assets, including allocated goodwill, to the estimated fair value of a reporting unit. NEP estimates the fair value of a reporting unit using a combination of the income, market and cost approaches. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit requires judgment and the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Such estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates, future operating margins, the weighted average cost of capital, and future market conditions, among others. If a reporting unit’s carrying value is greater than its fair value, a second step is performed whereby the implied fair value of goodwill is estimated by allocating the fair value of a reporting unit in a hypothetical purchase price allocation analysis. A goodwill impairment charge would be recognized for the amount by which the carrying value of goodwill exceeds its reassessed fair value. NEP performed its annual goodwill impairment test in October 2020 and determined, based on the results, that no goodwill impairment charge was required.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
NEP is exposed to several market risks in its normal business activities. Market risk is the potential loss that may result from market changes associated with its business. The types of market risks include interest rate and counterparty credit risks.
Interest Rate Risk
NEP is exposed to risk resulting from changes in interest rates associated with outstanding and expected future debt issuances and borrowings. NEP manages interest rate exposure by monitoring current interest rates, entering into interest rate contracts
and using a combination of fixed rate and variable rate debt. Interest rate swaps are used to mitigate and adjust interest rate exposure when deemed appropriate based upon market conditions or when required by financing agreements (see Note 5).
NEP has long-term debt instruments that subject it to the risk of loss associated with movements in market interest rates. At December 31, 2020, substantially all of the long-term debt, including current maturities, was not exposed to fluctuations in interest expense as it was either fixed rate debt or financially hedged. At December 31, 2020, the estimated fair value of NEP's long-term debt was approximately $3.5 billion and the carrying value of the long-term debt was $3.4 billion. See Note 6 - Financial Instruments Recorded at Other than Fair Value. Based upon a hypothetical 10% decrease in interest rates, which is a reasonable near-term market change, the fair value of NEP's long-term debt would increase by approximately $24 million at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, NEP had interest rate contracts with a notional amount of approximately $7.1 billion related to managing exposure to the variability of cash flows associated with outstanding and expected future debt issuances and borrowings. Based upon a hypothetical 10% decrease in rates, NEP’s net derivative liabilities at December 31, 2020 would increase by approximately $100 million.
Counterparty Credit Risk
Risks surrounding counterparty performance and credit risk could ultimately impact the amount and timing of expected cash flows. Credit risk relates to the risk of loss resulting from non-performance or non-payment by counterparties under the terms of their contractual obligations. NEP monitors and manages credit risk through credit policies that include a credit approval process and the use of credit mitigation measures such as prepayment arrangements in certain circumstances. NEP also seeks to mitigate counterparty risk by having a diversified portfolio of counterparties.