Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion includes forward-looking statements about our business, financial condition and results of operations including discussions about management’s expectations for our business. These statements represent projections, beliefs and expectations based on current circumstances and conditions and in light of recent events and trends, and these statements should not be construed either as assurances of performances or as promises of a given course of action. Instead, various known and unknown factors are likely to cause our actual performance and management’s actions to vary, and the results of these variances may be both material and adverse. A list of the known material factors that may cause our results to vary, or may cause management to deviate from its current plans and expectations, is included in Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion should also be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplemental Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Overview
We are a commercial-stage company that develops and sells high performance water solutions to the medical and commercial markets.
In medical markets, we sell water filtration products and waterborne pathogen detection products. Our medical water filters, mostly classified as ultrafilters, are used primarily by hospitals for the prevention of infection from waterborne pathogens, such as legionella and pseudomonas, and in dialysis centers for the removal of biological contaminants from water and bicarbonate concentrate. Because our ultrafilters capture contaminants as small as 0.005 microns in size, they minimize exposure to a wide variety of bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites, and endotoxins.
In commercial markets, we manufacture and sell water filters that improve the taste and odor of water and reduce biofilm, bacteria, and scale build-up in downstream equipment. Marketed under both the Nephros and AETHER brands, our products are marketed primarily to the food service, hospitality, convenience store, and health care markets.
Our pathogen detection systems are portable, near real-time systems designed to provide actionable data for infection control teams, biomedical engineers in dialysis clinics, and water quality teams in building management organizations.
We also have a subsidiary, Specialty Renal Products, Inc. (“SRP”), a development-stage medical device company, focused primarily on developing hemodiafiltration (“HDF”) technology. SRP is developing a second-generation of the Nephros OLpūr H2H Hemodiafiltration System, the FDA 510(k)-cleared medical device that enables nephrologists to provide HDF treatment to patients with end stage renal disease (“ESRD”).
We were founded in 1997 by healthcare professionals affiliated with Columbia University Medical Center/New York-Presbyterian Hospital to develop and commercialize an alternative method to hemodialysis. We have extended our filtration technologies to meet the demand for liquid purification in other areas, in particular, water purification.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We are subject to recently issued accounting standards, accounting guidance and disclosure requirements. For a description of these new accounting standards, see “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires application of management’s subjective judgments, often requiring estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Our actual results may differ substantially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies require the application of significant judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) 606 prescribes a five-step model for recognizing revenue, which includes (i) identifying contracts with customers; (ii) identifying performance obligations; (iii) determining the transaction price; (iv) allocating the transaction price; and (v) recognizing revenue.
We recognize revenue related to product sales when product is shipped via external logistics provider and the other criteria of ASC 606 are met. Product revenue is recorded net of returns and allowances. In addition to product revenue, we recognize revenue related to license, royalty and other agreements in accordance with the five-step model in ASC 606.
Stock-Based Compensation
The fair value of stock options is recognized as stock-based compensation expense in net loss. We calculate employee stock-based compensation expense in accordance with ASC 718. The fair value of our stock option awards is estimated using a Black-Scholes option valuation model. This model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions including expected stock price volatility and the estimated life of each award. The fair value of stock-based awards is amortized over the vesting period of the award. For stock awards that vest based on performance conditions (e.g., achievement of certain milestones), expense is recognized when it is probable that the condition will be met.
Warrants
We account for stock warrants as either equity instruments or derivative liabilities depending on the specific terms of the warrant agreement.
Accounts Receivable
We provide credit terms to our customers in connection with purchases of our products. We periodically review customer account activity in order to assess the adequacy of the allowances provided for potential collection issues and returns. Factors considered include economic conditions, each customer’s payment and return history and credit worthiness. Adjustments, if any, are made to reserve balances following the completion of these reviews to reflect our best estimate of potential losses.
Inventory Reserves
Our inventory reserve requirements are based on various factors including product expiration date and estimates for the future sales of the product. If estimated sales levels do not materialize, we will reevaluate our assumptions for inventory reserve requirements.
Accrued Expenses
We are required to estimate accrued expenses as part of our process of preparing financial statements. This process involves identifying services that have been performed on our behalf, the level of service performed, and the associated cost incurred for such service as of each balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements. Examples of areas in which subjective judgments may be required include costs associated with services provided by contract organizations for the preclinical development of our products, the manufacturing of clinical materials, and clinical trials, as well as legal and accounting services provided by professional organizations. In connection with such service fees, our estimates are primarily affected by our understanding of the status and timing of services provided relative to the actual levels of services incurred by such service providers. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. In the event that we do not identify certain costs, which have begun to be incurred, or we under- or over-estimate the level of services performed or the costs of such services, our reported expenses for such period would be too low or too high. The date on which certain services commence, the level of services performed on or before a given date and the cost of such services are often determined based on subjective judgments. We make these judgments based upon the facts and circumstances known to us in accordance with GAAP.
Noncontrolling Interest
We present the noncontrolling interest in SRP held by outside stockholders as stockholders’ equity on the accompanying consolidated balance sheet, as the noncontrolling interest is redeemable only upon the occurrence of events that are solely within our control.
Segment Reporting
We have three reportable segments: Water Filtration, Pathogen Detection and Renal Products. The Water Filtration segment primarily develops and sells high performance water purification filters. The Pathogen Detection segment develops and sells portable, real-time water testing systems designed to provide actionable data on waterborne pathogens in approximately one hour. The Renal Products segment is focused on the development of medical device products for patients with renal disease, including a 2nd generation hemodiafiltration system for the treatment of patients with ESRD.
Our chief operating decision maker evaluates the financial performance of our segments based on revenues, gross margin (where applicable), research and development expenses, and sales, general, and administrative expenses. The accounting policies for our segments are the same as those described in “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Fluctuations in Operating Results
Our results of operations have fluctuated significantly from period to period in the past and are likely to continue to do so in the future. We anticipate that our annual results of operations will be impacted for the foreseeable future by several factors, including the progress and timing of expenditures related to our research and development efforts, marketing expenses related to product launches, timing of regulatory approval of our various products and market acceptance of our products. Due to these fluctuations, we believe that the period-to-period comparisons of our operating results are not a good indication of our future performance.
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth our summarized, consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands except percentages):
Net Revenues
Total net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $8.5 million compared to $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $1.8 million, or 17%, was driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, which negatively impacted revenues, primarily with respect to new accounts, the hospitality and food service market, and our emergency response business. We believe, however, that our operating results also reflect underlying business strengths, especially within our install base. For example, recurring revenue from existing customers increased 24% from 2019 to 2020. In addition, customer retention rates remained high in 2020, averaging 89%, measured quarterly.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold was $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $0.6 million, or 14%, was due to $0.7 million in decreased direct product costs as a result of decreased revenue, partially offset by increases of $0.1 million in inventory reserves for expiring items and physical count inventory adjustments.
Gross Margin
Gross margin was approximately 57% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to approximately 59% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of approximately 2 percentage points is primarily due to increases of $0.1 million in inventory reserves for expiring items and physical count inventory adjustments.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $2.8 and $3.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. This decrease of $0.3 million, or 11%, was driven by decreases in headcount expenses including stock-based compensation expense, partially offset by increases expenditures in filter research and development.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization expenses were $0.2 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $0.4 million or 7%. The increase was due to several factors, including increased headcount-related expenses of $0.9 million, partially offset by a decrease in travel and marketing related expenses of $0.3 million as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and a decrease in stock-based compensation expense of $0.2 million.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
Change in fair value of contingent consideration of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to settlement of the contingent consideration liability. Change in fair value of contingent consideration of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to lower-than-planned revenue performance of commercial filtration products.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $0.1 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and is primarily related to interest on our secured note payable, interest on our secured revolving credit facility that was terminated on May 26, 2020 and accretion of contingent consideration.
Interest Income
Interest income was approximately $11,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. There was no interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other Expense, net
Other expense was approximately $152,000 and $54,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, as a result of losses on foreign currency transactions.
Income Tax Benefit
There was no income tax benefit recognized in the year ended December 31, 2020. In the year ended December 31, 2019, income tax benefit of $0.2 million was recorded due to the sale of net operating loss and research and development credit carryforwards under the New Jersey Economic Development Authority Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer Program.
Water Filtration
The following table sets forth results of operations for the Water Filtration segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands except percentages):
Net Revenues
Total net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $8.5 million compared to $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $1.8 million, or 17%, was driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, which negatively impacted revenues, primarily with respect to new accounts, the hospitality and food service market, and our emergency response business. We believe, however, that our operating results also reflect underlying business strengths, especially within our install base. For example, recurring revenue from existing customers increased 24% from 2019 to 2020. In addition, customer retention rates remained high in 2020, averaging 89%, measured quarterly.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold was $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $0.6 million, or 15%, was due to $0.7 million in decreased direct product costs as a result of decreased revenue, partially offset by increases of $0.1 million in inventory reserves for expiring items and physical count inventory adjustments.
Gross Margin
Gross margin was approximately 57% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to approximately 59% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of approximately 2 percentage points is primarily due to increases of $0.1 million in inventory reserves for expiring items and physical count inventory adjustments.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $1.2 and $1.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. This increase of $0.1 million, or 11%, was driven by increases in expenditures in filter research and development, partially offset by decreases in headcount expenses including stock-based compensation expense.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization expenses were $0.2 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of $0.2 million, or 3%. The decrease was primarily due to decreased stock-based compensation expense of $0.2 million and a decrease in travel-related and marketing expenses of $0.3 million as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an increase in professional expenses of $0.2 million.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
Change in fair value of contingent consideration of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to settlement of the contingent consideration liability. Change in fair value of contingent consideration of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to lower-than-planned revenue performance of commercial filtration products.
Pathogen Detection
The following table sets forth results of operations for the Pathogen Detection segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands except percentages):
Net Revenues
Total net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $29,000. Our pathogen detection products were launched during the year ended December 31, 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, which impacted our ability to gain revenue traction.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold was approximately $16,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gross Margin
Gross margin was approximately 45% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $0.3 million and $0.6 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and were due to the sales efforts that began during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Renal Products
The following table sets forth results of operations for the Renal Products segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands except percentages):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $1.3 million and $1.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $0.1 million due to decreased investment in the second-generation HDF product.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $0.3 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $0.1 million primarily due to an increased investment in operational management.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes our liquidity and capital resources as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and is intended to supplement the more detailed discussion that follows. The amounts stated are expressed in thousands.
We operate under an Investment, Risk Management and Accounting Policy adopted by our Board of Directors. Such policy limits the types of instruments or securities in which we may invest our excess funds: U.S. Treasury Securities; Certificates of Deposit issued by money center banks; Money Funds by money center banks; Repurchase Agreements; and Eurodollar Certificates of Deposit issued by money center banks. This policy provides that our primary objectives for investments are the preservation of principal and achieving sufficient liquidity to meet our forecasted cash requirements. In addition, provided that such primary objectives are met, we may seek to achieve the maximum yield available under such constraints.
At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $132.0 million, and we expect to incur additional operating losses from operations until such time, if ever, that we are able to increase product sales and/or licensing revenue to achieve profitability.
Based on cash that is available for our operations and projections of our future operations, we believe that our cash balances will be sufficient to fund our current operating plan through at least the next 12 months from the date of issuance of the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Additionally, our operating plans are designed to help control operating costs, to increase revenue and to raise additional capital until such time as we generate sufficient cash flows from operations. If there were a decrease in the demand for our products due to either economic or competitive conditions, or we are unable to achieve our plan, there could be a significant reduction in liquidity due to our possible inability to cut costs sufficiently.
Our future liquidity sources and requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the market acceptance of our products, and our ability to effectively and efficiently produce and market our products;
● the continued progress in, and the costs of, clinical studies and other research and development programs;
● the costs involved in filing and enforcing patent claims and the status of competitive products; and
● the cost of litigation, including potential patent litigation and any other actual or threatened litigation.
We expect to put our current capital resources to the following uses:
● the development, marketing, and sales of our water-filtration and water diagnostics product;
● the development of our second-generation HDF product; and
● working capital purposes.
Net cash used in operating activities was $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $4.6 million. The increase of $4.6 million is due primarily to increased expenditures on inventory, which were incurred in the first half of fiscal year 2020 to reduce the risk of possible supply chain interruptions early in the COVID-19 pandemic, and a decrease in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to equipment purchases.
Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $151,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a working capital adjustment of approximately $137,000 related to the Aether Acquisition and an equipment purchase of approximately $14,000.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from net proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $11.5 million, proceeds from a PPP loan of $0.5 million and proceeds from the exercise of warrants and stock options of $0.2 million, partially offset by net payments on our secured revolving credit facility of $0.6 million, payments on our secured note payable of $0.2 million and payment of contingent consideration related to the Aether Acquisition of $0.1 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted from net proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $2.0 million and proceeds from the exercise of warrants and stock options of $0.8 million, partially offset by net payments on our secured revolving credit facility of $0.4 million, payments on our secured note payable of $0.2 million and payment of contingent consideration related to the Aether Acquisition of $0.1 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our approximate minimum contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Reflects minimum purchase commitments pursuant to our License and Supply agreement with Medica.
In addition to lease obligations for office space, these obligations include a lease for various office equipment which expires in 2023 and an automobile lease which expires in 2021.