ITEM 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information in this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations and involves risk and uncertainties. For example, statements regarding our expectations as to our plans and strategy for our business, future financial performance, expense levels and liquidity sources are forward-looking statements. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under the “Risk Factors” section and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Please also see the section entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of proprietary product candidates to treat patients suffering from CNS diseases. Leveraging our scientific insights and clinical experience, we have acquired or in-licensed compounds that we believe have innovative mechanisms of actions and therapeutic profiles that potentially address the unmet needs of patients with these diseases.
We are developing roluperidone (f/k/a MIN-101) for the treatment of negative symptoms in patients with schizophrenia and MIN-301 for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. In addition, we previously co-developed seltorexant (f/k/a MIN-202 or JNJ-42847922) with Janssen for the treatment of insomnia disorder and adjunctive treatment of MDD. During 2020, we exercised our right to opt out of a joint development agreement with Janssen for the future development of seltorexant. As a result, we will be entitled to collect royalties in the mid-single digits on potential future sales of seltorexant worldwide in certain indications, with no further financial obligations to Janssen. In January 2021, we sold our rights to these potential royalties to Royalty Pharma.
Clinical and Regulatory Updates
In May 2020 we announced top level results from our Phase 3 trial of roluperidone to treat negative symptoms in schizophrenia which was conducted in the United States, Europe and Israel. In total, 515 patients were enrolled into the trial and 513 patients received treatment however the trial failed to meet its primary and key secondary endpoints. Patient evaluation in the open-label extension phase of the Phase 3 trial of roluperidone was achieved on February 15, 2021, with a total of 202 patients completing this phase. Data are expected to be available in the first half of 2021.
In November 2020 we met with the FDA regarding the development of roluperidone for the treatment of negative symptoms of schizophrenia. We plan to continue to communicate with FDA regarding their comments and continue to move forward with the clinical pharmacology, non-clinical, and CMC work needed to support an NDA submission. We anticipate requesting a pre-NDA meeting with FDA to discuss our NDA submission plans based on our clinical efficacy and safety data
We have not received regulatory approvals to commercialize any of our product candidates, and we have not generated any revenue from the sales or license of our product candidates. We have incurred significant operating losses every year since inception. We expect to incur net losses and negative cash flow from operating activities for the foreseeable future in connection with the clinical development and the potential regulatory approval, infrastructure development and commercialization of our product candidates.
Financial Overview
Revenue
None of our product candidates have been approved for commercialization and we have not received any revenue in connection with the sale or license of our product candidates.
During 2020 we exercised our right to opt out of the joint development agreement with Janssen for the future development of seltorexant. As a result, we have no future obligations under the agreement and recognized approximately $41.2 million in collaborative revenue, which we had previously included on our balance sheet under deferred revenue.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consists of costs incurred in connection with the development of our product candidates, including: fees paid to consultants and clinical research organizations, or CROs, including in connection with our non-clinical and clinical trials, and other related clinical trial fees, such as for investigator grants, patient screening, laboratory work, clinical trial database management, clinical trial material management and statistical compilation and analysis; licensing fees; costs related to acquiring clinical trial materials; costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and costs related to salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation granted to employees in research and development functions. We expense research and development costs as they are incurred.
The historic direct costs relating to each of our product candidates are summarized as follows (in thousands):
(1)
The $8.4 million decrease in expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus 2019 reflects the completion of the Phase 3 core study of roluperidone. Patient evaluation in the open-label extension portion of this study has been completed and data are expected to be available in the first half of 2021.
(2)
The $28.5 million decrease in MIN-117 expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus 2019 reflects the completion of a Phase 2b study. The study failed to meet its primary endpoints and, as a result, the 2019 expense includes a $19.0 million charge for the impairment of the related in-process research and development.
Completion dates and completion costs can vary significantly for each product candidate and are difficult to predict. We anticipate we will make determinations as to which programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program on an ongoing basis in response to the scientific and clinical success or failure of each product candidate, the estimated costs to continue the development program relative to our available resources, as well as an ongoing assessment as to each product candidate’s commercial potential. We will need to raise additional capital or may seek additional product collaborations in the future in order to complete the development and commercialization of our product candidates.
We test goodwill and in-process research and development for impairment annually on November 30 or more frequently if changes in circumstances or the occurrence of events suggest impairment exists. The test for impairment of in-process research and development requires us to make several estimates about fair value, most of which are based on projected future cash flows. Changes in these estimates may result in the recognition of an impairment loss in our results of operations. An impairment analysis is performed whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of any individual asset may not be recoverable. For example, if we or our counterparties fail to perform our respective obligations under an agreement, or if we lack sufficient funding to develop our product candidates, an impairment may result. In addition, any significant change in market conditions, estimates or judgments used to determine expected future cash flows that indicate a reduction in carrying value may give rise to impairment in the period that the change becomes known.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of costs for functions in executive, finance, legal, auditing and taxes. Our general and administrative expenses include salaries, bonuses, facility and information system costs and professional fees for auditing, accounting, consulting and legal services. General and administrative costs also include non-cash stock-based compensation expense as part of our compensation strategy to attract and retain qualified staff.
We expect to continue to incur general and administrative expenses related to operating as a publicly-traded company, including increased audit and legal fees, costs of compliance with securities, corporate governance and other regulations, investor relations expenses and higher insurance premiums. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs as we hire personnel and enhance our infrastructure to support the anticipated growth of our business.
Foreign Exchange (Losses) Gains
Foreign exchange (losses) gains are comprised primarily of losses and gains of foreign currency transactions related to clinical trial expenses denominated in Euros. Since our current clinical trials are conducted in Europe, we incur certain expenses in Euros and record these expenses in United States Dollars at the time the liability is incurred. Changes in the applicable foreign currency rate between the date an expense is recorded and the payment date is recorded as a foreign currency loss or gain. We expect to continue to incur future expenses denominated in Euros as certain of our planned clinical trials are expected to be conducted in Europe.
Investment Income
Investment income consists of income earned on our cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest incurred under our former loan with Oxford Finance LLC (“Oxford”), and Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”). During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there was no debt outstanding and no interest expense recorded.
Net Operating Losses and Tax Carryforwards
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $102.8 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards. These federal net operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire at various dates beginning in 2030, if not utilized. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $98.6 million of state net operating loss carryforwards. During the year ended December 31, 2020, no state operating loss carryforwards had expired.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (in thousands):
Collaborative Revenue
Collaborative revenue was $41.2 million and $0.0 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in collaborative revenue was the result of our exercising our right to opt out of the co-development agreement with Janssen during 2020. As a result of the opt out we have no further performance obligations and recognized the $41.2 million, which had been previously included on our balance sheet under deferred revenue.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $22.0 million and $58.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $36.1 million. The decrease in research and development expenses was primarily due to (i) a $19.0 million charge for the impairment of the in-process research and development related to MIN-117 in December 2019, (ii) approximately $11.0 million from the
completion of the Phase 2b clinical trial of MIN-117 in December 2019 and (iii) the completion in May 2020 of the core study portion of the Phase 3 clinical trial of roluperidone. Patient evaluation in the open-label extension portion of this study has been completed and data are expected to be available in the first half of 2021. Non-cash stock compensation expense included in research and development expenses was $3.0 million and $2.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $17.3 million and $17.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of approximately $0.4 million. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to approximately $1.1 million in lower pre-commercial expenses in 2020, offset by higher insurance costs of approximately $0.9 million. Non-cash stock compensation expense included in general and administrative expenses was $6.7 million and $6.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Foreign Exchange Losses
Foreign exchange losses were $67 thousand and $29 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $38 thousand. The loss was primarily due to a higher level of clinical activities in 2020 denominated in Euros.
Investment Income
Investment income was $0.2 million and $1.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $1.3 million. The decrease was primarily due to lower average balances for cash equivalents and marketable securities during 2020.
Benefit for Income Taxes
Benefit for income taxes was zero and $2.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $2.3 million. The $2.3 million benefit was a result of lowering the deferred tax liability due to the impairment of the MIN-117 IPR&D asset during 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $284.8 million. We anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development and potential commercialization of our product candidates and to support our operations as a public company. At December 31, 2020, we had approximately $25.5 million in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash. In January 2021 Royalty Pharma acquired our royalty interest in seltorexant for an upfront payment of $60 million and up to $95 million in additional milestone payments. The future milestone payments to us will be contingent on the achievement of certain clinical, regulatory and commercialization milestones for seltorexant by Janssen. Seltorexant is currently in Phase 3 development for the treatment of MDD with insomnia symptoms by Janssen. We believe that with the upfront payment of $60 million, our existing cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash will be sufficient to meet our cash commitments for at least the next 12 months after the date that the financial statements are issued.
The process of drug development can be costly and the timing and outcomes of clinical trials is uncertain. The assumptions upon which we have based our estimates are routinely evaluated and may be subject to change. The actual amount of our expenditures will vary depending upon a number of factors including but not limited to the design, timing and duration of future clinical trials, the progress of our research and development programs, the infrastructure to support a commercial enterprise, the cost of a commercial product launch and the level of financial resources available. We have the ability to adjust our operating plan spending levels based on the timing of future clinical trials which will be predicated upon adequate funding to complete the trials.
Sources of Funds
At-the-Market Equity Offering Program
In August 2018 we entered into the Sales Agreement with Jefferies LLC pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, through Jefferies, up to $50.0 million in shares of our common stock, by any method permitted by law deemed to be an “at-the-market” offering as defined in Rule 415 promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued and sold 3,381,608 shares of our common stock under the Sales Agreement. The shares were sold at an average price of $3.7113 per share for aggregate net proceeds to us of approximately $12.1 million, after deducting sales commissions and offering costs payable by us.
Seltorexant Royalties
We previously co-developed seltorexant with Janssen for the treatment of insomnia disorder and adjunctive treatment of MDD. During 2020, we exercised our right to opt out of a joint development agreement with Janssen for the future development of seltorexant. As a result, we will be entitled to collect royalties in the mid-single digits on potential future sales of seltorexant worldwide in certain indications, with no further financial obligations to Janssen.
On January 19, 2021, we entered into an agreement with Royalty Pharma under which Royalty Pharma has acquired our royalty interest in seltorexant for an upfront payment of $60 million and up to $95 million in future milestone payments, contingent upon the achievement of certain clinical, regulatory and commercial milestones for seltorexant by Janssen or any other party in the event that Janssen sells seltorexant.
Uses of Funds
To date, we have not generated any revenue from sales of products. We have only generated collaborative revenue due to opting out of our license and co-development agreement with Janssen, and have only generated revenue from the one-time sale of our royalty interests in seltorexant to Royalty Pharma. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from sales of our products, or from the potential future royalty streams associated with the sale of our royalty interests in seltorexant to Royalty Pharma. We do not expect to generate significant revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize any of our product candidates. At the same time, we expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing development activities, particularly as we continue the research, development and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidates. We also expect to continue to incur costs associated with operating as a public company. In addition, subject to obtaining regulatory approval of any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses for product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenue from product sales, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, government or other third party funding, commercialization, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of our common stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Additional debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through government or other third party funding, commercialization, marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. There can be no assurance that such additional funding, if available, can be obtained on terms acceptable to us, and the uncertainty and volatility in the capital markets caused by the continuing COVID-19 pandemic may negatively impact the availability and cost of capital. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, future operations would need to be scaled back or discontinued. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash will be sufficient to meet our cash commitments for at least the next 12 months after the date that the financial statements are issued. The timing of future capital requirements depends upon many factors including the size and timing of future clinical trials, the timing and scope of any strategic partnering activity and the progress of other research and development activities.
Cash Flows
The tables below set forth our significant sources and uses of cash for the periods set forth below.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities of approximately $33.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to decreases in deferred revenue of $41.2 million, accrued expenses of $2.1 million and accounts payable of $1.3 million, and an increase of prepaid expense of $0.8 million. The cash used was partially offset by our net income of $1.9 million and stock-based compensation expense of $9.7 million.
Net cash used in operating activities of approximately $43.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to our net loss of $72.2 million, a decrease of $2.2 million in deferred taxes, and amortization of investments of $0.8 million, partially offset by an impairment expense of in process research and development assets of $19.0 million, stock-based compensation expense of $9.2 million, an increase in accrued expenses $2.3 million, a decrease in prepaid expenses of $0.7 million, and an increase in accounts payable of $0.6 million.
Net Cash Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities of approximately $24.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the maturity and redemption of marketable securities of $28.4 million, partially offset by the purchase of marketable securities of $3.9 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities of approximately $14.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the maturity and redemption of marketable securities of $75.2 million, partially offset by the purchase of marketable securities of $61.1 million.
Net Cash Provided by (Used In) Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $13.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to gross proceeds received from the ‘at the market’ stock offering of $12.6 million less costs of $0.5 million, and proceeds from the exercise of common stock options of $1.1 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to the proceeds from the exercise of common stock options of $0.5 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC rules.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Research and Development Costs
Costs incurred in connection with research and development activities are expensed as incurred. These costs include licensing fees to use certain technology in our research and development projects as well as fees paid to consultants and various entities that perform certain research and testing on our behalf and costs related to salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation granted to employees in research and development functions. We determine our expenses related to clinical studies based on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and contract research organizations
that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual accordingly. The expenses for some trials may be recognized on a straight-line basis if the anticipated costs are expected to be incurred ratably during the period. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in the condensed consolidated financial statements as prepaid or accrued expenses.
We make estimates of our accrued research and development expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known at that time. Although we do not expect that our estimates will be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any particular period. There had been no material adjustments to our prior period estimates of accrued expenses for clinical trials. However, due to the nature of estimates, we cannot assure you that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical trials.
In-process Research and Development
In-process research and development, or IPR&D, assets represent capitalized incomplete research projects that we acquired through business combinations. Such assets are initially measured at their acquisition date fair values. The initial fair values of the research projects is recorded as intangible assets on the balance sheet, rather than expensed, regardless of whether these assets have an alternative future use.
The amounts capitalized are being accounted for as indefinite-lived intangible assets, subject to impairment testing, until completion or abandonment of research and development efforts associated with the project. An IPR&D asset is considered abandoned when it ceases to be used (that is, research and development efforts associated with the asset have ceased, and there are no plans to sell or license the asset or derive defensive value from the asset). At that point, the asset is considered to be disposed of and is written off. Upon successful completion of each project, we will make a determination about the then remaining useful life of the intangible asset and begin amortization. We test our indefinite-lived intangibles, IPR&D assets, for impairment annually on November 30 and more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired. In estimating the fair value of IPR&D, an income approach was used with a discounted cash flow analysis. Many assumptions and estimates are included in this analysis including revenue and expense projections, probability of success factors, expected product launch date and a weighted average cost of capital of 19.5%.
Potential triggering events that could indicate whether an impairment to the IPR&D may have occurred include: clinical trial results where the compound under investigation did not meet pre-established criteria or clinical endpoints, failure to obtain regulatory approval, the inability to fund future clinical trials, failure to obtain patent protection, adverse changes in the regulatory environment, the approval of competing therapies or compounds, adverse changes in applicable laws or regulations and a variety of other circumstances. The impairment of IPR&D could have a material adverse impact on our financial condition. In order to determine whether an impairment has occurred, management must evaluate the events and incorporate multiple assumptions including: costs associated with continuing the development program, competing therapies or compounds, potential market size, estimated future cash flows and other factors. When testing indefinite-lived intangibles for impairment, we may assess qualitative factors for our indefinite-lived intangibles to determine whether it is more likely than not (that is, a likelihood of more than 50 percent) that the asset is impaired. Alternatively, we may bypass this qualitative assessment for some or all of our indefinite-lived intangibles and perform the quantitative impairment test that compares the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset with the asset’s carrying amount. We test our IPR&D for impairment as of November 30. There was no impairment of the Mind-NRG IPR&D asset for the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Impairment of MIN-117 In-process Research and Development Asset.
As a result of our Phase 2b trial of MIN-117 in adult patients suffering from moderate to severe MDD not meeting its primary and key secondary endpoints and our decision not to further the clinical development of MIN-117 in MDD, we determined that the MIN-117 IPR&D was fully impaired and recognized a $19.0 million expense, which was included as a component of research and development expense, during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Goodwill
We test our goodwill for impairment annually, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate an impairment may have occurred, by comparing our reporting unit’s carrying value to its fair value. Impairment may result from, among other things, deterioration in the performance of the acquired business, adverse market conditions, adverse changes in applicable laws or regulations and a variety of other circumstances. If we determine that an impairment has occurred, we are required to record a write-
down of the carrying value and charge the impairment as an operating expense in the period the determination is made. In evaluating the recoverability of the carrying value of goodwill, we must make assumptions regarding estimated future cash flows and other factors to determine the fair value of the acquired assets. Changes in strategy or market conditions could significantly impact those judgments in the future and require an adjustment to the recorded balances. We test our goodwill for impairment as of November 30. There was no impairment of goodwill for the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between financial reporting and tax reporting bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using enacted tax rates and laws that are expected to be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Uncertain tax positions are evaluated and if appropriate, the amount of unrecognized tax benefits are recorded within deferred tax assets. Deferred tax assets are evaluated for realization based on a more-likely-than-not criterion in determining if a valuation allowance should be provided. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized.
We use a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken, or expected to be taken, in a tax return. We have elected to treat interest and penalties, to the extent they arise, as a component of income taxes. There was no interest or penalties related to income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019. Income tax years beginning in 2012 for federal and state purposes are generally subject to examination by taxing authorities, although net operating losses from all prior years are subject to examinations and adjustments for at least three years following the year in which the tax attributes are utilized.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) and are adopted by us as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise disclosed in the notes to the financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K, we believe that the impact of other recently issued, but not yet adopted, accounting pronouncements will not have a material impact on the financial position, results of operations or cash flows, or do not apply to our operations.