ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion, as well as other discussions in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, contains forward-looking statements about future events and expectations within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future results. When we use words in this document such as “anticipates,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “estimates,” “projects,” “expects,” “should,” “could,” “may,” “will,” and similar expressions, we do so to identify forward-looking statements. Examples of forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements we make regarding future prospects of growth in the petroleum additives market, other trends in the petroleum additives market, our ability to maintain or increase our market share, and our future capital expenditure levels.
We believe our forward-looking statements are based on reasonable expectations and assumptions, within the bounds of what we know about our business and operations. However, we offer no assurance that actual results will not differ materially from our expectations due to uncertainties and factors that are difficult to predict and beyond our control.
Factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from expectations include, but are not limited to, the availability of raw materials and distribution systems; disruptions at production facilities, including single-sourced facilities; hazards common to chemical businesses; the ability to respond effectively to technological changes in our industry; failure to protect our intellectual property rights; sudden or sharp raw material price increases; competition from other manufacturers; current and future governmental regulations; the gain or loss of significant customers; failure to attract and retain a highly-qualified workforce; an information technology system failure or security breach; the occurrence or threat of extraordinary events, including natural disasters, terrorist attacks, and health-related epidemics such as the COVID-19 pandemic; risks related to operating outside of the United States; political, economic, and regulatory factors concerning our products; the impact of substantial indebtedness on our operational and financial flexibility; the impact of fluctuations in foreign exchange rates; resolution of environmental liabilities or legal proceedings; limitation of our insurance coverage; our inability to realize expected benefits from investment in our infrastructure or from recent or future acquisitions, or our inability to successfully integrate recent or future acquisitions into our business; and the underperformance of our pension assets resulting in additional cash contributions to our pension plans. Risk factors are discussed in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.”
You should keep in mind that any forward-looking statement made by us in this discussion or elsewhere speaks only as of the date on which we make it. New risks and uncertainties arise from time to time, and it is impossible for us to predict these events or how they may affect us. We have no duty to, and do not intend to, update or revise the forward-looking statements in this discussion after the date hereof, except as may be required by law. In light of these risks and uncertainties, any forward-looking statement made in this discussion or elsewhere, might not occur.
OVERVIEW
When comparing the results of the petroleum additives segment for 2020 with 2019, both net sales and operating profit decreased primarily as a result of the economic disruption from the COVID-19 pandemic. Net sales for 2020 decreased 8.0% primarily due to lower lubricant additives and fuel additives product shipments, as well as decreased selling prices. Petroleum additives operating profit for 2020 was 7.2% lower reflecting lower product shipments and changes in selling prices, as well as higher conversion costs, partially offset by improved raw material costs.
Our operations generate cash that is in excess of the needs of the business. We continue to invest in and manage our business for the long-term with the goal of helping our customers succeed in their marketplaces. Our investments continue to be in organizational talent, technology development and processes, and global infrastructure, consisting of technical centers, production capability, and geographic expansion.
IMPACT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND CURRENT ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT
Petroleum additives operating results for 2020 have been marked by economic uncertainty resulting from the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related restrictions on the movement of people, goods and services. While
we have continued to operate throughout the year in each of our regions, we have at various times experienced significant changes in some of the key drivers that affect the performance of our business. During the second quarter of 2020, government and business shutdowns in North America and Europe led to a precipitous drop in vehicle miles driven and auto production, with gasoline consumption in the United States dropping to its lowest point in over 50 years. With less travel and fewer miles driven, combined with automobile plant closures, global demand for our products declined substantially, except in our Asia Pacific region where demand remained relatively stable throughout the year. As restrictions eased and economies reopened in the second half of 2020, global production of automobiles began to rebound and gasoline consumption and miles driven showed steady improvement in most countries, including the United States. Late in the fourth quarter, renewed restrictions on travel and work in certain countries had a negative effect on our business. The pace and stability of improvement in demand for our products will continue to depend heavily on economic recovery and the rate at which government restrictions are lifted and remain lifted.
With only a very few government-ordered, short-term exceptions, all of our locations around the world, including our manufacturing and research and development facilities, have continued to operate safely and without interruption during the pandemic, and we expect them to continue to do so. Raw material sourcing has not been significantly impacted and we do not expect that to change over the coming months. The transportation industry continues to operate and our products are currently being delivered to our customers.
Our financial position remains strong. We have sufficient access to additional capital if needed, including our new $900 million revolving credit facility we entered into in March 2020, and we do not anticipate any issues with meeting the covenants in our debt agreements. Our major capital projects are continuing to progress substantially as planned.
The chemical industry and our products are recognized as essential for the transportation of goods and services. Our business continuity planning process focuses our efforts on managing through this challenging time and helping our customers do the same. As we are a global company and can leverage the knowledge and experience of our personnel in facilities across the world, we do not expect to experience negative impacts related to short-term travel and border restrictions. As we operate in the chemical industry, we continue to be focused on protecting the health and safety of our employees and have procedures in place at each of our operating facilities to help ensure their well-being.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management's discussion and analysis of our results of operations is presented below for the comparative periods of 2020 versus 2019. The discussion and analysis of our results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018 is available in Item 7 of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Net Sales
Our consolidated net sales for 2020 amounted to $2.0 billion, a decrease of $179 million, or 8.2% from 2019.
No single customer accounted for 10% or more of our total net sales in 2020, 2019, or 2018.
The following table shows net sales by segment and product line for each of the last three years.
Petroleum Additives - The regions in which we operate include North America (the United States and Canada), Latin America (Mexico, Central America, and South America), Asia Pacific, and the Europe/Middle East/Africa/India (EMEAI) region. The percentage of net sales being generated in the regions has remained fairly consistent over the past
three years, with some limited fluctuation due to various factors, including the impact of regional economic trends. North America and EMEAI both represent around 35% of our petroleum additives net sales, while Asia Pacific contributes about 25% and Latin America represents the remaining amount. As shown in the table above, lubricant additives net sales and fuel additives net sales compared to total petroleum additives net sales has remained substantially consistent over the past three years.
Petroleum additives net sales for 2020 of $2.0 billion were approximately 8.0% lower than 2019 levels. The decrease was across all regions except the Latin America region, which was substantially even with 2019 levels. The North America region represented nearly 50% of the petroleum additives decrease in net sales, while the Asia Pacific and EMEAI regions represented about 25% each. The decrease in petroleum additives net sales was predominantly the result of the economic disruption due to the COVID-19 pandemic, including lower demand for petroleum additives products reflecting the restrictions across the world on the movement of people, goods, and services.
The approximate components of the petroleum additives decrease in net sales of $174 million when comparing 2020 to 2019 are shown below in millions.
Petroleum additives shipments accounted for a $92 million decrease in net sales between 2019 and 2020. Lower selling prices, partially offset by a favorable foreign currency impact, resulted in a decrease in net sales of $82 million when comparing the two years. The United States Dollar weakened against the Euro when comparing 2020 and 2019, which resulted in most of the favorable foreign currency impact to net sales in 2020.
On a worldwide basis, the volume of product shipments for petroleum additives decreased 5.2% when comparing 2020 with 2019. The decreases in shipments were in both lubricant additives and fuel additives. Most of the decrease in lubricant additives was in the Asia Pacific region, with small decreases in the North America and EMEAI regions offset by a small increase in the Latin America region. The North America and EMEAI regions represented most of the decrease in fuel additive product shipments. We believe the decrease in product shipments during 2020 substantially resulted from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
All Other - The “All other” category includes the operations of the antiknock compounds business, and certain contracted manufacturing and services performed by Ethyl.
Segment Operating Profit
NewMarket evaluates the performance of the petroleum additives business based on segment operating profit. NewMarket Services expenses are charged to each subsidiary pursuant to services agreements between the companies. Depreciation on segment property, plant, and equipment, as well as amortization of segment intangible assets and lease right-of-use assets, is included in segment operating profit.
The table below reports segment operating profit for the last three years. A reconciliation of segment operating profit to income before income tax expense is in Note 4.
Petroleum Additives - Petroleum additives segment operating profit decreased $26 million when comparing 2020 to 2019. Both periods included the impact of the same factors that affected gross profit (see discussion below) including an unfavorable foreign currency translation impact.
The operating profit margin was 16.7% in 2020 and 16.5% in 2019. Despite the economic disruption from the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020 resulting in lower product shipment volumes and reduced net sales compared to 2019, the operating profit margin is slightly improved from 2019 levels. Operating profit margins remain a priority, and while they will fluctuate from quarter to quarter due to multiple factors, we believe the fundamentals of our business and industry are unchanged.
Petroleum additives gross profit decreased $37 million when comparing 2020 and 2019. Cost of goods sold as a percentage of net sales was 70.4% in 2020 and 71.1% in 2019.
When comparing 2020 and 2019, the decrease in gross profit resulted from unfavorable impacts from product shipments and lower selling prices (both as discussed in the Net Sales section above), as well as unfavorable conversion costs, which together contributed over 100% of the change between 2020 and 2019. These unfavorable factors were partially offset by lower raw material costs.
Petroleum additives selling, general, and administrative expenses (SG&A) were $7 million, or 5.7% lower in 2020 compared to 2019. SG&A as a percentage of net sales was 5.9% in 2020 and 5.8% in 2019. Our SG&A costs are primarily personnel-related and include salaries, benefits and other costs associated with our workforce, including travel-related expenses. While personnel-related costs fluctuate from year to year, there were no significant changes in the drivers of these costs when comparing 2020 and 2019 other than reduced travel-related expenses due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our investment in petroleum additives research, development, and testing (R&D) decreased approximately $4 million when comparing 2020 with 2019. As a percentage of net sales, R&D was 7.0% in 2020 and 6.6% in 2019. Our R&D investments reflect our efforts to support the development of solutions that meet our customers' needs, meet new and evolving standards, and support our expansion into new product areas. Our approach to R&D investment, as it is with SG&A, is one of purposeful spending on programs to support our current product base and to ensure that we develop products to support our customers' programs in the future. R&D investments include personnel-related costs, as well as costs for internal and external testing of our products. Substantially all investments in new product development are incurred in the United States and the U.K., with approximately 70% of total R&D being attributable to the North America and EMEAI regions. The remaining R&D is attributable to the Asia Pacific and Latin America regions and represents customer technology support services in those regions. All of our R&D is related to the petroleum additives segment.
The following discussion references certain captions on the Consolidated Statements of Income.
Interest and Financing Expenses
Interest and financing expenses were $26 million in 2020 and $29 million in 2019. The decrease in interest and financing expense between 2020 and 2019 resulted primarily from a lower average interest rate during 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net was income of $46 million in 2020 and $24 million in 2019. The amount for 2020 included a gain of $16 million related to the sale of a non-operating parcel of real estate. The amounts for both periods also included the components of net periodic benefit cost (income), except for service costs. See Note 17 for further information on total periodic benefit cost (income).
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was $61 million in 2020 and $77 million in 2019. The effective tax rate was 18.3% in 2020 and 23.3% in 2019. When comparing 2020 and 2019, income tax decreased $16 million due to the lower effective tax rate. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily the result of finalizing prior year tax filings and releasing certain tax reserves.
CASH FLOWS DISCUSSION
We generated cash from operating activities of $284 million in 2020 and $337 million in 2019.
During 2020, we used the $284 million of cash generated from operations along with $19 million of cash on hand to repurchase $101 million of our common stock, pay $83 million of dividends on our common stock, repay $45 million on our revolving credit facility, and fund $93 million for capital expenditures. Cash flows from operating activities included a decrease of $54 million from higher working capital requirements, cash contributions of $11 million to our pension and postretirement plans, and a gain of $16 million related to the sale of a parcel of non-operating real estate.
During 2019, we used the $337 million cash generated from operations to repay $123 million on our revolving credit facility, pay $82 million of dividends on our common stock, and fund capital expenditures of $59 million. Cash flows from operating activities included an increase of $5 million from lower working capital requirements, as well as cash contributions of $10 million to our pension and postretirement plans.
FINANCIAL POSITION AND LIQUIDITY
Cash
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $125 million as compared to $144 million at the end of 2019.
Cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries amounted to approximately $97 million at December 31, 2020 and $99 million at December 31, 2019. Periodically, we repatriate cash from our foreign subsidiaries to the United States through intercompany dividends and loans. We do not anticipate significant tax consequences of future distributions of foreign earnings.
A portion of our foreign cash balances is associated with earnings that we have asserted are indefinitely reinvested. We plan to use these indefinitely reinvested earnings to support growth outside of the United States through funding of operating expenses, research and development expenses, capital expenditures, and other cash needs of our foreign subsidiaries.
Debt
A summary of our debt instruments follows. A full discussion is in Note 13.
4.10% Senior Notes - At both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had $350 million of 4.10% senior notes due 2022 with interest payable semiannually and which are senior unsecured obligations. We were in compliance with all covenants under the indenture governing the 4.10% senior notes as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
3.78% Senior Notes - On January 4, 2017, we issued $250 million in senior unsecured notes in a private placement with The Prudential Insurance Company of America and certain other purchasers. These notes bear interest at 3.78% and mature on January 4, 2029. Interest is payable semiannually. Principal payments of $50 million are payable annually beginning on January 4, 2025. We have the right to make optional prepayments on the notes at any time, subject to certain limitations. We were in compliance with all covenants under the 3.78% senior notes as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Revolving Credit Facility - On March 5, 2020, NewMarket and certain foreign subsidiary borrowers entered into a Credit Agreement (the Credit Agreement) with a term of five years. The Credit Agreement provides for a $900 million, multicurrency revolving credit facility with a $500 million sublimit for foreign currency borrowings, a $50 million sublimit for letters of credit, and a $20 million sublimit for swingline loans. The Credit Agreement includes an expansion feature which allows us, subject to certain conditions, to request an increase in the aggregate amount of the revolving credit facility or obtain incremental term loans in an amount up to $425 million. NewMarket's obligations under the Credit Agreement are unsecured and the obligations of foreign subsidiary borrowers are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by NewMarket. The revolving credit facility is available on a revolving basis until March 5, 2025.
There were no outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility at December 31, 2020 compared to $45 million in outstanding borrowings at December 31, 2019 under our former facility. Outstanding letters of credit amounted to $2 million at December 31, 2020 and $3 million at December 31, 2019 resulting in the unused portion of the applicable credit facility amounting to $898 million at December 31, 2020 and $803 million at December 31, 2019.
The average interest rate for borrowings under the credit facilities was 1.4% during 2020 and 3.0% during 2019.
The Credit Agreement contains financial covenants that require NewMarket to maintain a consolidated Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of no more than 3.75 to 1.00 except during an Increased Leverage Period (as defined in the Credit Agreement). At December 31, 2020, the Leverage Ratio was 1.45. We were in compliance with all covenants under the revolving credit facility in effect at December 31, 2020 and at December 31, 2019.
Other Borrowings - Two of our subsidiaries in Singapore and China each have access to separate short-term lines of credit of $10 million. One of our subsidiaries in the U.K. has access to a short-term line of credit of 10 million Euro. There was no activity on these lines of credit in 2020, nor was there an outstanding balance on any of these lines of credit at December 31, 2019.
***
We had long-term debt of $599 million at December 31, 2020 and $643 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease in debt resulted from repaying borrowings outstanding under the revolving credit facility during 2020.
As a percentage of total capitalization (total long-term debt and shareholders’ equity), our total long-term debt decreased from 48.5% at the end of 2019 to 44.1% at the end of 2020. The change in the percentage was primarily the result of the decrease in long-term debt, as well as the increase in shareholders' equity. The change in shareholders’ equity primarily reflects our earnings and the impact of the foreign currency translation adjustment offset by stock repurchases, dividend payments, and a decrease in the funded position of our defined benefit plans. Normally, we repay any outstanding long-term debt with cash from operations or refinancing activities.
Working Capital
Including cash and cash equivalents and the impact of foreign currency on the balance sheet, at December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $586 million, resulting in a current ratio of 2.87 to 1. Our working capital at December 31, 2019 on the same basis was $571 million, resulting in a current ratio of 2.85 to 1.
Other than the decrease in cash and cash equivalents, the most significant changes in working capital since December 31, 2019 resulted from an increase in inventory, which was partially offset by an increase in accounts payable. The increase in inventories was primarily due to a reduction in an inventory reserve, as well as planning for first quarter 2021 sales forecasts. The increase in accounts payable reflected normal fluctuations across the regions.
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures were $93 million for 2020 and $59 million for 2019. We currently estimate capital expenditures in 2021 will be in the range of $75 million to $85 million as we anticipate spending on several improvements to our manufacturing and R&D infrastructure around the world. We expect to continue to finance capital spending through cash on hand and cash provided from operations, together with borrowing available under our $900 million revolving credit facility.
Environmental Expenses
We spent approximately $29 million in both 2020 and in 2019 for ongoing environmental operating and clean-up costs, excluding depreciation of previously capitalized expenditures. These environmental operating and clean-up expenses are included in cost of goods sold. We expect to continue to fund these costs through cash provided by operations.
Liquidity and Contractual Obligations
We have both current and long-term obligations that have known payment streams and are discussed throughout this Report on Form 10-K. The more material of these include debt-related obligations, lease obligations, purchase commitments, including those for property, plant, and equipment, contributions to pension and postretirement benefit plans, and environmental dismantling and decontamination.
The debt-related contractual obligations include both principle payments on outstanding long-term debt and the related interest payments. The maturity dates and interest rates, as well as information on the repayment of the principle on our long-term debt is detailed above in the Debt section, as well as in Note 13. At December 31, 2020, all of our long-term debt was at fixed rates. Interest is paid semi-annually on both of our fixed rate long-term debt agreements.
Note 16 provides information by year on our lease obligations which have commenced. We also have obligations for leases that have not yet commenced of $5 million in 2021, $3 million in 2022, $3 million in 2023, $2 million in 2024, $2 million in 2025, and $10 million thereafter. Note 17 includes information on contributions to pension and postretirement benefit plans. Benefit payments under these plans are included in Note 17 are predominantly paid from assets held in trust. Further information on purchase commitments, including those for purchases of property, plant, and equipment are in Note 20.
The annual operating expenses and capital expenditures associated with compliance with environmental, health, and safety regulations are included in Item 1, Governmental and Environmental Regulations. In addition to these costs, there are expected cash flows for dismantling and decontamination of environmental sites. At December 31, 2020, these costs were estimated at $1 million in each of 2021 through 2025, and $8 million thereafter.
We expect that cash from operations, together with borrowing available under our credit facilities, will continue to be sufficient for our operating needs and planned capital expenditures for both a current and long-term horizon.
The table below shows our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 by year due.
(a)Amounts represent contractual payments due on the 4.10% senior notes and the Prudential senior unsecured notes as of December 31, 2020. See Note 13 for more information on long-term debt obligations.
(b)We intend to renew letters of credit when necessary as they mature; therefore, the maturity date is the same as the revolving credit facility under which the letters of credit are issued.
(c)Amounts represent the undiscounted obligation for lease payments for leases having an initial lease term of at least one year.
(d)Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum, or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Purchase obligations exclude agreements that are cancelable without penalty. Purchase orders made in the ordinary course of business are excluded from the above table. Any amounts for which we are liable under purchase orders are reflected in our Consolidated Balance Sheets as accounts payable or accrued expenses.
(e)These represent other long-term liability amounts reflected in our Consolidated Balance Sheets that have known payment streams. Amounts include environmental liabilities, contributions associated with pension and postretirement benefit plans, and tax payments related to the deemed repatriation of foreign earnings resulting from the Tax Reform Act. Amounts accrued for potential exposure with respect to litigation, claims, and assessments are not included in the table above.
Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans
Our U.S. and foreign benefit plans are discussed separately below. The information applies to all of our U.S. benefit plans. Our foreign plans are quite diverse, and the actuarial assumptions used by the various foreign plans are based upon the circumstances of each particular country and retirement plan. We use a December 31 measurement date to determine our pension and postretirement expenses and related financial disclosure information. Additional information on our pension and postretirement plans is in Note 17.
U.S. Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans-The average remaining service period of active participants for our U.S. plans is 13 years, while the average remaining life expectancy of inactive participants is 23 years. We utilize the sex distinct Pri-2012 table with separate rates for annuitants, non-annuitants, and contingent annuitants, projected generationally using Scale MP-2020 in determining the impact of the U.S. benefit plans on our financial statements.
Investment Return Assumptions and Asset Allocation-We periodically review our assumptions for the long-term expected return on pension plan assets. As part of the review and to develop expected rates of return, we considered an analysis of expected returns based on the U.S. plans’ asset allocation as of both January 1, 2021 and January 1, 2020. This analysis reflects our expected long-term rates of return for each significant asset class or economic indicator. The range of returns developed relies both on forecasts and on broad-market historical benchmarks for expected return, correlation, and volatility for each asset class. While the asset allocation for our U.S. pension plans is predominantly weighted toward equities, through the ongoing monitoring of our investments and review of market data, we have determined that we should reduce the expected long-term rate of return for our U.S. pension plans from 8.5% to 8.0% at December 31, 2020.
An actuarial gain on the assets occurred during both 2020 and 2019 as the actual investment return for all of our U.S. pension plans exceeded the expected return by approximately $43 million in 2020 and $75 million in 2019. Investment gains and losses are recognized in earnings on an amortized basis over a period of years. The amortization of the actuarial net loss is expected to be approximately $6 million in 2021 resulting primarily from the actuarial loss on the plan liabilities which has only partially been offset by the investment gains on plan assets. We expect that there will be continued volatility in pension expense as actual investment returns vary from the expected return, but we continue to believe the potential long-term benefits justify the risk premium for equity investments.
At December 31, 2020, our expected long-term rate of return on our postretirement plans was 4.5%. This rate varies from the pension rate of 8.0% primarily because of the difference in investment of assets. The assets of the postretirement plan are held in an insurance contract, which results in a lower assumed rate of investment return.
Pension expense and the life insurance portion of postretirement expense are sensitive to changes in the expected return on assets. For example, decreasing the expected rate of return by 100 basis points to 7.0% for pension assets and 3.5% for postretirement benefit assets (while holding other assumptions constant) would increase the forecasted 2021 expense for our U.S. pension and postretirement plans by approximately $5 million. Similarly, a 100 basis point increase in the expected rate of return to 9.0% for pension assets and 5.5% for postretirement benefit assets (while holding other assumptions constant) would reduce forecasted 2021 pension and postretirement expense by $5 million.
Discount Rate Assumption-We develop the discount rate assumption by determining the single effective discount rate for a unique hypothetical portfolio constructed from investment-grade bonds that, in the aggregate, match the projected cash flows of each of our retirement plans. The discount rate is developed based on the hypothetical portfolio on the last day of December. The discount rate at December 31, 2020 was 2.875% for all plans.
Pension and postretirement benefit expense is also sensitive to changes in the discount rate. For example, decreasing the discount rate by 100 basis points to 1.875% (while holding other assumptions constant) would increase the forecasted 2021 expense for our U.S. pension and postretirement benefit plans by approximately $9 million. A 100 basis point increase in the discount rate to 3.875% would reduce forecasted 2021 pension and postretirement benefit expense by $7 million.
Rate of Projected Compensation Increase-We have maintained our rate of projected compensation increase at December 31, 2020 at 3.5%. The rate assumption was based on an analysis of our projected compensation increases for the foreseeable future.
Liquidity-Cash contribution requirements to the pension plan are sensitive to changes in assumed interest rates and investment gains or losses in the same manner as pension expense. We expect our aggregate cash contributions to the U.S. pension plans will be approximately $3 million in 2021. We expect our contributions to the postretirement benefit plans will be approximately $2 million in 2021.
Foreign Pension Benefit Plans-Our foreign pension plans are quite diverse. The following information applies only to our U.K. pension plan, which represents the majority of the amounts recorded in our financial statements for our foreign pension plans. The average remaining service period of active participants for our U.K. plan is 16 years, while the average remaining life expectancy of inactive participants is 26 years. In determining the impact of the U.K. pension plans on our financial statements, we utilize the S3P (Light) mortality tables and allow for future projected improvements in life expectancy in line with the CMI 2019 model (with the core smoothing parameter and an initial addition to mortality improvements of 0.4% per year) with a long-term rate of improvement of 1% per year based on the membership of the plan.
Investment Return Assumptions and Asset Allocation-We periodically review our assumptions for the long-term expected return on the U.K. pension plan assets. The expected long-term rate of return is based on both the asset allocation, as well as yields available in the U.K. markets.
The target asset allocation in the U.K. is to be invested 40% in pooled equities funds, 40% in pooled government bonds, and 20% in pooled diversified growth funds. The actual allocation at the end of 2020 was 40% in pooled equities funds, 40% in pooled government bonds, and 20% in pooled diversified growth funds. Based on the actual asset allocation and the expected yields available in the U.K. markets, the expected long-term rate of return for the U.K. pension plan was 5.0% at December 31, 2020.
Actuarial gains on the assets occurred during both 2020 and 2019 as the actual investment return exceeded the expected investment return by approximately $4 million in 2020 and $10 million in 2019. Investment gains and losses are recognized in earnings on an amortized basis over a period of years. The amortization of the actuarial net loss is expected to be approximately $3 million in 2021 resulting primarily from the actuarial loss on the plan liabilities, which has only partially been offset by investment gains on the plan assets. We expect that there will be continued volatility in pension expense as actual investment returns vary from the expected return, but we continue to believe the potential benefits justify the risk premium for the target asset allocation.
Pension expense is sensitive to changes in the expected return on assets. For example, decreasing the expected rate of return by 100 basis points to 4% (while holding other assumptions constant) would increase the forecasted 2021 expense for our U.K. pension plan by approximately $2 million. Similarly, a 100 basis point increase in the expected rate of return to 6% (while holding other assumptions constant) would reduce forecasted 2021 pension expense by approximately $2 million.
Discount Rate Assumption-We utilize a yield curve based on AA-rated corporate bond yields in developing a discount rate assumption. The yield appropriate to the duration of the U.K. plan liabilities is then used. The discount rate at December 31, 2020 was 1.3%.
Pension expense is also sensitive to changes in the discount rate. For example, decreasing the discount rate by 100 basis points to 0.3% (while holding other assumptions constant) would increase the forecasted 2021 expense for our U.K. pension plans by approximately $2 million. A 100 basis point increase in the discount rate to 2.3% would reduce forecasted 2021 pension expense by approximately $1 million.
Rate of Projected Compensation Increase-Our rate of projected compensation increase at December 31, 2020 is 4.1%. The rate assumption was based on an analysis of our projected compensation increases for the foreseeable future.
Liquidity-Cash contribution requirements to the U.K. pension plan are sensitive to changes in assumed interest rates and investment gains or losses. We expect our aggregate U.K. cash contributions will be approximately $5 million in 2021.
OUTLOOK
Our stated goal is to provide a 10% compounded return per year for our shareholders over any five-year period (defined by earnings per share growth plus dividend yield), although we may not necessarily achieve a 10% return each year. We continue to have confidence in our customer-focused strategy and approach to the market. We believe the fundamentals of how we run our business - a long-term view, safety-first culture, customer-focused solutions, technology-driven product offerings, and world-class supply chain capability - will continue to be beneficial for all of our stakeholders over the long term.
We expect our petroleum additives segment will continue to experience impacts to its operating performance due to the current economic environment. Our global business will see varying effects on demand that will differ by region based on our product portfolio and geographic coverage. The global market should stabilize when government restrictions on the movement of people, goods, and services implemented as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic are lifted, as modern transportation and machinery cannot function without our products. We expect that the petroleum additives market will grow in the 1% to 2% range annually for the foreseeable future. We plan to exceed that growth rate over the long-term.
In the past several years we have made significant investments in our business as the industry fundamentals remain positive. These investments have been and will continue to be in organizational talent, technology development and processes, and global infrastructure, consisting of technical centers, production capability and geographic expansion. We intend to utilize these investments to improve our ability to deliver the solutions that our customers value, expand our global reach, and enhance our operating results. We will continue to invest in our capabilities to provide even better value, service, technology, and customer solutions.
Typically, our business generates significant amounts of cash beyond what is necessary for the expansion and growth of our current offerings. We regularly review our many internal opportunities to utilize excess cash from technological, geographic, production capability, and product line perspectives. We believe our capital spending is creating the capability we need to grow and support our customers worldwide, and our research and development investments are positioning us well to provide added value to our customers. Our primary focus in the acquisition area remains on the petroleum additives industry. It is our view that this industry segment will provide the greatest opportunity for solid returns on our investments while minimizing risk. We remain focused on this strategy and will evaluate any future opportunities. We will continue to evaluate all alternative uses of cash to enhance shareholder value, including stock repurchases and dividends.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The following discussion highlights some of the more critical areas where a significant change in facts and circumstances in our operating and financial environment could cause a change in future reported financial results.
Income Taxes
We file United States, foreign, state, and local income tax returns. Significant judgment is required in determining our worldwide provision for income taxes and recording the related tax assets and liabilities. Any significant impact as a result of changes in underlying facts, law, tax rates, or tax audits could lead to adjustments to our income tax expense, effective tax rate, financial position, or cash flow.
Deferred income taxes are provided for the estimated income tax effect of temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of existing assets and liabilities, as well as for net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. When recording these deferred tax assets and liabilities, we must estimate the tax rates we expect will apply to taxable income in the periods in which the deferred tax liability or asset is expected to be settled or realized. In addition, we may record valuation allowances to reduce deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Judgment is required as we consider the scheduled reversal of deferred tax assets and liabilities, projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies in making this assessment. If our estimates and assumptions change from those used when we recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities, the effect on our results of operations and financial position could be material.
The income tax returns for our entities in the United States and in foreign jurisdictions are open for examination by tax authorities. We assess our income tax positions and record a liability for all years open for examination based upon our evaluation of the facts, circumstances, and information available at the reporting date. The economic benefit associated with a tax position will be recognized only if we determine it is more likely than not to be upheld on audit. Although we believe our estimates and judgments are reasonable, actual results could differ, resulting in gains or losses that may be material to our results of operations and financial position.
At each interim reporting period, we estimate an effective income tax rate that is expected to be applicable for the full year. Our provision for income taxes is impacted by the income tax rates of the countries where we operate. A change in the geographical source of our income can affect the effective tax rate. Significant judgment is involved regarding the application of global income tax laws and regulations when projecting the jurisdictional mix of income. Additionally, interpretations of tax laws, court decisions, or other guidance provided by taxing authorities influence our estimate of the effective income tax rate. As a result, our actual effective income tax rate and related income tax liabilities may differ materially from our estimated effective tax rate and related income tax liabilities.
Intangibles (net of amortization) and Goodwill
We have certain identifiable intangibles amounting to $6 million and goodwill amounting to $124 million at December 31, 2020 that are discussed in Note 10. These intangibles and goodwill relate to our petroleum additives business. The intangibles are being amortized over periods with up to approximately 8 years of remaining life. We continue to assess the market related to the intangibles and goodwill, as well as their specific values and evaluate the intangibles and goodwill for any potential impairment when significant events or circumstances occur that might impair the value of these assets. We have concluded the values are appropriate, as are the amortization periods for the intangibles. However, if conditions were to substantially deteriorate in the petroleum additives market, it could possibly cause a decrease in the estimated useful lives of the intangible assets or result in a noncash write-off of all or a portion of the intangibles and goodwill carrying amounts. A reduction in the amortization period of the intangibles would have no effect on cash flows. We do not anticipate such a change in the market conditions in the near term.
Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits
We use assumptions to record the impact of the pension and postretirement benefit plans in the financial statements. These assumptions include the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. A change in any of these assumptions could cause different results for the plans and therefore, impact our results of operations, cash flows, and financial condition. We develop these assumptions after considering available information that we deem relevant. Information is provided on the pension and postretirement plans in Note 17. In addition, further disclosure of the effect of changes in these assumptions is provided in the “Financial Position and Liquidity” section of Item 7.
Environmental and Legal Proceedings
We have disclosed our environmental matters in Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as in Note 20. Our estimates for costs that will be incurred to satisfy our obligations related to environmental matters are affected by many variables, including our judgment regarding the extent of remediation that will be required, future changes in and enforcement and interpretation of laws and regulations, current and future technology available, and timing of remediation activities. While we currently do not anticipate significant changes to the many factors that could impact our environmental requirements, we continue to keep our accruals consistent with these requirements as they change.
Also, as noted in the discussion of “Legal Proceedings” in Item 3 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, while it is not possible to predict or determine with certainty the outcome of any legal proceeding, it is our opinion, based on our current knowledge, that we will not experience any material adverse effects on our results of operations, cash flows, or financial condition as a result of any pending or threatened proceeding.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
For a full discussion of the more significant recently issued accounting standards, see Note 23.