Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. When reviewing the discussion below, you should keep in mind the substantial risks and uncertainties that could impact our business. In particular, we encourage you to review the risks and uncertainties described in Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this report. These risks and uncertainties could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected in forward-looking statements contained in this report or implied by past results and trends. Forward-looking statements are statements that attempt to forecast or anticipate future developments in our business, financial condition or results of operations. See the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this report. These statements, like all statements in this report, speak only as of their date (unless another date is indicated), and we undertake no obligation to update or revise these statements in light of future developments.
Overview
New Relic delivers the observability platform for engineers to plan, build, deploy and operate more perfect software. We offer a comprehensive suite of products delivered on an open and extensible cloud-based platform that enables organizations to collect, store and analyze massive amounts of data in real time so they can better operate their applications and infrastructure and improve their digital customer experience.
New Relic One is our purpose-built offering for customers to land all of their telemetry data quickly and affordably in one place, and to translate that data into actionable insights. We believe a truly unified front-end that sits on top of a single database helps our users avoid complexity and confusion that would be associated with relying instead upon multiple different but related products.
Our revenue for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 was $667.6 million and $599.5 million, respectively, representing year-over-year growth of 11%. Although we have experienced substantial revenue growth in historical periods, we have had difficulty maintaining our historical growth rates as our business has scaled, even in the periods where our revenue grew in absolute terms. Meanwhile, we have continued to make significant expenditures and investments, including in personnel-related costs, sales and marketing, infrastructure and operations, and have incurred net losses in each period since our inception, including net losses attributable to New Relic of $192.6 million and $88.9 million for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our accumulated deficit as of March 31, 2021 was $587.1 million.
Internationally, we currently offer our products in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa, or EMEA; Asia-Pacific, or APAC; and other non-U.S. locations, as determined based on the billing address of our customers, and our revenue from those regions constituted 16%, 9%, and 6%, respectively, of our revenue for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, and 16%, 9%, and 5%, respectively, of our revenue for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. We believe there is an opportunity to increase our international revenue overall and as a proportion of our revenue, and we are increasingly investing in our international operations and intend to invest in further expanding our footprint in international markets.
Our employee headcount has increased to 2,168 employees as of March 31, 2021 from 2,131 as of March 31, 2020, and we plan to continue to invest aggressively in the growth of our business to take advantage of our market opportunity.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to affect the U.S. and the world and has resulted in authorities implementing numerous measures to contain the virus. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will continue to depend on certain developments, including the duration of the pandemic; impact on our customers and our sales cycles; impact on our customer, employee, and industry events; impact on our employee recruitment and attrition; and effect on our vendors, all of which remain uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time.
More generally, the COVID-19 pandemic is still adversely affecting economies and financial markets globally, and has led to an economic downturn and increased market volatility, with an uncertain effect upon technology spending and demand for our offerings, which may harm our business and results of operations. For example, for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted expected spending from new and existing customers and has resulted in a portion of our paid customers choosing to renew with a smaller commitment than previous contracts. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and have taken and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required or recommended by federal, state, or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners, suppliers, and stockholders. We have seen our revenue and deferred revenue to be, in part, negatively impacted by the slowdown in activity associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, but at this point, the extent of any continuing
impact to our financial condition or results of operations, including cash flows, is uncertain, particularly as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to persist for an extended period of time. Furthermore, due to our historical reliance upon a subscription-based business model, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations until future periods. Other factors affecting our performance are discussed below, although we caution you that the COVID-19 pandemic may also further impact these factors.
In addition, on July 30, 2020, we announced an updated pricing strategy that prices customer spend based upon their consumption; customers may be charged upon their usage in arrears, which we refer to as “Pay as You Go,” or they may commit to a minimum spend over their contracted period in exchange for a discount on their usage pricing, which we refer to as “Annual Pool of Funds.” Consumption under this model is measured by the number of users and data ingested into our system, thereby collapsing what had previously been a number of different products priced in individualized ways into a simplified strategy that is intended to drive consumption across our platform. Although we expect, in the near term, that this transition will have a negative impact on our results of operations and our key operating metrics for the reasons described below, we believe that this pricing model transition will increase customer adoption and allow us to better retain and expand within our paid accounts over the long term, and thereby have a positive impact on sales and marketing productivity. However, due to our historical reliance upon a subscription-based business model, improvement in the market adoption of our products due to this pricing model transition would not be fully reflected in our results of operations until future periods.
On April 6, 2021, we announced to a restructuring plan to realign our cost structure to better reflect significant product and business model innovation over the past 12 months. We expect that go-to-market operations in our new consumption-based business model will be more efficient, thus requiring less investment, than our former more traditional subscription model. In furtherance of this strategy shift, we are reallocating some spending to increase our investment on research and development. We believe these initiatives will better align resources to provide further operating flexibility and position the business for its long-term success.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Market Adoption of Our Platform. Our success, including our rate of customer expansions and renewals, is dependent on the market adoption of our platform. With the introduction of new technologies, the evolution of our platform and new market entrants, competition has intensified and we expect competition to intensify in the future. We employ a land, expand, and standardize business model centered around offering a platform that is open, connected and programmable. We believe that we have built a highly differentiated platform and we intend to continue to invest in building additional offerings, features and functionality that expand our capabilities and facilitate the extension of our platform to new use cases. We also intend to continue to evaluate strategic acquisitions and investments in businesses and technologies to drive product and market expansion. Our ability to improve market adoption of our platform will also depend on a number of other factors, including the competitiveness and pricing of our products, offerings of our competitors, success of international expansion, and effectiveness of our sales and marketing efforts. With the shift in our pricing strategy, which will now rely primarily upon a per-user license fee and payment based on the quantity of data ingested, we will be more closely tying our revenue to the usage of our platform. Together with our new pricing strategy, we also launched a new, robust free tier and improved self-service capabilities, which we expect to result in a material increase to our marketing opportunities in converting free users into new paying customers.
Retention and Expansion. A key factor in our success is the retention and expansion of our platform usage with our existing customers. In order for us to continue to grow our business, it is important to generate additional revenue from our existing customers, and we intend to do this in several ways. As we improve our existing products and platform capabilities and introduce new products, we believe that the demand for our products will generally grow. We also believe that there is a significant opportunity for us to increase our revenue from sales to our current customers as they become more familiar with our products and adopt our products to address additional business use cases. In addition, we believe the shift in our pricing strategy will allow sales resources to focus energy on helping customers increase their data ingestion and the number of users and use cases.
Key Operating Metrics
The pricing changes announced in the second quarter of fiscal 2021 shifted our business model away from a reliance upon subscription-based revenue to a reliance upon consumption-based revenue.
A key financial indicator when employing a subscription-based model is annual recurring revenue (“ARR”), which is the revenue that we would expect to receive from our customers over the following 12-month period without any increase or reduction in any of the customer’s contractual commitments. In a consumption model, customers can pay as they use the product, without any up-front commitment. Therefore, ARR, which is based on commitments, does not capture actual usage,
also known as consumption. We expect a meaningful amount of revenue will be recognized from customers under our Annual Pool of Funds consumption model, where consumption in excess of the committed contractual amount will result in additional revenue. Meanwhile, the Pay as You Go component of the consumption model does not have an up-front commitment at all. In either of these consumption-based engagements, the revenue committed at the outset of a contractual engagement is not necessarily determinative of the revenue we will ultimately receive from the customer. Therefore, as the overall portion of revenue derived from subscription model contracts decreases, the associated subscription-based metrics that rely upon ARR become less relevant as a measure of the performance of the business.
As we begin fiscal 2022, our focus has shifted away from legacy subscription model contracts to new consumption model contracts. As such, we will retire ARR and all of our traditional subscription-based key operating metrics that rely upon ARR beginning with the first quarter of fiscal 2022. In place of ARR and ARR derived metrics, we will provide metrics that we believe provide better insight into our business now that we are entering into contracts that rely primarily upon consumption-based revenue instead.
In the meantime, however, a portion of our overall revenue continues to be derived from our subscription-based contracts that remain in our install base. Therefore, with these caveats, we review the following key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make key strategic decisions:
Annual Recurring Revenue. Our ARR as of March 31, 2021 was $673.7 million which was a 4.9% increase compared to $642.4 million as of March 31, 2020.
As noted above, we only recognize as ARR the committed contractual amount for customers under the Annual Pool of Funds model; therefore, ARR does not include contracts under the Pay as You Go model. Our pricing transition resulted in downward pressure on ARR through the end of fiscal year 2021 as customers took advantage of our new pricing model, which, in some instances, resulted in the choice of smaller up-front commitments in favor of spending on actual consumption in excess of committed amounts. We believe these pricing model changes, which rely upon a consumption model, will over time result in higher revenue as market adoption of our platform and new pricing model grows.
ARR should be viewed independently of historical revenue as the operating metric is not intended to be a replacement for revenue forecasts.
Number of Paid Business Accounts with ARR over $100,000 and Number of Paid Business Accounts. As a measure of our business, we have occasionally reported paid business accounts, which we define as customers that are identified by a unique account identifier for which we have recognized revenue on the last day of the period indicated. A single organization or customer may have multiple paid business accounts for separate divisions, segments, or subsidiaries. Inherent to the definition of this metric, however, is a focus on an ongoing contractual commitment as of the end of the given period. Therefore, if a customer is not engaged in a financial commitment with us on the last day of the last month of the quarter, that customer is not considered a paid business account. Importantly, in a consumption model, many of our customers, especially our smaller customers, choose not to engage in an up-front financial commitment with us, which means that many of our customers that pay us consistently, but perhaps not regularly, are not captured in our current definition of paid business accounts. As a result, the historical definition we have used for our paid business account metric, which was defined when we were primarily a subscription business, does not capture all of our paying customers.
As of March 31, 2021, we had 12,900 paid business accounts, which is down from 16,300 paid business accounts as of March 31, 2020. We round the number of total paid business accounts that we report as of a particular date down to the nearest hundred. As noted above, our paid business account metric excludes customers that are paying us when they use our products, but have not made a commitment to pay us on a regular basis. Enabling customers to use and pay for our products without a commitment has become the primary engagement model for new and lower-spend customers on our platform.
Importantly, a portion of the decline in total paid business accounts has been the deliberate result of our transition to a self-serve initiative and a consumption-based pricing model. First, we introduced a free tier in July 2020, designed to drive awareness and fill the top of our marketing funnel with qualified leads. One of the by-products of this decision was that a large number of our lower-spend customers qualified for this free tier based on their then-existing usage, and was therefore able to continue use of our platform without further obligation to continue paying us. While the revenue impact associated with offering these lower-spend customers free product may have been minimal, the conversion of these accounts to the free tier had a significant impact on our total paid business account metric. Second, in order to make our go-to-market motion more efficient, many of our lower-spend customers that had previously been covered with our direct-sales model have been given the opportunity to engage instead as part of our self-serve model at the time of their renewal. Because our self-serve model does not
contain a financial commitment to continue paying us, accounts that shift to the self-serve model are no longer counted in our paid business account metric.
Irrespective of pricing model, we continue to believe that the acquisition of larger accounts within our overall customer base, as well as expansion within our existing paid business accounts, are important indicators of our overall business. We have in part historically measured our performance in these areas with reference to our number of paid business accounts with ARR over $100,000. We had 1,048 paid business accounts with ARR over $100,000 as of March 31, 2021, which was a 5.3% increase compared to 995 as of March 31, 2020.
Percentage of ARR from Paid Business Accounts with ARR over $100,000. Historically, paid business accounts with ARR over $100,000 have generally had a materially higher rate of renewal than paid business accounts with ARR less than $100,000. We therefore believe that the percentage of our total ARR that comes from paid business accounts with ARR over $100,000 is a key indicator, as our ability to increase and retain paid business accounts in this category of spend has a significant impact on our overall financial performance and key operating metrics.
Our percentage of ARR from paid business accounts with ARR over $100,000 was 80% as of March 31, 2021, compared to 75% as of March 31, 2020.
Dollar-Based Net Expansion Rate. Our ability to generate revenue is dependent on our ability to maintain and grow our relationships with our existing customers. We have tracked our performance in this area for our subscription-based revenue by measuring our dollar-based net expansion rate. Our dollar-based net expansion rate increases when customers increase their contractual spend amounts. Our dollar-based net expansion rate is reduced when customers decrease or terminate their contractual spend amounts.
Our dollar-based net expansion rate compares the commitments we have secured for recurring revenue from customers from one period to the next, and therefore does not include any reference or adjustments for consumption. We measure our dollar-based net expansion rate on a monthly basis because many of our customers have changed their commitment more frequently than quarterly or annually. To calculate our annual dollar-based net expansion rate, we first establish the base period monthly recurring revenue from all our customers at the end of a month. This represents the revenue we would contractually expect to receive from those customers over the following month, without any increase or reduction in any of their commitments. For contracts entered into under our new pricing model announced on July 30, 2020, we calculate each customer’s monthly recurring revenue as their ARR divided by twelve. We then (i) calculate the actual monthly recurring revenue from those same customers at the end of that following month; then (ii) divide that following month’s recurring revenue by the base month’s recurring revenue to arrive at our monthly net expansion rate; then (iii) calculate a quarterly net expansion rate by compounding the net expansion rates of the three months in the quarter; and then (iv) calculate our annualized net expansion rate by compounding our quarterly net expansion rate over an annual period.
Our annualized dollar-based net expansion rate decreased to 98.7% for the three-month period ended March 31, 2021 from 115.7% for the three-month period ended March 31, 2020. As a metric that is derived from ARR, our pricing transition resulted in downward pressure on our annualized dollar-based net expansion rate through the end of fiscal year 2021 as customers took advantage of our new pricing model, which, in some instances, resulted in the choice of smaller up-front commitments in favor of spending on actual consumption in excess of committed amounts.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
For the period presented, we offer access to our products and/or platform under subscription and usage-based plans that include service and support for one or more of our products. For our paying customers, we offer a variety of pricing plans based on the particular product purchased. Our plans typically have terms of one year, although some of our customers commit for shorter or longer periods.
Most of our revenue comes from contracts that are non-cancellable over the contract term. We had remaining performance obligations, or backlog, in the amount of $726.8 million and $635.2 million as of March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020, respectively, consisting of both billed and unbilled consideration.
Deferred revenue consists of billings or payments received in advance of revenue being recognized, and can fluctuate with changes in billing frequency and other factors. As a result of our mix of subscription plans and billing frequencies, we do not believe that changes in our deferred revenue in a given period are directly correlated with our revenue growth in that period.
The first two quarters of each fiscal year usually have lower or potentially negative sequential backlog and deferred revenue growth than the third and fourth fiscal quarters, during which we generally benefit from a larger renewal pool and opportunity to upsell existing customers. As a result, over time we have seen stronger sequential revenue results in our fourth and first fiscal quarters as our deferred revenue is recognized. We expect that this seasonality will continue to affect our sales and operating results in the future, as a portion of our overall revenue continues to be derived from our subscription-based contracts that remain in our install base, which can make it difficult to achieve sequential growth in certain financial metrics or could result in sequential declines on a quarterly basis.
With our shift in pricing strategy, we may experience additional variation from the seasonality trends we have seen in the past for revenue, backlog, and deferred revenue. Our shift to a consumption model will allow our customers to choose lower up-front commitments and to instead pay for their consumption in excess of their commitments. Should this occur as we expect, it may exhibit downward pressure on our backlog and deferred revenue. Meanwhile, in the event our customers’ consumption usage exceeds their up-front commitments in a meaningful amount, we would expect to see a step up in revenue growth.
In addition, our revenue and deferred revenue in fiscal 2021 have been negatively impacted, in part, by the slowdown in activity associated with the COVID-19 pandemic as well as by our change in pricing strategy announced on July 30, 2020. Due to our historical reliance upon a subscription-based business model, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic to date were not fully reflected in our results of operations until later periods. Meanwhile, although we have seen indications of improved market acceptance of our platform and new pricing strategy, due to our historical reliance upon a subscription-based business model, improvement in the market adoption of our products due to this pricing model transition would also not be fully reflected in our results of operations until future periods.
Further, in the past, we have experienced end-of-quarter concentration of our transactions and variations in the number and size of transactions that close in a particular quarter. Our transactions vary by quarter, and within each quarter, a significant portion of our transactions typically close in the last two weeks of that quarter. If we are unable to close one or more large individual transactions in a particular period, or if an expected transaction is delayed until a subsequent period, we expect that our results of operations for that period, and for any future periods in which revenue from such transaction would otherwise have been recognized, may be harmed.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists of expenses relating to data center operations, hosting-related costs, payment processing fees, depreciation and amortization, consulting costs, and salaries and benefits of operations and global customer support personnel. Salaries and benefits costs associated with our operations and global customer support personnel consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation. We plan to continue increasing the capacity, capability, and reliability of our infrastructure to support the growth of our customer adoption and the number of products we offer, as customer usage continues to grow. Additionally, we are continuing to build out services and functionality in the public cloud with a view to migrating our entire platform over time from third-party data center hosting facilities to public cloud hosting providers. We have decreased the amount of capital expenditures on hosting equipment for use in our data center hosting facilities as we transition to greater dependence on cloud hosting providers. This public cloud migration has resulted and will continue to result in significant increased costs in the short term as we are incurring cloud migration costs as well as costs to maintain our data center operations.
Gross Profit and Margin
Gross profit is revenue less cost of revenue. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenue. Our gross margin has been, and will continue to be, affected by a number of factors, including the timing and extent of our investments in our operations and global customer support personnel, hosting-related costs, and the amortization of capitalized software. Although we expect our gross margin to fluctuate from period to period as a result of these factors, our recent public cloud migration and, to a lesser extent, our pricing transition, have contributed to lower gross margins and we expect to continue to experience additional downward pressure on margins in the short-term.
Operating Expenses
Personnel costs, which consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation and, with regard to sales and marketing expenses, sales commissions, are the most significant component of our operating expenses. We also incur other non-personnel costs such as an allocation of our general overhead expenses.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs and an allocation of our general overhead expenses. We continue to focus our research and development efforts on adding new features and products, and increasing the functionality and enhancing the ease of use of our existing products. We capitalize the portion of our software development costs that meets the criteria for capitalization.
We plan to continue to hire employees for our engineering, product management, and design teams to support our research and development efforts. As a result, we expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future. Although our research and development expenses may fluctuate from period to period depending on fluctuations in our revenue and the timing and extent of our research and development expenses.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist of personnel costs for our sales, marketing, and business development employees and executives. Commissions are considered incremental and recoverable costs of acquiring customer contracts. These costs are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the anticipated period of benefit. In future periods, with our shift to a consumption model and shift in pricing strategy, we expect that the majority of commissions will no longer be capitalized and will instead mostly be expensed as incurred. Sales and marketing expenses also include the costs of our marketing and brand awareness programs, including our free tier offering.
We expect that go-to-market operations in our new consumption-based business model will be more efficient, and requires less investment, than in our former more traditional subscription model. In furtherance of this strategy shift, we are reallocating some spending from sales and marketing to increase our investment on research and development. While we expect this to contribute to a decrease in our sales and marketing expenses over time, we expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to be our largest operating expense category for the foreseeable future. While we expect our sales and marketing expenses to decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term, our sales and marketing expenses may fluctuate from period to period depending on fluctuations in our revenue and the timing and extent of our sales and marketing expenses.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our administrative, legal, human resources, information technology, finance and accounting employees, and executives. Also included are non-personnel costs, such as legal and other professional fees.
We plan to continue to expand our business both domestically and internationally, and we expect to increase the size of our general and administrative function to support the growth of our business. As a result, we expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future. However, we expect our general and administrative expenses to remain flat or decrease modestly as a percentage of our revenue over the long term, although our general and administrative expense may fluctuate from period to period depending on the timing and extent of our general and administrative expenses, such as litigation or accounting costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) consists primarily of interest income, interest expense, foreign exchange gains and losses, and gains on lease modifications.
Results of Operations For Fiscal Years Ended March 31, 2021 and 2020
The following tables summarize our consolidated statements of operations data for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020 and as a percentage of our revenue for those periods. For a discussion of our consolidated statement of operations data for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019 and as a percentage of revenue for that period, see “Results of Operations for Fiscal Years Ended March 31, 2019, 2018, and 2017” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on May 15, 2020, or our Annual Report. For a discussion of our liquidity and capital resources for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report. The period to period comparison of results is not necessarily indicative of results for future periods.
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
Revenue
Revenue increased $68.1 million, or 11%, in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in product adoption by existing customers. Our revenue from EMEA increased $5.5 million, or 6%, in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, and our revenue from APAC increased $11.8 million, or 23%, in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, primarily as a result of an increase in product adoption by existing customers in these geographic regions.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased $78.3 million, or 76%, in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily a result of an increase in hosting-related costs of $70.1 million as a result of the additional expenses incurred in connection with our public cloud migration. The remaining increase was due to an increase in depreciation expense and amortization expense of $9.0 million primarily as a result of the addition of site equipment and acquired technology, an increase in other miscellaneous expenses of $0.2 million, and an increase in personnel-related costs of $0.3 million. This was partially offset by a decrease in travel expense of $0.8 million due to global restrictions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and a decrease in payment processing fees of $0.5 million.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased $26.7 million, or 18%, in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily the result of an increase in personnel-related costs of $23.4 million, driven by an increase in headcount and compensation-related expense increases. The remaining increase was due to a $6.6 million increase in software subscription and consulting expenses and $0.7 million increase in facilities and depreciation expenses. This was partially offset by a decrease in travel expenses of $3.8 million due to global travel restrictions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $27.4 million, or 8%, in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily a result of an increase in personnel-related costs of $35.9 million, driven by an increase in sales commissions due to revenue growth and compensation-related expense increases. The remaining increase was due to a $3.1 million increase in allocated costs, including facilities, depreciation and costs associated with our free tier offering, a $2.8 million increase in marketing programs, a $1.8 million increase in software subscription and consulting expenses, and a $0.7 million increase in miscellaneous operating expenses. This was partially offset by a decrease in travel expenses of $16.8 million due to global travel restrictions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $21.6 million, or 22%, in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily a result of an increase in personnel-related costs of $26.2 million, driven by an increase in headcount and compensation-related expense increases. The remaining increase was due to a $1.3 million increase in software subscription and consulting expenses and a $0.6 million increase in legal and accounting expenses. This was partially offset by a $3.5 million decrease in travel expense due to global travel restrictions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, a $2.0 million decrease in allocated costs, including facilities and depreciation, and a $1.0 million decrease in miscellaneous operating expense.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense increased by $13.7 million, or 259%, in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $7.6 million decrease in interest income due to the drop in interest rates and the absence of a $3.0 million lease modification gain recognized in the prior period.
Provision for Income Tax
Income tax expense increased $0.3 million, or 165% from $0.2 million in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 to $0.5 million in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. The increase was mostly due to the increase in U.S. tax expense offset by a decrease in foreign tax expense.
Net Loss and Adjustment Attributable to Redeemable Non-controlling Interest
Net loss and adjustment attributable to redeemable non-controlling interest decreased by $3.8 million or 184% in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease is related to the redeemable non-controlling interest’s adjustment to estimated redemption value of our joint venture in New Relic K.K. offset by share of associated losses.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following tables set forth selected unaudited quarterly consolidated statements of operations data for each of the eight fiscal quarters in the period ended March 31, 2021, as well as the percentage that each line item represents of our revenue for each quarter. The information for each of these quarters has been prepared on the same basis as the audited annual consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report and, in the opinion of management, includes all adjustments of a normal, recurring nature that are necessary for the fair presentation of the results of operations for these periods in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. This data should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. These quarterly operating results are not necessarily indicative of our operating results for a full fiscal year or any future period.
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
(2)See notes 1 and 14 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements for a description of how we compute net loss attributable to New Relic per share, basic and diluted.
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
Quarterly Revenue Trends
Our quarterly revenue increased sequentially for each period presented, primarily due to sales of new subscriptions to our products and expanding use of our products by our existing customers. We cannot assure you that this pattern of sequential growth in revenue will continue. In future periods, as our rate of revenue growth declines, seasonality in our revenue may become more apparent. Further, with our pricing strategy change and focus on consumption we may continue to see downward pressure on revenue growth until our customers’ consumption usage exceeds their up-front commitments.
Quarterly Gross Margin Trends
Our gross margin decreased during the past fiscal year, due to our public cloud migration which has resulted in significant increased costs in the short term as we are incurring cloud migration costs as well as costs to maintain our data center operations. In future periods, we expect that our gross margin will have additional downward pressure during our public cloud migration, but we will see our gross margin increase when our transition to the public cloud is complete.
Quarterly Expense Trends
Research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses generally increased sequentially over the periods as we increased our headcount to support continued investment in our products. The increase in
personnel costs was primarily related to increases in headcount and merit-based compensation increases, along with higher stock-based compensation expense.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Non-GAAP Income (Loss) From Operations
To supplement our consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with GAAP, we provide investors with certain non-GAAP financial measures, including non-GAAP income (loss) from operations and non-GAAP net income (loss) attributable to New Relic. We define non-GAAP income (loss) from operations and non-GAAP net income (loss) attributable to New Relic as the respective GAAP balance, adjusted for, as applicable: (1) stock-based compensation expense, (2) lease exit costs and accelerated depreciation, (3) amortization of stock-based compensation capitalized in software development costs, (4) the amortization of purchased intangibles, (5) employer payroll tax expense on equity incentive plans and (6) amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, and in certain periods, (7) the transaction costs related to acquisitions (8) lawsuit litigation cost and other expense, (9) gain or loss from lease modification, and (10) adjustment to redeemable non-controlling interest. We use non-GAAP financial measures, including non-GAAP income (loss) from operations and non-GAAP net income (loss) attributable to New Relic, internally to understand and compare operating results across accounting periods, for internal budgeting and forecasting purposes, for short- and long-term operating plans, and to evaluate our financial performance. In addition, our bonus opportunity for eligible employees and executives is based in part on non-GAAP income (loss) from operations.
We believe these measures are useful to investors, as a supplement to GAAP measures, in evaluating our operational performance. We have provided below a reconciliation of GAAP loss from operations to non-GAAP income (loss) from operations and a reconciliation of GAAP net loss attributable to New Relic to non-GAAP net income (loss) attributable to New Relic. We believe non-GAAP income (loss) from operations and non-GAAP net income (loss) attributable to New Relic are useful to investors and others in assessing our operating performance due to the following factors:
Stock-based compensation expense and amortization of stock-based compensation capitalized in software development costs. We utilize share-based compensation to attract and retain employees. It is principally aimed at aligning their interests with those of our stockholders and at long-term retention, rather than to address operational performance for any particular period. As a result, share-based compensation expenses vary for reasons that are generally unrelated to financial and operational performance in any particular period.
Lease exit costs and accelerated depreciation. In fiscal 2020, we entered into an agreement to exit the lease of our 123 Mission premises in San Francisco, California. In connection with this agreement and subsequent relocation, we accelerated depreciation and other expenses associated with the remaining lease term. We believe it is useful to exclude this depreciation and these other expenses because we do not consider such amounts to be part of the ongoing operation of our business.
Amortization of purchased intangibles and transaction costs related to acquisitions. We view amortization of purchased intangible assets as items arising from pre-acquisition activities determined at the time of an acquisition. While these intangible assets are evaluated for impairment regularly, amortization of the cost of purchased intangibles is an expense that is not typically affected by operations during any particular period. Similarly, we view acquisition-related expenses as events that are not necessarily reflective of operational performance during a period.
Lawsuit litigation cost and other expense. We may from time to time incur charges or benefits related to litigation that are outside of the ordinary course of our business. We believe it is useful to exclude such charges or benefits because we do not consider such amounts to be part of the ongoing operation of our business and because of the singular nature of the claims underlying the matter.
Employer payroll tax expense on equity incentive plans. We exclude employer payroll tax expense on equity incentive plans as these expenses are tied to the exercise or vesting of underlying equity awards and the price of our common stock at the time of vesting or exercise. As a result, these taxes may vary in any particular period independent of the financial and operating performance of our business.
Amortization of debt discount and issuance costs. In May 2018, we issued $500.25 million of our 0.50% convertible senior notes due 2023 (the “Notes”), which bear interest at an annual fixed rate of 0.5%. The effective interest rate of the Notes was 5.74%. This is a result of the debt discount recorded for the conversion feature that is required to be separately accounted for as equity, and debt issuance costs, which reduce the carrying value of the convertible debt instrument. The debt discount is amortized as interest expense together with the issuance costs of the debt. The expense for the amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs is a non-cash item, and we believe the exclusion of this interest expense will provide for a more useful comparison of our operational performance in different periods.
Gain or loss from lease modification. We may incur a gain or loss from modification related to lease agreements. We believe it is useful to exclude such charges or benefits because we do not consider such amounts to be part of the ongoing operation of our business and because of the singular nature of benefit or charge from such events.
Adjustment to redeemable non-controlling interest. In fiscal year 2021, we made an adjustment to the value of redeemable non-controlling interest in connection with our joint venture in New Relic K.K. We believe it is useful to exclude the adjustment to redeemable non-controlling interest because it may not be indicative of our future operating results and that investors benefit from an understanding of our operating results without giving effect to this adjustment.
Non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. In addition, there are limitations in using non-GAAP financial measures because the non-GAAP financial measures are not prepared in accordance with GAAP and may differ from non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies in our industry and exclude expenses that may have a material impact on our reported financial results.
The following tables present our non-GAAP income (loss) from operations and our non-GAAP net income (loss) attributable to New Relic and reconcile our GAAP loss from operations to non-GAAP income (loss) from operations and our GAAP net loss attributable to New Relic to our non-GAAP net income (loss) attributable to New Relic for the three months ended and fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Non-GAAP income (loss) from operations and non-GAAP net income (loss) attributable to New Relic for the periods presented reflects the same trends discussed above in “Results of Operations.” Although we have generated non-GAAP income
from operations and non-GAAP net income attributable to New Relic in past quarters, we expect to remain in a loss position in the near future as we continue to incur additional expenses during our public cloud migration.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the issuance of the Notes, private and public equity financings and customer payments. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investment balances, together with cash generated from operations, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support research and development efforts, the timing of our public cloud migration and the related decreased spending on capital expenditures, the introduction of new and enhanced products, seasonality of our billing activities, the timing and extent of spending to support our growth strategy, the continued market acceptance of our products, and competitive pressures. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, technologies and intellectual property rights. We may need to raise additional funds from equity or debt securities in order to meet those capital requirements. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results, and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Operating Activities
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $69.9 million as a result of a net loss of $190.9 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $250.4 million and a change of $10.4 million in our operating assets and liabilities. The change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of a $47.0 million increase in deferred contract acquisition costs due to increased sales, a $27.1 million increase in accounts receivable due to increased sales, and a 1.5 million decrease in lease liabilities. This was partially offset by a $58.9 million increase in deferred revenue as a result of increased sales of subscriptions, a $1.0 million decrease in lease right-of-use assets, an $11.8 million increase in accounts payable, an $18.8 million increase in accrued compensation and benefits and other liabilities due to increased headcount and merit-based compensation increases as well as deferred social security taxes, and a $7.6 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets.
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $93.4 million as a result of a net loss of $91.0 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $192.0 million and a change of $7.6 million in our operating assets and liabilities. The change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of a $39.5 million increase in deferred contract acquisition costs due to increased sales, a $28.4 million increase in accounts receivable due to increased sales, and a 19.4 million decrease in lease liabilities. This was partially offset by a $44.7 million increase in deferred revenue as a result of increased sales of subscriptions, a $21.8 million decrease in lease right-of-use assets, a $7.4 million increase in accounts payable, a $5.0 million increase in accrued compensation and benefits and other liabilities due to increased headcount, and a $0.8 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 was $142.9 million, primarily as a result of purchases of short-term investments of $405.1 million, purchases of property and equipment of $18.7 million, increases in capitalization of software development costs of $13.5 million, and cash paid for acquisitions of $41.5 million. These were offset by proceeds from the sale and maturity of short-term investments of $336.0 million.
Cash used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 was $64.6 million, primarily as a result of purchases of short-term investments of $391.1 million, purchases of property and equipment of $58.2 million, increases in
capitalization of software development costs of $6.6 million, and cash paid for acquisitions of $4.3 million. These were offset by proceeds from the sale and maturity of short-term investments of $395.6 million.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 was $21.3 million, primarily as a result of proceeds from our employee stock purchase plan of $14.4 million and proceeds from exercise of employee stock options of $6.9 million.
Cash provided by financing activities during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 was $26.2 million, primarily as a result of proceeds from our employee stock purchase plan of $13.6 million, proceeds from exercise of employee stock options of $11.6 million, and our investment in the redeemable non-controlling interest of $1.0 million.
Contractual Obligations
As of March 31, 2021, our future non-cancelable contractual obligations were as follows:
(1)For additional information regarding the Notes, refer to Note 7 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2)Consists of future minimum lease payments under non-cancelable operating leases for office space.
(3)Consists of future minimum payments under non-cancelable purchase commitments primarily related to hosting services and software subscriptions.
As of March 31, 2021, we had accrued liabilities related to uncertain tax positions, which are reflected on our consolidated balance sheet. These accrued liabilities are not reflected in the table above, as it is unclear when these liabilities will be paid.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. In the preparation of these consolidated financial statements, we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates are based on information available as of the date of the consolidated financial statements; therefore, actual results could differ from our estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial condition or results of operations would be affected. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. We refer to accounting estimates of this type as critical accounting policies and estimates.
The critical accounting policies requiring estimates, assumptions, and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from subscription-based arrangements and usage-based arrangements that allow customers to access our products and/or platform. Our sales agreements have contract terms typically for one year.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•identification of the contract, or contracts with a customer;
•identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•determination of the transaction price;
•allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•recognition of revenue, when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Revenue from subscription-based arrangements is recognized on a ratable basis over the contractual subscription period of the arrangement beginning when or as control of the promised goods or services is transferred to the customer. Deferred revenue consists of billings or payments received in advance of revenue being recognized.
Beginning in the second quarter of fiscal 2021, we started offering usage-based pricing to our customers. Customers have the option to be charged upon their incurred usage in arrears (“Pay as You Go”), or they may commit to a minimum spend over their contracted period (“Annual Pool of Funds”). Revenue related to Pay as You Go contracts are recognized based on the customers’ actual usage. Revenue related to Annual Pool of Funds contracts are recognized on a ratable basis over the contract period including an estimate of the usage above the minimum commitment. The estimated usage-based revenues are constrained to the amount we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for providing access to our platform.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
We measure and recognize compensation expense related to stock-based transactions, including employee and non-employee director stock options, performance stock units, or PSUs, restricted stock units, or RSUs, restricted stock awards, or RSAs, and the employee stock purchase plan, or ESPP, in our financial statements based on the fair value of the awards granted. We estimate the fair value of each option award on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and a single option award approach. The fair value of RSUs and RSAs is based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the New York Stock Exchange. We recognize stock-based compensation expense, net of forfeitures, over the requisite service periods of the awards, which is generally four years.
Our use of the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions we use in our option-pricing model represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions and estimates are as follows:
•Fair Value of Common Stock. Since our IPO, we have used the market closing price of our common stock as reported on the New York Stock Exchange.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate. We base the risk-free interest rate used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equivalent to that of the options for each option group.
•Expected Term. We determine the expected term based on the average period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding generally calculated as the midpoint of the stock options vesting term and contractual expiration period.
•Expected Volatility. Beginning in April 2020, the expected volatility for options granted is based on historical volatility of our common stock. The expected volatility for options granted prior to April 2020 was based on the historical volatilities of our publicly traded peer group.
•Dividend Yield. The expected dividend assumption is based on our current expectations about our anticipated dividend policy. Consequently, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
In addition to the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, we must also estimate a forfeiture rate to calculate the stock-based compensation expense for our awards. Our forfeiture rate is based on an analysis of our actual
forfeitures. We will continue to evaluate the appropriateness of the forfeiture rate based on actual forfeiture experience, analysis of employee turnover, and other factors. Quarterly changes in the estimated forfeiture rate can have a significant impact on our stock-based compensation expense as the cumulative effect of adjusting the rate is recognized in the period the forfeiture estimate is changed.
We estimate the fair value of the rights to acquire stock under our ESPP using the Black-Scholes option-pricing formula. Our ESPP typically provides for consecutive six-month offering periods. Prior to February 2017, we used our peer group volatility data in the valuation of ESPP shares. Beginning in February 2017, we started to use our own historical volatility data. We recognize such compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period.
In May 2020, we began issuing PSUs to certain executives, which are contingent upon the achievement of pre-determined market and service conditions. The number of shares of common stock to be issued at vesting will range from 0% to 200% of the target number based on our total shareholder return (“TSR”) relative to the performance of peer companies for each measurement period, over a one-year, two-year cumulative, and three-year cumulative period. If these market conditions are not met but service conditions are met, the PSUs will not vest; however, any stock-based compensation expense recognized to date will not be reversed. We use a Monte Carlo simulation model to determine the fair value of our PSUs and recognize expense using the accelerated attribution method over the requisite service period.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Business Combinations
We recognize identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their acquisition date fair value. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While we use our best estimates and assumptions as a part of the purchase price allocation process to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill to the extent that we identify adjustments to the preliminary purchase price allocation. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of operations.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of an acquired business over the fair value of the underlying net tangible and intangible assets. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment annually in the third quarter, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. Triggering events that may indicate impairment include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in customer demand or business climate that could affect the value of goodwill or a significant decrease in expected cash flows.
Intangible assets consist of identifiable intangible assets, primarily developed technology, resulting from our acquisitions. Acquired intangible assets are recorded at cost, net of accumulated amortization. Intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. Long-lived assets, including intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable.
Software Development Costs
We capitalize certain development costs incurred in connection with our internal use software and website. These capitalized costs are primarily related to our software tools that are hosted by us and accessed by our customers on a subscription basis. Costs incurred in the preliminary stages of development are expensed as incurred. Once an application has reached the development stage, internal and external costs, if direct and incremental, are capitalized until the software is substantially complete and ready for its intended use. Capitalization ceases upon completion of all substantial testing. We also capitalize costs related to specific upgrades and enhancements when it is probable the expenditures will result in additional features and functionality. Maintenance costs are expensed as incurred. Internal use software is amortized on a straight-line basis over its estimated useful life, generally three years.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between financial reporting and the tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the tax rates that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Future tax benefits are recognized to the extent that realization of such benefits is considered to be more likely than not. A valuation allowance is provided on deferred tax assets if it is determined that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We have considered our future anticipated market growth, historical and forecasted earnings, future taxable income and the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate along with prudent, feasible and permissible tax planning strategies in determining the extent to which our deferred tax assets may be realizable. Projections inherently include a level of uncertainty that could result in lower or higher than expected future taxable income. When we determine that the deferred tax assets for which there is currently a valuation allowance would be realized in the future, the related valuation allowance will be reduced and a benefit to operations will be recorded. Conversely, if we were to make a determination that we will not be able to realize a portion of our net deferred tax assets in the future (using the “more likely than not” criteria), we would record an adjustment to our valuation allowance and a charge to operations in the period in which such determination is made.
We use a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments and which may not accurately forecast actual outcomes. If interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits were incurred, such amounts would be included in our provision for income taxes.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of our accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8.